NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RED QUEEN AND THE HARD REDS:
PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN AMERICAN WHEAT, 1800-1940

Alan L. Olmstead
Paul W. Rhode

Working Paper 8863
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8863

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We have received valuable comments from Greg Clark, Jack Goldstone, D. Gale Johnson, Bruce Johnston, Frank Lewis,
Joel Mokyr, Jose Morilla, Philip Pardey, Vicente Pinilla, James Simpson, Vernon Ruttan, and from the seminar
participants at UC Davis, Stanford University, Northwestern University, the University of Minnesota, the All-Chicago
Economic History Group, Triangle Economic History Workshop, the University of Alcala, the University of Zaragoza,
the Victoria Department of Natural Resources and Environment and the Victorian Branch of the Australian Agricultural
and Resource Economics Society, Melbourne, Australia, and the conference participants at the Australian Agricultural
and Resource Economics Society Conference, Christchurch, New Zealand and the Economic History Association at
Philadelphia, PA. Lisa Cappellari, Susana Iranzo, and Shelagh Mackay provided assistance on this project. Lee Craig
generously shared county-level data from the 1839 Census. Several plant scientists, including Calvin Qualset, Charles
Schaller, and Robert Webster provided valuable perspectives. As has become custom, we owe special thanks to Julian
Alston and Peter Lindert for their insights, advice, and encouragement. Work on this paper was facilitated by a fellowship
granted by the International Centre for Economic Research (ICER) in Turin, Italy. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Red Queen and the Hard Reds:
Productivity Growth in American Wheat, 1800-1940
Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode
NBER Working Paper No. 8863
April 2002
JEL No. N5, Q1, O3

ABSTRACT
The standard treatment of U.S. agriculture asserts that, before the 1930s, productivity growth was
almost exclusively the result of mechanization rather than biological innovations. This paper shows that,
to the contrary, U.S. wheat production witnessed a biological revolution during the 19th and early 20th
centuries with wholesale changes in the varieties grown and cultural practices employed. Without these
changes, vast expanses of the wheat belt could not have sustained commercial production and yields
everywhere would have plummeted due to the increasing severity of insects, diseases, and weeds. Our
revised estimates of Parker and Klein’s productivity calculations indicate that biological innovations
account for roughly one-half of labor productivity growth between 1839 and 1909.

Alan L. Olmstead
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis

Paul W. Rhode
Economics Department
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
and NBER
prhode@email.unc.edu

THE RED QUEEN AND THE HARD REDS:
PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN AMERICAN WHEAT, 1800-1940
History celebrates the battlefields whereon we meet our death, but scorns the plowed
fields whereby we thrive. It knows the names of the King’s bastard children, but cannot
tell us the origin of wheat. That is the way of human folly...
1
Jean Henri Fabre

Deciphering the mysteries of U.S. productivity growth has been one of the major
contributions of the economics profession over the past half-century. Controversy still
reigns for many contemporary issues such as explaining the productivity downturn in the
1970s and measuring the impact of computers on recent economic performance. But for
the more distant past there is widespread consensus about the productivity record of such
core sectors as agriculture. According to the stylized facts, American agriculture before
1940 witnessed significant increases in labor productivity resulting from mechanization
but little growth in land productivity from biological advances. As an example, Willard
Cochrane argued that mechanization “was the principal, almost the exclusive, form of
farm technological advance” between 1820 and 1920.2 In his Richard T. Ely Lecture, D.
Gale Johnson noted that:
While American agriculture achieved very large labor savings during the last century,
which made it possible to continue expanding the cultivated area with a declining share
of the labor force, output per unit of land increased hardly at all…. The revolution in
land productivity based on important scientific advances began very recently; its
beginnings were in the 1930’s with the development of hybrid corn….3

Yujiro Hayami and Vernon Ruttan repeatedly echo this theme in their comparative
analysis of international agricultural development.4 This view is also a part of the mantra
of most economic historians. As detailed below, it is the main lesson of William Parker
1

Fabre (1823-1915) was a French entomologist and philosopher. Kephart, “Commercial Wheat,”
Introduction.
2
Cochrane, Development, p. 200, also see p. 107. Griliches’ treatment is less emphatic, but appears to lead
to the same general conclusion. Griliches, “Agriculture,” pp. 241-45.
3
Johnson, “Agriculture,” pp. 7-8.
4
Hayami and Ruttan, Agricultural Development, p. 209. As an example, when dealing with the history of
small grains in nineteenth century United States, they note that “the advances in mechanical technology
were not accompanied by parallel advances in biological technology. Nor were the advances in labor
productivity accompanied by comparable advances in land productivity.”

1

and Judith Klein’s classic study of labor productivity growth in grain cultivation between
1839 and 1909, and it has become a prominent fixture in the economic history textbooks.5
The existing literature would have us believe that before the development of a
sophisticated understanding of genetics, biological knowledge in agriculture essentially
stood still, generating little or no boost to productivity or production. This leads to the
popular picture of nineteenth century agriculture as a world of unchanging cropping
patterns and cultural practices, a world where each farmer sowed grain that he himself
grew and that his father grew before him, a world of a happy, organic balance between
cultivators and their natural environment.6
Focusing on wheat, this paper argues that, contrary to the conventional wisdom,
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries witnessed a stream of “biological”
innovations that rivaled the importance of mechanical changes on agricultural
productivity growth.7 These new biological technologies addressed two distinct classes
of problems. First, there was a relentless campaign to discover and develop new wheat
varieties and cultural methods to allow the wheat frontier to expand into the Northern
Prairies, the Great Plains, and the Pacific Coast states.8 Without these land-augmenting
technologies, western yields would have been significantly lower, and vast areas of the
Great Plains would not have been able to sustain commercial wheat production. In
addition, researchers and wheat farmers made great strides in combating the growing
threat of yield-sapping insects and diseases, many of which were the unintended
consequences of biological globalization. With the large-scale importation of Eurasian
crops to North America came hitchhikers who fed on and destroyed those crops. In the
absence of vigorous efforts to maintain wheat yields in the face of evolving foreign and
5

Parker and Klein, “Productivity Growth,” pp. 523-82. See also Walton and Rockoff, History, p. 334;
Ratner, et al., Evolution, pp. 264-265; Atack and Passell, New Economic View, pp. 280-282; Hughes,
American Economic History, pp. 275-276. The theme is also standard fare in the USDA’s treatment of
productivity growth. Loomis and Barton, “Productivity,” pp. 6-8.
6
See Stanelle, “Certified” for a statement of this view.
7
In the context of the international development literature the term “biological change” encompasses nonmechanical activities that modify the growing environment. In addition to strictly biological innovations
such as improved plant varieties, “biological changes” include changes in cultural practices, irrigation
systems, fertilizers, and chemicals.
8
When discussing wheat, modern agronomists have abandoned the term “variety” and adopted the term
“cultivars” in its place because of the subtle distinctions as to what properly constitutes a distinct variety.
Because the historical literature we cite consistently refers to “varieties,” we have chosen to use the dated
terminology.

2

domestic threats, land and labor productivity would have been significantly lower.9 In
effect farmers practiced a crude, early form of what today would be termed integrated
pest management (IPM) with the sensitive details of the farming systems evolving in
response to new threats and changing knowledge. It is important to emphasize that we
are not arguing that these pre-1940 IPM systems were as effective as what came later.
Building on our analysis of pre-1940 biological innovations, we take a fresh look at
Parker and Klein’s formal estimates of labor productivity growth between 1839 and
1909. Our revised estimates suggest that biological innovations accounted for roughly
one-half of the labor productivity growth in this period.

Cornerstones of the Conventional Wisdom

The lesson that biological innovations were unimportant in wheat cultivation
before 1940 rests on two fundamental building blocks. The first is the time series on U.S.
yields, which is graphed for the 1866-1969 period in Figure 1. The figure also includes
the growth trend with a break in 1939, which maximizes the fit. Output per acre
harvested was nearly constant from 1866 to 1939, growing only about 0.15 percent per
annum. This amounted to a meager 1.75-bushel increase over nearly three-quarters of a
century. After 1939, the growth rate jumped up to 2.23 percent per annum and yields
virtually doubled in the course of forty years.10
9

Several USDA economists have promoted the general view that mechanical technologies dominated
biological innovations in the pre 1940 era. For example see Loomis and Barton, “Productivity,” pp. 6-8. In
an excellent article on biological innovation in wheat, another USDA economist, Dana Dalrymple, hits on
this issue noting the “effect of some yield-increasing technologies may have been masked” by disease or
other problems, but he fails to develop the implications of this insight. Instead he repeats the standard
mantra that “mechanical technologies were of major importance well before biological technologies.” The
key point is that just because yields were relatively constant does not necessarily imply that biological
innovation was of minor importance. Dalrymple, “Changes,” p. 20-21.
10
The use of average national yields to measure land productivity is subject to obvious conceptual
difficulties. The following reasoning, for which we thank Frank Lewis, helps illustrate the some of the
sample selection problems involved. Suppose potential wheat land may be ranked along a scale according
to its yield capacity. Given prevailing farm prices and costs, there will be a minimum yield for which it is
profitable to devote the land to wheat cultivation. Land ranked below this threshold will go uncultivated
and the average measured yield is based only on land above the profitable-cultivation threshold.
Now consider the effect of a yield-increasing biological innovation, which like many of those
considered in this paper, disproportionately increases yields on low yielding lands. This will raise more
land above the threshold, pushing out the frontier of wheat cultivation, and increase total production.
Although the innovation will raise productivity on low-yielding land, it need not have a positive effect of

3

The second building block is research linking labor productivity to
mechanization. One of the classic contributions here is Parker and Klein’s 1966 NBER
study of labor productivity growth in wheat, oats and corn over the 1839-1909 period.11
Table 1 reproduces the core results of their analysis for wheat.12 Overall, Parker and
Klein found that wheat output per hour increased 4.17 fold over this period. In their
estimation, the driving force was mechanization, which acting alone would have
increased output per hour by 2.45 times. The interaction of mechanization with western
expansion raised this ratio to 3.77 times (or about 90 percent of the total increase). By
way of contrast, biological advances played a minor role; holding all else constant, yield
changes increased labor productivity by only 18 percent. These results reinforce the
general view that significant biological changes did not begin until the mid-twentieth
century.
A closer look at the Parker-Klein study offers insights on two other fundamental
issues: changes in land productivity and the role of western settlement in the growth of
total production. Parker and Klein consider output per acre only as an indirect source of
labor productivity movements, but the yield increases are important as measures of land
measured yields. Indeed, if the effects of the biological innovation are limited to low-yielding lands close
to the threshold, average measured yields can actually fall. Also note the other cost-reducing innovations,
such as mechanization, can lower the threshold yield necessary for profitable cultivation. The frontier of
cultivation will expand and measured yields will fall, even in the absence of changes in the productivity of
a specific acre of land.
11
1909 is a shorthand; their terminal years were actually 1907-11. Parker and Klein, “Productivity
Growth,” 523-82. See a reconsideration of this study by the lead author, Parker, Europe, pp. 313-33. An
earlier USDA study for the period between the First and Second World Wars reached findings similar to
Parker-Klein’s about the relative importance of mechanization and yield changes on labor productivity.
See Hecht and Barton, “Gains in Productivity.”
12
Parker and Klein divide the United States into three major regions: the Northeast (including PA, NJ, NY,
VT, MA, NH, ME, CN, RI) South (DE, MD, VA, WV, KY, TN, NC, SC, GA, FL, AL, MS, LA, AR) and
West (everywhere else). In their detailed analysis, they broke the West into five regions: Corn (including
OH, IN, IL, IA, MO), Dairy (MI, MN. WI), Small Grain and Western Cotton (NB, KS, SD, ND, MT, TX,
OK), Range (NM, AZ, CO, UT, NV, WY), and Northwest and California (ID, OR, WA, CA).
They then estimate for each region the labor required in the pre-harvest, harvest, and post-harvest
operations; the direct requirements reflect the state of mechanization. The last operation is modeled to
depend directly on output whereas the first two depend directly on acreage. To determine pre-harvest and
harvest labor requirements per bushel, they divide by the crop yield. This is the only way that yields,
embodying the state of biological knowledge, enter the calculation. Parker and Klein do not, for example,
treat farmers as devoting labor to increase yields. Moreover, their approach implies that increases in yields
result in less than one-for-one increases in labor productivity. After deriving the regional labor-output
ratios, Parker and Klein use the region’s weights in total production to obtain the U.S. average labor
requirement per bushel of wheat. By substituting the direct labor requirements, yields, and regional

4

productivity and directly influence total factor productivity.13 With a slight change in
perspective, the information in Table 1 reinforces a common claim that western
settlement moved wheat cultivation onto less productive soils. In the absence of these
shifts, Parker and Klein’s data suggest that 1909 yields would have been 29.8 percent
higher than in 1839 and 4.3 percent higher than they actually were.14
Over the 1839-1909 period, U.S. wheat production increased almost eight-fold,
rising from roughly 85 million to 640 million bushels.15 The rapid growth in output was
crucially dependent on the western expansion of cultivation.16 These geographic shifts
are illustrated in Figure 2, which maps the distribution of U.S. wheat output in 1839 and
1909, and in Table 2, which shows the changing geographic center of production over the
same period.17

In 1839, the center was located east of Wheeling, (West) Virginia.

Cultivation was concentrated in Ohio and upstate New York; relatively little was grown
as far west as Illinois. By 1909, the center of production had moved over eight hundred
miles west to the Iowa/Nebraska borderlands. The core areas of the modern wheat belt
had emerged in an area stretching from Oklahoma and Kansas in the south to the Dakotas
weights for different periods, Parker and Klein decompose changes in labor productivity into the effects of
(and interactions between) mechanization, biological change, and western settlement, respectively.
13
Frank Lewis’ reasoning noted above suggests that associating changes in yields with changes in land
productivity might be misguided. Lewis’ skepticism is consistent with the view of S. C.. Salmon, one of
America’s leading wheat experts. Salmon noted that “yields per acre are often used to measure or indicate
technological improvements. They are reasonably good indices in counties in which acreage remains fairly
constant or where the productivity of the new acreage does not materially differ from the old. They may be
misleading, however, in a country such as the United States, where the acreage has greatly increased in
areas where the conditions for growth are quite different. If an improvement reduces cost per acre, thereby
permitting a larger expansion on less production land, average over-all acre yields may actually be
reduced.” Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 5.
14
Note that Fisher and Temin criticized Parker and Klein for focusing exclusively on labor productivity,
rather than total factor productivity. Fisher and Temin, “Regional Specialization,” pp. 134-49.
15
More precisely, this was a 7.54 fold (or 2.9 percent per annum) increase, which exceeded the growth in
labor productivity noted in the text. Thus, the wheat sector was continuing to absorb labor over this period.
16
In their study of the elasticity of the U.S. wheat supply over the post-bellum period, Fisher and Temin
raise a related critique of the Parker-Klein approach. Fisher and Temin note that in the presence of rising
marginal costs, average productivity calculations such as Parker and Klein’s are difficult to interpret.
Attempting to achieve 1909 output levels under the 1839 geographic distribution would lead to sharply
diminishing returns to land and require significantly greater application of labor. Fisher and Temin,
“Regional Specialization,” pp. 134-49.
17
We calculated the 1839 and 1909 center from Census county-level production data and the location of the
county’s seat. The 1839 data are from Craig, et al., U.S. Censuses of Agriculture and Craig, et al.,
“Development.” Those for 1909 data are from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Thirteenth Census, Vols. 6-7.
The information for 1849-1899 and 1919 (mean only) are from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Atlas,
p. 22. The county seat location data are from Sechrist, Basic Geographic and Historic Data. The data

5

in the north (as well as the Canadian Prairies). Another important concentration appeared
in the Inland Empire of the Pacific Northwest. The western shift was so overwhelming
that “new areas,” not included in Parker and Klein’s 1839 regions, accounted for 64
percent of 1909 output and 74 percent of the growth from 1839 to 1909. More generally,
the area west of the Appalachian Mountains, which had made up less than one-half of
output in 1839, provided 92 percent of output by 1909.
Figure 2, which also shows different types of wheat grown in the four major
wheat regions of the United States, illustrates the significance of this shift in the locus of
production. According to Mark Carleton, a leading USDA agronomist, these regions
possessed such different geo-climatic conditions that “they are as different from each
other as though they lay in different continents.”18 The key point for our re-evaluation of
Parker and Klein is that in 1839 wheat was only extensively grown in the eastern half of
just one of these four regions. In addition, by 1909 the newer regions specialized in
varieties–the Hard Reds–that were completely different from those produced in the older
areas, and for the most part they did not exist in the United States in 1839.19

include only U.S. production. As a result, the changes do not capture the spread of grain cultivation onto
the Canadian Prairies.
18
Carleton, Basis, p. 9. The four general wheat regions shown in the lower panel of Figure 2 represent
gross demarcations because each of these areas contained important sub-regions.
19
It is useful to clarify the basic nomenclature of wheat. The primary distinction is between winter (-habit)
and spring (-habit) wheats. (“Habit” is added because the distinction does not depend strictly on the
growing season.) Winter-habit wheat requires a period of vernalization, that is, prolonged exposure to cold
temperatures, to shift into its reproductive stage. This typically involves sowing in fall and allowing the
seedlings to emerge before winter. During the cold period, the winter-habit wheat goes dormant but
remains exposed to risks of winterkill. The grain is harvested in the late spring or early summer. Springhabit wheat grows continuously without a period of vernalization. In Europe and North America, farmers
in cold regions often sow spring-habit wheat shortly before the last freeze, harvesting the crop in mid- to
late summer. But it is interesting to note that varieties with spring-habits were also used in areas with mild
winters, such as the Mediterranean and California. There, the wheat was planted in the fall and grew
without interruption. (There is a third, less important category of facultative wheat that is intermediate in
cold tolerance but does not require vernalization to flower and develop grain.) Note that a longer growing
season is generally associated with greater yield potential, but also involves greater exposure to weather
risks, diseases, and insects.
Other important distinctions refer to the kernel’s texture (soft, semi-hard, and hard) and color
(white versus red). Hard wheats, which were relatively drought-resistant, outperform soft wheats in the
more arid areas. The rough-and-ready dividing line was between the 30 and 35 inches of precipitation.
(Salmon, “Climate,” pp. 334-35.) East of the Mississippi, soft white and red wheats were prevalent
whereas in the Great Plains, hard reds traditionally dominated. Durum wheat, which became popular in
selected regions of the Northern Great Plains after 1900, is a distinct species from common wheat, with
distinct flour quality and uses.

6

This observation suggests that the Parker-Klein calculations suffer from index
number problems similar to the classic “new goods” issue. As the “ND” marks for
several of the western areas in Table 1 illustrate, the relevant data for many of the leading
producing states in 1909 on labor requirements and yields are lacking in 1839. In their
standard approach, Parker and Klein lump together all of the states from Ohio to the
Pacific Coast into the “West.”

To address the problem of shifts within this vast,

heterogeneous region, they did explore a modified productivity calculation replacing the
1909 labor requirements and yields of their “West” with those for the five Midwestern
states (their “West: Corn”).20 This adjustment generated slight changes in the results, but
as in the standard calculations, it misses the fundamental role that biological changes
played in allowing the spread of wheat to the new lands of the West and in maintaining
yields everywhere in the face of growing threats from pests and diseases.

The Introduction of New Wheat Varieties

As wheat culture moved onto the Northern Prairies, Great Plains, and Pacific
Coast, it confronted climatic conditions far different from those prevailing in the East.21
Table 3 shows the average precipitation, the mean average high and low temperatures,
and the length of the frost-free growing season at three agricultural experiment stations.
These are relatively coarse indicators of the climatic conditions relevant for wheat

20

The latter sub-region included Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, and Iowa and encompassed most of the
wheat-growing areas in their 1839 “West.” By this modified measure, aggregate labor productivity grew
by 3.85 times, instead of the 4.17 times of their standard approach. The contribution of mechanization was
lower while that of yield increases was higher. But this is not a fully satisfactory solution. Parker and
Klein’s modified measure retained the output weights of their standard calculation, essentially assuming all
of the wheat grown on the Great Plains, Pacific Coast, and other parts of the “West” were produced in the
“West-Corn Belt.” In fact, during the 1909 period, the “West-Corn Belt” accounted for only 23.5 percent
of national output and 26.7 percent of the output of the “West” (which made up 87.9 percent of the national
total). We could further modify the productivity calculation to avoid crediting the “West-Corn Belt” with
wheat it did not grow by focusing strictly on changes within the regions producing in 1839. If we use the
shares of the “East,” “South,” and “West-Corn Belt” in their collective output, the resulting measure shows
a 3.4-fold increase over the 1839-1909 period. While this technique is more theoretically consistent, it
includes only 36 percent of U.S. wheat production at the end of the period. Parker and Klein, “Productivity
Growth,” pp. 535-39.
21
For a classic example of the serious problems associated with finding varieties suitable for the frontier
see, Murray, Valley Comes of Age, p. 37; Pritchett, Red River Valley, pp. 113, 228.

7

production, but they serve to emphasize the substantial regional differences.22 Annual
data indicate that the driest year in the past 100 years at the Wooster experiment station in
Central Ohio was wetter than the average years at the stations in Hays, Kansas, and
Dickinson, North Dakota. Furthermore, the coldest year on record in Ohio was warmer
than the average year in North Dakota. As a result, the pioneers suffered repeated crop
failures when they attempted to grow the standard eastern varieties under the normal
conditions of the Plains except in protected river valleys.23
The successful spread of the crop across the vast tracts extending from the Texas
Panhandle through Kansas to the Dakotas and Canadian Prairies was dependent on the
introduction of hard red winter and hard red spring wheats that were entirely new to
North America.

Over the late-nineteenth century, the premier hard spring wheat

cultivated in North America was Red Fife (which appears identical to a variety known as
Galician in Europe). According to the most widely accepted account, David Fife of
Otonabee, Ontario, selected and increased the grain-stock from a single wheat plant
grown on his farm in 1842. The original seed was included in a sample that Fife received
from a Scottish source out of a cargo of winter wheat shipped from Danzig to Glasgow.
It was not introduced into the United States until the mid-1850s. Red Fife was the first
hard spring wheat grown in North America and became the basis for the spread of the
wheat frontier into Wisconsin, Minnesota, the Dakotas and Canada. It also provided
much of the parental stock for later wheat innovations, including Marquis. At the time of
the first reliable survey of wheat varieties in 1919, North Dakota, South Dakota, and
Minnesota grew hard red spring and durum wheats to the virtual exclusion of all other
variety classes.
Another notable breakthrough was the introduction of “Turkey” wheat, a hard red
winter variety suited to Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and the surrounding region. The
standard account credits German Mennonites migrating to the region from Southern
Russia with the introduction of this strain in 1873.24 Malin’s careful treatment describes
22

For a discussion of the effects of weather conditions on wheat see Cook and Veseth, Wheat Health, pp.
21-24.
23
Clark and Martin, Varietal Experiments with Hard Red Winter Wheats, p. 1.
24
Ball, “History of American Wheat,” p. 63. The Mennonites had introduced Turkey into southern Russia
only in 1860. Bernhard Warkentin, one of the early Mennonite settlers in Kansas, reportedly imported

8

the long process of adaptation and experimentation, with the new varieties gaining
widespread acceptance only in the 1890s. In 1919, Turkey type wheat made up about
“83 percent of the wheat acreage in Nebraska, 82 percent in Kansas, 67 percent in
Colorado, 69 percent in Oklahoma, and 34 percent in Texas. It…made up 30 percent of
total wheat acreage and 99 percent of the hard winter wheat acreage in the U.S….”25 A
similar story holds for the Pacific Coast: the main varieties grown in California and the
Pacific Northwest differed in nature and origin (Chile, Spain, and Australia) from those
cultivated in the humid East in 1839.
Wheat cultivation in the East was also in a constant state of flux, with many
varieties being tried and abandoned, and others taking root where they proved better
suited to evolving local conditions. The most notable change in the East in the midnineteenth century was the replacement of soft white varieties by soft reds. Leading this
transition was Mediterranean, a late-sown variety introduced from Europe in 1819, which
gained wide favor (for reasons described before) during in the 1840s and 1850s. The
field of competing varieties was large and ever changing. Danhof notes that around 1840
a survey listed 41 varieties being grown in New York State, “of which, nine winter
wheats and nine spring wheats were most important.”26 In 1857, the Ohio State Board of
Agriculture catalogued 111 varieties (96 winter, 15 spring) grown locally in recent years,
detailing the time of ripening, performance in different soils and climates, flour quality,
and resistance to enemies. Of the 86 varieties that we could date, 28 percent had been
introduced into Ohio within the previous 5 years.27

25,000 bushels of seed from Russia and had as many as 300 test plots near his home in Kansas. In 1904
black rust destroyed a large part of the soft wheat, but the new Russian wheat was hardly affected. Stucky,
Century of Russian Mennonite History, pp. 27-30.
25
Quisenberry and Reitz, “Turkey Wheat,” pp. 98-114. Improvements in flour milling technologies
contributed to the spread of hard red wheat, thereby creating an example of the synergism of biological and
mechanical innovations. Using the traditional stone-grinding methods, millers found hard red wheat
yielded darker, less valuable flour than the softer white wheat varieties. The introduction of the middling
purifier (to separate the bran from the flour) in 1870 and the new roller grinding process in 1878 allowed
millers to make high-quality flour from the new varieties. Over this period, flour from hard red wheat,
which had formerly sold at a substantial discount relative to that ground from white winter wheat, began to
sell at a premium. Knopf, “Changes in Wheat,” p. 233; Malin, Winter Wheat, pp. 188-189.
26
Danhof, Changes in Agriculture, p. 157.
27
Ohio State Board of Agriculture, Annual Report, 1857, pp. 737-761. Given that there was often much
confusion regarding wheat names, it is likely that some varieties were listed under different names.

9

This evidence suggests that current rapid turnover in wheat varieties, which many
contemporaries view as a product of modern science, has nineteenth century
antecedents.28

In the past as today, new wheat varieties could be secured by (1)

introduction from other regions; (2) selection of naturally occurring mutations and
crosses; and (3) deliberate hybridization. The balance across methods has shifted in
modern times, but it is important to recall the commercial spread of wheat varieties
derived from hybridization (and subsequent selection) began before 1870.29
Since the days of Washington and Jefferson, the U.S. government was active in
the search for new wheat varieties. The 1854 Commissioner of Patents report notes that
“a considerable share of the money appropriated by Congress for Agricultural purposes
has been devoted to the procurement and distribution of seeds, roots, and cuttings.”30
The report describes 14 varieties of wheat recently imported from 9 countries. In 1866
the newly formed Department of Agriculture (USDA) tested 122 varieties (55 winter and
67 spring) including “nine from Glasgow, eight from the Royal Agricultural Exhibition at
Vienna… several varieties from Germany,” and a number from the Mediterranean and
Black Seas.31 Private breeders were also at work, producing a large number of superior
varieties (including hybrids) during the second half of the nineteenth century. As a sign
of their value these new varieties largely displaced earlier varieties in the eastern states.32
As a rule breeders and farmers were looking for varieties that improved yields, were
more resistant to lodging and plant enemies, and as the wheat belt pushed westward and
northward, varieties that were more tolerant of heat and drought and less subject to
winterkill.33 The general progression in varieties allowed the North American wheat belt

28

Johnson and Gustafson, Grain Yields, p. 119; Pardey, et al. Hidden Harvest, pp. 8-12; Dalrymple,
“Changes,” pp. 23-27.
29
Large, Advance of Fungi, pp. 302-04. In the United States, the first wheat variety derived from
hybridization is usually traced back to 1870 when Cyrus G. Pringle marketed Champaign, but Todd dates
American wheat hybridization to the 1840s. Todd, American Wheat Culturist, pp. 40-46; Ball, “History of
American Wheat,” pp. 48-71.
30
U.S. Patent Office, Annual Report, 1854, pp. v and x-xiii.
31
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Report of the Commissioner, p.8.
32
Among the leading new varieties were Fultz (1862), Goldcoin (1865), Fulcaster (1886), Diehl
Mediterranean (1884), and Fultzo Mediterranean (1886). Carleton, “Basis,” pp. 65, 70; Clark, et al.,
Classification, pp. 83-85, 135, 160; Patterson and Allan, “Soft Wheat,” pp. 36-41.
33
The economics literature focuses on yields as a summary measure of biological improvement in wheat.
But breeders and farmers were also keenly interested in a number of other economically significant

10

to push hundreds of miles northward and westward, and significantly reduced the risks of
crop damage everywhere. One of the most important of the early-twentieth century
innovations was Marquis, which was bred in Canada by Charles Saunders who crossed
Red Fife with Red Calcutta. According to Tony Ward’s analysis of Canadian experiment
station data, changes in cultural methods and varieties shortened the ripening period by
12 days between 1885 and 1910. Given the region’s harsh and variable climate, this was
often the difference between success and failure. Kenneth Norrie’s work also emphasizes
the key contribution of these biological developments to the settlement of the Canadian
prairies between 1870 and 1911.34
The introduction of Marquis and various durum varieties to the United States
illustrates the rapid spread of new varieties in the early twentieth century. The USDA
introduced and tested Marquis seed in 1912-13. By 1916, Marquis was the leading
variety in the Northern Grain Belt.35 This was not an isolated case. As a result of
extensive exploratory campaigns on the Russian Plains, Mark Alfred Carleton introduced
Kubanka and several other durum varieties in 1900.36 These varieties proved to be hardy
spring wheats and, at the time, relatively rust resistant. By 1903 durum production,
which was concentrated in Minnesota and the Dakotas, approached 7 million bushels. In
1904, the region’s Fife and Bluestem crops succumbed to a rust epidemic with an
estimated loss of 25-40 million bushels, but the durum crop was unaffected. By 1906,
durum production soared to 50 million bushels.37 The wholesale transformation of the
wheat stock in the Northern Great Plains in the late-1910s is displayed in Table 4.
Overall, the production share of the traditional varieties such as Velvet Chaff, Bluestem,
and Fife fell from 84 percent in 1914 to under 13 percent by 1921 as the new Marquis
and Durum varieties took hold. These rates of diffusion are comparable with those
characteristics unrelated to yield including milling quality, protein and gluten content, color, baking quality,
and the percentage of the kernel weight that was converted to flour.
34
Norrie, “Rate of Settlement,” pp. 410-27; Ward, “Origins,” pp. 864-883. Ward’s regression estimates
capture other effects besides the switch to Marquis. He notes, for example, that the time of ripening of Red
Fife declined over the period also and that changes in cultural techniques such as employing grain drills
also reduced the time of ripening. Buller, Essays, pp. 175-76, credits Marquis with giving adopters about
one extra week between harvest and freezeup (which put an end to fall plowing).
35
Clark, et al., “Classification of American Wheat Varieties,” pp. 90-91.
36
Ball and Clark, “Experiments,” pp. 3-7; Clark, et al., “Varietal Experiments with Spring Wheat,” pp. 8-9.

11

publicized by Zvi Griliches for the spread of hybrid corn in the Midwest during the
1930s.
The national turnover of varieties is evident in USDA surveys of wheat
distribution, first systematically collected in 1919 and reported thereafter roughly every
five years until 1984. Using the 1919 survey together with information on the date of
introduction/release of specific varieties, we can gain a clearer picture of the changing
composition of the wheat varieties grown in the United States.38 In that year, roughly
24.2 percent of U.S. wheat acreage was in hard red spring wheat, 6.4 percent in durum,
32.0 percent in hard red winter, 30.1 percent in soft red winter, and 7.1 percent in white.
It is important to recall that in 1839 there was essentially no commercial production of
durum or the hard reds, which comprised 62.8 percent of the 1919 total. Table 5 provides
further evidence of the age distribution of wheat varieties in 1919. Of the 133 varieties
that could be dated, the acreage-weighted mean “vintage” was 1881, or less than 40 years
old. The median was 1873, which corresponded to the introduction of Turkey. This is
not surprising given that Turkey was the largest single type, making up almost 30 percent
of total acreage.

Note that even the soft red winter varieties experienced significant

turnover. Their mean “vintage” was 1868. And of the top four soft red winter wheats in
1919—Fultz, Fulcaster, Mediterranean, and Poole—only Mediterranean was introduced
before 1839.39 The key results are that in 1919, well before the usual dating of the onset
of the biological revolution, roughly 80 percent of U.S. wheat acreage consisted of
varieties that did not exist in North America before 1873, and less than 8 percent was
planted in varieties dating earlier than 1840.
Farmers in the Great Plains, Mountain states, and Pacific Coast showed a strong
revealed preference for varieties different from those grown in the wheat belt of 1839.
But were the advantages of the new wheats large or small? On this issue we have some
evidence, albeit fragmentary. The controlled settings of the experiment station variety
37

As another example, in 1900 Carleton also returned from Russia with Kharkof, a hard winter wheat
adapted to the cold, dry climate in western and northern Kansas. By 1914 it accounted for about one-half
of the entire Kansas crop. Carleton, “Hard Wheats,” pp. 404-08.
38
Clark, et al., “Classification.” A variety’s “vintage” is measured since first introduction. It often took a
decade for new varieties to be tested on farms and begin to gain acceptance (in the case of Turkey general
acceptance took over 20 years), so the mean number of years since general availability would have been
much less.

12

trials provide perhaps the best information. For example, from the late 1880s on, the
stations in Minnesota and North Dakota cooperated to test hundreds of spring wheat
varieties in the Northern Plains. Because the agronomists rapidly dropped unsuccessful
varieties after 1-3 years, the eastern stocks rarely even appeared in these trials. During
the 1892-94 period, they did include China Tea, an early-maturing soft spring wheat, in
their Red River Valley test plots. China Tea’s average yields were about 88 percent of
the leading Fife and Bluestem varieties. But this result is incomplete because of China
Tea’s extremely low quality. It was consistently classed a “reject,” suitable only for
animal feed and subject to almost 50 percent price discounts. The 1892-93 Fargo trials
also included Lost Nation, a soft spring wheat popular in the 1870s and 1880s. Its yields
were only 80 percent of Red Fife’s, and it was considered less reliable.40 In addition,
Lost Nation’s quality was well below the Fife’s, resulting in a roughly 10 percent price
discount. These experimental results left the Minnesota officials a “little disappointed”
because they would “heartily welcome” a soft spring variety that generated sufficiently
high yields. To provide perspective, these officials estimated that soft wheats of standard
grade would have to out-yield their “famous” hard wheats by five bushels per acre to
overcome the quality differential.41

Combining the quantity and quality differences

meant that the soft wheats suffered an effective yield disadvantage relative to Fife of 28
to 54 percent. This gap would have been far greater in the colder and drier expanses to
the west of the Red River Valley. This conclusion is born out by the experiences in
North Dakota where officials concluded that “little else than Fife” could be grown and
that “the value of this wheat can hardly be overstated.”42
These results help explain why by the early twentieth century effectively all of the
wheat grown in Minnesota and the Dakotas consisted of durum or hard spring wheat
varieties. Moreover, the contrasts between China Tea and Lost Nation with Red Fife, as
large as they are, significantly understate the extent of technological change because by
39

Clark and Quisenberry, “Distribution,” p. 37.
China Tea, also known as Black Tea, Siberian, Java, and Early Java was imported to New York from
Switzerland around 1837. Clark, et al., Classification, pp. 140-41. Given that it takes several years to
increase the seed, the variety could not have been widely available in 1839. Thus using China Tea as the
1839 reference variety biases the case against biological innovation.
41
“Grain and Forage Crops,” no. 10, pp. 5-10; “Grain and Forage Crops,” no. 11, pp. 1-17; Minnesota
Agricultural Experiment Station, 1894 Annual Report, pp. 253-61.
40

13

1909 Red Fife had been largely replaced by yet superior varieties, including Bluestem
and Preston, along with various durum wheats. As the 1914-21 production data
underlying Table 4 reveal (consistent with earlier experiment station results), the durum
yields were roughly one-third (32 percent) higher than Fife and the newer hard spring
wheats out-yielded Fife by about 16 percent.43 The net result is that in the northern plains,
the varieties available around World War I offered a net return (combining yield and
quality difference) that about doubled what could have been earned growing the defunct
varieties that had been available in the United States or Canada in 1839.44
The situation was similar in the hard winter wheat belt. Early settlers in Kansas
experimented with scores of soft winter varieties common to the eastern states.45
According to the Kansas State Board of Agriculture, “as long as farming was confined to
eastern Kansas these [soft] varieties did fairly well, but when settlement moved westward
it was found they would not survive the cold winters and hot, dry summers of the
plains.”46 The evidence on winterkill, that is wheat losses due to cold, lends credence to
this view. Data for four east-central counties for 1885-90 show that over 42 percent of
the planted acres were abandoned. For the decade 1911-20, after the adoption of hard
winter wheat, the winterkill rate in these counties averaged about 20 percent.47
Drawing on decades of research, S. C. Salmon, et al., noted that for Kansas “the
soft winter varieties then grown yielded no more than two-thirds as much, and the spring
wheat no more than one-third or one-half as much, as the TURKEY wheat grown

42

“Grain and Forage Crops,” no. 10, pp. 1, 12-13.
By 1940 several more generations of new varieties became available on the northern Great Plains.
44
This understates the advantages of the new varieties because as we shall show below if the older
varieties had been planted continuously on vast tracts, they almost surely would have become highly
susceptible to diseases, vastly widening the observed yield gap.
45
Malin, Winter Wheat, pp. 96-101.
46
Salmon, “Developing Better Varieties,” p. 210.
47
Clearly, many factors could account for the decline, but both Malin and the Kansas State Board of
Agriculture credit the new hard winter wheat varieties for improving the survival rate. Malin, Winter
Wheat, pp. 156-159; winter kill rates for 1911-20 are calculated from Salmon, “Developing Better
Varieties,” pp. 78-79; for national winterkill data see Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 6. The
approximately 20-year effort of farmers in Kansas to discover which varieties of wheat were best suited for
a given region was simply a reenactment of what settlers in other regions of the country had experienced.
As an example, in the 1840s pioneer farmers attempted to grow winter wheat on the Wisconsin prairie.
Repeated failures due to winterkill eventually forced the adoption of spring varieties. Hibbard, History of
Agriculture, pp. 125-26.
43

14

somewhat later.”48 In 1920, Salmon concluded that without these new varieties, “the
wheat crop of Kansas today would be no more than half what it is, and the farmers of
Nebraska, Montana and Iowa would have no choice but to grow spring wheat” which
offered much lower yields.49
By the eve of World War I, Nebraska had emerged as the nation’s fourth leading
wheat producer. Its farmers experienced many of the same challenges as growers in
Kansas.
In Nebraska spring wheat predominated until after 1900, and winterkilling of the soft winter
wheat was even more severe than in Kansas. Some measure of the benefit derived from the
general culture of TURKEY wheat in Nebraska after 1900 is afforded by comparing its
average yield with that of spring wheat at the North Platte Station in western Nebraska.
During the twenty-eight-year period ending in 1939, as reported by Quisenberry et al.
(1940), winter wheat yielded on the average 20.6 bushels as compared with 14.3 for spring
wheat, a gain of more than 44 per cent. At Lincoln, in eastern Nebraska, the corresponding
50
gain for a this 31-year period is 14.2 bushels, or 96 per cent.

The movement in actual statewide yields bolsters this evidence. Yields had
averaged about 12.5 bushels per acre for 1870-1900, but jumped by about 40 percent to
17.5 bushels in 1900-09. At the time scientists attributed the vast majority of this
increase to the substitution of Turkey Red for spring wheats.51
Clark and Martin’s analysis of field tests conducted across the Great Plains and in
the Pacific Northwest between 1906 and the early 1920s offers further evidence that hard
winter wheat outperformed soft winter varieties in yield, days to maturity, and survival
rates.52 Their summary finding was that “hard red winter wheat is now the principal crop
in many sections of limited rainfall, including much of Kansas and Nebraska, Western
Oklahoma, Northeastern Colorado, Central Montana, and the drier portions of the
48

Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 14.
Salmon, “Developing Better Varieties,” pp. 211-12. Salmon’s estimates deserve our attention. He was
one of America’s leading agronomists and was responsible for introducing the first dwarf varieties into the
United States from Japan following World War II.
50
Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 16.
51
Montgomery, “Wheat Breeding,” pp. 4-7. Also see, Kiesselbach, “Winter Wheat,” pp. 6-7, 103, and 107.
The definition of Turkey Red lacks precision. There were several strains of Turkey Red, including
Malakoff, Kharkov, Crimean, and Beloglina. All were Turkey type wheats that had been adapted for
Nebraska conditions.
52
Clark and Martin, “Varietal Experiments with Hard Red Winter Wheats.” The tests comparing Turkey
with spring wheats and soft winter varieties referred above significantly understate the advantage that
Turkey would have had over wheats available in 1839. In particular many of the soft varieties actually
49

15

Columbia Basin of Oregon and Washington. In these areas farming was not practiced or
was exceedingly hazardous before this class of wheat was grown.”53
An examination of the spread of wheat culture in the Pacific Northwest supports
this general view. By the end of the nineteenth century the Inland Empire, comprising
parts of Idaho and Eastern Washington and Oregon, had emerged as a major wheat
producer. In 1909, combined production in these regions rivaled that of Minnesota. The
eastward march of wheat production in the northwest was dependent on a succession of
ever-superior wind and drought resistant varieties, including the famous Baart and
Federation wheats developed in Australia. A survey conducted in 1918-19 showed that
none of the commercially important varieties grown at that time in Washington had
existed in the United States in 1839 and that almost 50 percent of the state’s acreage
consisted of varieties that would not have been available to Washington farmers until
after 1900. Due to the initiatives of W. J. Spillman, the state could boast one of the most
impressive wheat research programs in the world by the beginning of the twentieth
century. Spillman began crossing spring and winter varieties in 1899, and the first of his
hybrids was released in 1907.

“During the season of 1908 there were almost one

thousand new or selected varieties growing on the Experiment Station farm.”54 Between
1911 and 1926, Spillman succeeded in hybridizing 1240 new wheat varieties. The best of
Spillman’s hybrids which were chosen for distribution offered yield advantages of 5 to 10
bushels an acre in a wide range of test conditions and rapidly gained favor.55
How should one interpret this enormous scientific effort, along with the broader
process of farm-level experimentation that transformed wheat production in every region
of the country and allowed wheat cultivation to move into vast regions that in 1839 were
considered impossible to farm? The conventional wisdom’s fixation on the development
of hybrid corn in the 1930s as representing the beginnings of the true revolution in land
tested were themselves developed as hybrids between Turkey and other varieties in order to be suitable for
more arid conditions.
53
Clark and Martin, “Varietal Experiments with Hard Red Winter Wheats,” p. 1. Besides Fife, another
important variety grown in the northern Great Plains was Haynes Bluestem. This was a hard red spring
wheat derived from an eastern semi-hard, red, winter wheat. L. H. Haynes of Fargo, ND, developed the
variety through selection by 1885. The Minnesota experiment station further improved the variety, creating
a pure-line variety, Minn. No. 169, by the late 1890s. Clark, et al., “Classification,” pp. 124-25.
54
Elliott and Lawrence, “Some New Hybrid Wheats,” p. 4.
55
Schafer, et al., “Wheat Varieties,” p. 5

16

productivity implies that the biological innovations we discussed above were of little
consequence. This is the assumption underlying Parker and Klein’s estimates and, not
too surprisingly, it is the conclusion that they reached. But rather than merely being the
primitive ancestors to the modern era, the biological innovations that we have highlighted
were an important ingredient and in many cases a necessary condition for the expansion
of wheat culture beyond its 1839 boundaries.

The Curse of the Red Queen

In addition to the imperative to find well-adapted varieties, there was another
crucial need for biological innovation. As wheat culture spread to new areas, so did the
pathogens and pests that fed on wheat plants. Such problems tended to grow more severe
over time because the vast expanses of continuously cropped wheat lands created an ideal
breeding ground for the enemies of wheat to multiply and evolve, and because of the
repeated invasion of new threats from foreign lands. Wheat farmers were cursed by the
Red Queen’s dictum: they had to run hard just to stay in place.56 Without significant
investments in maintenance operations, grain yields would have plummeted as the plant’s
enemies evolved. To illustrate this problem, we start with an example drawn from D.
Gale Johnson and Robert Gustafson’s important work for the period when the scientific
literature provides a clear sense of what transpired. In the early 1950s, black stem rust
devastated the durum wheat crop of the Northern Plains, with yields per seeded acre
shrinking from 14.5 bushels in the decade 1941-51 to 9.7 bushels in 1952, 6.2 in 1953,
and 3.0 in 1954.57

A new race of stem rust, 15B, had evolved to overwhelm the

previously resistant durum varieties. Only the introduction of new varieties allowed
yields to recover, because once a wheat variety fell victim to rust, its economic value was
permanently diminished.
Rusts, which typically are the most destructive diseases affecting wheat, are windblown fungi that attack the plant’s stems and leaves, causing lodging and shriveled

56

Carroll, Through the Looking Glass, p. 37, and Van Valen, " New Evolutionary Law," p. 1-30.
Johnson and Gustafson, Grain Yields, p. 120.

57

17

grain.58 In the span of a couple of weeks stem rust could destroy what had promised to
be a healthy crop. There were two fundamental ways that a wheat variety might avoid
rust damage. First, it might have genetic resistance to the rust races currently in the area.
Finding such varieties was a top priority. Before the modern age, this was a haphazard
process, but breeders made significant progress. Second, a variety might mature before
the rust did much damage (although under more ideal conditions, early maturation often
compromised quality and yield). Since winter wheats ripened much earlier than spring
wheats, the former were generally less vulnerable to damage.

One of the great

achievements of wheat breeders before 1940 was the development of hardier winter
wheats allowing many parts of Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, Wisconsin, and Illinois to shift
out of spring varieties around 1900.
Problems with rust were not new. As early as the 1660s, the Puritans were
enacting a scenario that would be repeated thousands of times as farmers sought to match
crops to their local conditions. Early introductions of English winter wheat failed in the
harsh New England winters.

After some trial and error, the Puritans succeeded in

growing spring varieties. But in 1664 black stem rust appeared in Massachusetts, badly
blasting the wheat crop by 1665. Farmers attempted to substitute earlier maturing winter
wheats without much success. The inability to find winter hardy, rust-resistant varieties
largely explains why New England never emerged as a serious wheat-producing region.59
The high incidence of leaf rust in the Southeastern United States is a major reason why
little wheat was grown in that region despite generations of attempts. In addition, stem
rust attacks forced large sections of Iowa and Texas to at least temporarily abandon wheat
production in the late nineteenth century.60
Normal stem rust losses are estimated at 5-10 percent of the wheat crop in the
late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries.61 Regional epidemics in 1878, 1904, 1914,
58

Loegering, et al., “Wheat Rusts,” pp. 307-35. Stem and leaf rusts thrive in the hot, humid climates and
attack wheat in most grain-growing regions of North America. Stripe rust thrives in cooler climates and in
most years is limited to the Mountain and Pacific regions.
59
Carrier, Beginnings of Agriculture, p. 147; Clay dates the arrival of the blast in New England in 1660.
Clay, History of Maine, p. 38; Bidwell and Falconer, History of Agriculture, pp. 13-14. Flint, “Progress in
Agriculture,” pp. 72-73.
60
Carleton, “Cereal Rusts,” pp.13-19; Carleton, Basis, pp. 11-22.
61
Beginning in 1918 the USDA’s Plant Disease Reporter began collecting estimates by polling plant
specialists about the damage in each state or region. These estimates show national stem rust damage

18

1916, 1923, 1925, 1935, and 1937 pushed losses much higher. The 1916 stem rust
epidemic is estimated to have destroyed about 200 million bushels in the United States
(over 30 percent of the harvested crop) and 100 million bushels in Canada.62 The
emergence of vast concentrations of wheat in the Great Plains increased the breeding
ground for rusts (and other enemies) and thus the frequency and severity of rust
epidemics.63 The added incidence of rust is just one reason why agronomists maintain
that the wheat-growing environment had seriously deteriorated by the early twentieth
century.64
Given the advances after World War II, the early efforts to control rusts seem
primitive. But that was not the perspective as of 1940, when E. C. Large proclaimed that
the “greatest single undertaking in the history of applied Plant Pathology was to be the
attack on the Rust diseases of cereals.”65 What accomplishments so excited Large? A
systemic analysis of rusts in the United States dates back to the contributions of Mark
Carleton in the 1890s.

Carleton tested over 1000 wheat varieties for yield, winter

hardiness, rust and insect resistance, and for other qualities. The work of numerous other
American scientists, along with research in Australia, Canada, and Europe, unlocked
many of the mysteries of rust diseases. Aided by the rediscovery of Mendel’s laws

averaged around 3 percent over the 1919-39 period, with peak losses of 23 percent in 1935. National leaf
rust damage averaged around 2 percent, with a 9.6 percent peak in 1938. Roelfs, “Estimated Losses,”
summarizes these results for the period 1918-76. Whereas others may have overestimated the losses to
disease, there is good reason to think that the formal estimates seriously understate the losses. Subsequent
studies suggest that it is likely that the scientists reporting the incidence of disease did not fully recognize
the damage caused and tended to report only damage in excess of normal damage. As an example, Chester
argues that the estimates of the losses to leaf rust for the years 1900-35 “must be regarded as gross under
estimates.” Instead of averaging about 1.5 percent he claims annual losses were at least 5 percent and
maybe much higher. Chester, “Plant Disease Losses,” pp. 189-362, especially pp. 210-212. For our needs
actual losses are less important than understanding what would have happened without changing varieties
and cultural methods. All plant scientists agree that without changing varieties and taking other defensive
measures, losses would have been much higher than actually observed.
62
Roelfs, “Effects of Barberry Eradication,” pp. 177-181; Miller, et al., “Diseases of Durum Wheat,” pp.
75-83; Carleton, “Hard Wheats,” pp. 407-08; Dondlinger, Book of Wheat, pp. 167-68.
63
Peterson, Wheat, pp. 201-204. Systematic efforts to estimate and record losses to rust only began after
the epidemic of 1916. Hamilton, “Stem Rust,” p. 157.
64
“Stem and leaf rust, foot rots, scab, and most other diseases appear to have been relatively unimportant in
comparison with later periods….” Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 16.
65
Large, Advance of Fungi, p. 292.

19

around 1900 and the publication of Johannsen’s pure-line theory in 1901, this research
accelerated the development of rust-resistant hybrids.66
There is clear evidence that farmers and wheat breeders were systematically
developing and adopting more rust-resistant and earlier maturing varieties. For its day,
Red Fife, which gained such favor in the Northern Great Plains, had excellent rustresistant qualities and was early ripening. Early Manitoba wheat farmers noted that Fife
matured 10 days earlier than the Prairie Du Chien variety that it replaced.67 Marquis,
which followed Red Fife, further cut the ripening period by 7 to 10 days, thereby
providing significant rust protection.

Kubanka proved remarkably resistant to the

epidemic of 1904 that hammered the Bluestem and Fife crops.68 When rusts evolved to
attack Kubanka, it was replaced by Mindan (1918), which in turn was replaced in 1943
by Carleton and Stewart. At the time of their release these two varieties were highly
resistant to the prevailing stem rust races. They maintained their resistance until race 15B
suddenly made them obsolete.69 A similar progression took place in the hard winter
wheat belt because the new Turkey wheats that became the dominant variety by 1900
also had excellent rust resistant qualities when first introduced. Subsequent releases were
all chosen in large part for their rust resistance and because previously resistant varieties
had come under attack.70 The successive changes in varieties that began in the early
colonial period were neither random nor haphazard.

Rather the process led to a

progression of ever-superior varieties, given the unstable disease environment. By the
end of the nineteenth century researchers were playing an increasingly prominent role in
the identification, creation, and diffusion of new varieties. In addition the rapid rates of
diffusion testify to the economic value of the new releases. Without this continuous
process of technological replacement there is absolutely no reason to believe that wheat

66

Large, Advance of Fungi, pp. 292-312; Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” pp. 113-14. For a treatment of the
early history of rust research see Bushnell and Roelfs, Cereal Rusts, pp. 3-38.
67
It probably had direct resistance also because when it was first selected ‘“it proved at harvest to be
entirely free from rust, when all wheat in the neighborhood was badly rusted.’” Carleton, “Hard Wheats,”
p. 393.
68
Carleton, “Hard Wheats,” pp. 407-08.
69
Miller, et al., Diseases of Durum Wheat, pp. 69-92.
70
Cox, et al., “Genetic Improvement,” pp. 756-760. Kanred (1917) ranked first out of 150 varieties tested
for stem and leaf rust. Salmon, “Developing Better Varieties,” pp. 214 and 228.

20

yields would not have plummeted (as they in fact did on numerous occasions) and
remained low.
A better understanding of the stem-rust lifecycle allowed farmers and scientists to
attack its breeding ground in barberry bushes.71 In 1660 farmers in Rouen, France
observed that wheat growing near barberry bushes was more apt to be damaged by stem
rust and took steps to tear out the bushes. In the mid-eighteenth century Connecticut,
Massachusetts, and Rhode Island all enacted measures against the barberry. In 1865
Anton De Bary scientifically demonstrated the role of barberry bushes as a host.
Following the 1916 epidemic, the USDA launched a crusade to eradicate barberry bushes
in 13 North Central states, resulting in the destruction of about 340 million bushes by
1950.72 Alan Roelfs estimates that the eradication program delayed the disease’s onset
by about 10 days and, by removing the site of the rust’s sexual reproduction, significantly
slowed the evolution of new destructive races.73
In addition to rusts, various smut fungi did great damage to wheat throughout
North America. Stinking smut (or bunt) was the most destructive. “In a ripe but bunted
ear of wheat the grains were swollen and black, still whole, but with all their inner
substance transformed into a pulverulent mass.”74 Milder cases damaged the grain and
lowered its value. In 1908, Dondlinger noted that “formerly at least one-fifth of the
cereal crops was [sic] annually destroyed by smut.”75 In addition, Gussow and Conners
observed that ‘“previous to 1900 bunt was alarmingly serious and threatened to be a
limiting factor in wheat production’” in Southern Canada.76 Even if Dondlinger’s figure
is an exaggeration, both these accounts suggest that the damage from smut was declining

71

Not only did the barberry provide a home for the stem rust to carry over and multiply, the rust passed
through its sexual recombination stage on the barberry. Thus, the bush was the breeding ground where
rusts mutated and hybridized to develop new races.
72
Ball, “History of American Wheat,” pp.48-71; Hamilton, “Stem Rust,” pp. 156-164; Large, Advance of
Fungi, pp. 121-46; Elwood, et al., Changes in Technology,” p. 80; Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 123.
73
The rust spores can migrate over vast areas. But now new races have to migrate from Texas and Mexico,
or from barberry bushes still remaining in mountainous regions. Roelfs, “Effects of Barberry Eradication,”
pp. 177-181; Robert Webster, interview by author, Davis, Calif., 27 May 2000.
74
Large, Advance of Fungi, p. 70.
75
Dondlinger, Book of Wheat, p. 162.
76
As reported in Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 16. Salmon, et al. also discuss the rise of the bunt
problem in the Pacific Northwest after 1900. “Nowhere in the United States and probably nowhere in the
world has bunt been so serious or so difficult to control.” Salmon, et al., “Half Century, “ p. 84.

21

by the turn of the century.77 This was a direct result of scientific advances and farmer
education. In an exhaustive series of experiments in the mid-1700s, Mathieu Tillet of
France proved smut was a seed-borne disease and developed a number of treatments.
Other researchers built on this discovery, leading to increasingly effective chemicals. In
the nineteenth century, many American farmers soaked seeds in hot water to control
loose smut and employed lime and copper sulfate solutions to fight stinking smut. By
1900 cheaper formaldehyde solutions became available and by the early 1920s mercury
solutions and carbon carbonates dusts came on the market. There were still losses to
smut, but they were far lower than before.78
Insects represented another arrow in the Red Queen’s quiver. The Hessian fly,
whose maggots sucked the sap from young plants, was the most destructive of the scores
of insects that attack wheat. Its spread reduced yields and led to wholesale changes in the
varieties planted and in cultural practices.

The conventional wisdom asserts that the

Hessian fly entered the United States at Long Island in 1776 in the straw of Hessian
mercenaries. From New York, it spread into Pennsylvania in 1786, swept across the
Alleghenies by 1797, hit Ohio by the mid-1820s, Illinois by 1844, Kansas by 1871, and
reached the Pacific Coast in 1884. The new scourge, appropriately named Cecidomyia
destructor, shifted American wheat farmers onto a significantly lower production
possibility frontier.79
By carefully studying the fly’s behavior, farmers gradually learned that they could
reduce the damage by sowing winter wheat late (or for spring wheat, early) and by better
cleaning their fields to reduce the carry-over of the fly population. Planting late delayed
the harvest, increasing the danger from rust, but most farmers were willing to take this
risk. Across the Mid-Atlantic region, farmers shifted the date of planting from the second

77

Dondlinger’s estimate may be credible because bunt losses in modern tests with untreated seeds often
exceeded 20 percent. Charles Schaller, interview by author, Davis, Calif., 25 April 2000.
78
Large, Advance of Fungi, pp.70-82; Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” pp. 125-26; Freeman and Stakman,
“Smuts of Grain Crops,” pp. 33-64; Boss, et al., “Seed Grain,” pp. 370-79.
79
Although 1776 is the widely accepted date of entry, Fletcher asserts that the Hessian fly was in New
York and New Jersey before the revolution. Fletcher, Pennsylvania Agriculture, p. 147.
Headlee and Parker, “Hessian Fly,” p. 88; Marlatt, “Principal Insect Enemies,” p. 14; Webster, “Hessian
Fly,” pp. 259-60. Other sources offer slightly different chronologies, but the above account gives a general
picture of its spread. There are several strains of the Hessian fly and later treatments often focus on
Mayetiola destructor. Dahms, “Insects Attacking Wheat,” pp. 428-31.

22

half of August to late September or early October.80 The fly also induced a search for
new varieties that had stronger stocks to resist the maggots or that could be sown late. By
far the most important biological innovation was the introduction of Mediterranean wheat
from Europe in 1819.81 This variety proved suitable for late planting and gained wide
favor by the 1840s and 1850s.
Just when American farmers were learning to live with the Hessian fly, a new
scourge appeared. The grain midge first entered Vermont from Canada in the 1820s.
This one insect had such a profound effect that the 1860 Census of Agriculture devoted
more attention to it than to the mechanical reaper. The Census traced the midge’s path of
devastation across New York, beginning in the 1830s as one county after another fell
victim. In 1854, the New York State Agricultural Society estimated that the midge
destroyed over 40 percent of the state’s wheat crop.82 The damage reached its zenith
when the midge entered the fertile Genesee Valley. “In 1856 it destroyed from one-half
to two-thirds of the crop on the uplands, and nearly all on the flats. In 1857 it was still
worse, taking over two-thirds of the crop.” The midge also wreaked havoc throughout
New England and Pennsylvania.83 The Census blamed the midge for most of the 44
percent decline of the New York wheat crop between 1849 and 1859, as “spring crops
and winter barley took the place of wheat….”84
Initially farmers “knew little of the habits of this minute insect, and were unable
to offer it any resistance.”85 But once again they adjusted their cultural practices to
survive the midge. At first there was a widespread shift from winter to spring wheats,
80

Headlee and Parker, “Hessian Fly,” p. 113; Bidwell and Falconer, History of Agriculture, p. 96; Schmidt,
Agriculture in New Jersey, p. 92.
81
As is often the case there are conflicting stories as to this wheat’s origin. Klose, America’s Crop
Heritage, p. 66; Ohio State Board of Agriculture, Annual Report, 1857, pp. 700-701; Fletcher,
Pennsylvania Agriculture, p. 148.
82
Calculated from data in Bidwell and Falconer, History of Agriculture, pp. 323 and 333.
83
U.S. Census Office. Agriculture, p. xxxiv.
84
U.S. Census Office. Agriculture, pp. xxxi-xlv; quote from p. xxxiii; According to Hedrick, the timing of
the demise of eastern New York as the “Granary of the Country” was largely due to the impact of the two
pests, noting that they “had become so destructive that in all eastern New York wheat growing became
unprofitable, and almost ceased to exist.” Hedrick, History of Agriculture, pp. 332-35. Although most
accounts date the entry of the midge from Canada in the early 1820s, Hind notes that it first appeared in
Northern Vermont and was not recorded in Canada until 1828-29. The destruction in Canada appears to
have rivaled that in the United States, leading to the abandonment of wheat growing in many areas. Hind,
Essay, pp. 75-101, and Hind, “Agricultural History,” pp. 55-56.
85
U.S. Census Office. Agriculture, p. xxxv.

23

which even if successful in avoiding the insect, offered significantly lower yields than the
pre-midge winter varieties. Farmers faced a dilemma because the key to fighting the
Hessian fly was to delay planting winter wheat, but the trick with the midge was to
harvest as early as possible. All else equal, this required planting earlier. Thus the
arrival of the midge further constricted the available options by creating smaller windows
in which planting and harvesting had to take place. In New York the sowing date which
had been pushed from August to late September or early October because of the Hessian
fly, now had to be recalibrated to the first three weeks of September because of the
midge.86
Experience with midge infestations showed that “‘the injury has been almost
entirely confined to the high quality ‘white’ varieties, the Mediterranean escaping
altogether.”’87 By the 1850s, Mediterranean had become the dominant variety in the
United States even though its flour quality and yield (in the absence of insects) were
inferior to many abandoned varieties.88 Although the 1860 Census called the midge the
“greatest of all pests which has infested the wheat-crop,” adjustments in cultural
practices, including plowing deep, burning the chaff from infected fields and rotating
crops, soon demoted it to a lesser status.89
The battle against the Hessian fly intensified as countless farmers and researchers
investigated the fly’s behavior and tested cultural practices and wheat varieties to limit its
damage. Out of necessity farmers adopted so-called fly-safe varieties that allowed for
late planting and, gradually, researchers publicized “fly-safe” dates for every nook and
cranny that grew wheat. The recommended dates varied by about two months with
latitude, longitude, elevation, soil conditions, rainfall, and wheat varieties. As noted
above, the planting decision involved a delicate balancing of several threats, but as wheat
culture moved onto the Great Plains the problem became even more difficult. Planting
late to avoid the fly made the crop more susceptible to winterkill and reduced yield
86

U.S. Census Office. Agriculture, pp. xl, xxxv; Bidwell and Falconer, History of Agriculture, p. 239. In
fact, moving to an earlier planting date might allow for a slightly earlier harvest, but it was more important
to find earlier ripening varieties.
87
U.S. Census Office. Agriculture, p. xxxiv.
88
Ohio State Board of Agriculture. Annual Report, 1857, p. 685; U.S. Patent Office, Annual Report.
Agriculture, vols. 1847-1854.

24

potential because the root system had less time to develop. Delaying the harvest exposed
the crop to heat, drought, grasshoppers, and other enemies.90 As a 1923 Kansas report
noted, “the proper time of seeding must be determined for each locality by experimental
sowings extending over a period of years.”91 Preventive measures had a collective
dimension because the benefits of destroying volunteer wheat and cleaning infected fields
of stubble were spread throughout the neighborhood.
Despite considerable precautions, there were local fly outbreaks every year and
serious regional infestations roughly every five to six years. As examples, in 1900 over
one-half of wheat acreage in Ohio and Indiana was abandoned due to fly damage and
yields on the harvested land fell by about 60 percent.

The following year the fly

destroyed over half of New York’s wheat crop. Kansas experienced six serious outbreaks
between 1884 and 1913 with losses peaking at about 27 percent of the crop.92 Damage
tended to be more serious with unseasonably warm falls, in wet years, and in years with
large volunteer crops. Nationally, estimates of annual Hessian fly losses around 1900
hover at 10 percent of the wheat crop.93 In 1938, USDA entomologist J. A. Hyslop noted
the “general adoption, throughout the greater part of the regions infested by the hessian
fly, of the practice of planting wheat after the fly-free date has materially reduced” the

89

U.S. Census Office. Agriculture, p. xxxiii. Much later tests would confirm that Mediterranean in fact had
fly resistant qualities. Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 98.
90
Delaying the planting date for winter wheat could markedly limit the chances for a buildup of other pests,
including the greenbug, the Russian wheat aphid, aphid vectors of barley yellow dwarf virus, and the curl
mite vector of wheat streak mosaic virus. Cook and Veseth, Wheat Health, p. 84.
91
McColloch, “Hessian Fly,” p. 80.
92
Marlatt, “Annual Losses,” pp. 461-74. For a small sample of the studies conducted and for estimates of
state losses in bad years see: Roberts, et al., Hessian Fly; Webster, Hessian Fly; Headlee and Parker,
Hessian Fly, p. 113; McColloch, Hessian Fly.
93
Marlatt, Principal Insect Enemies, p. 13. Numerous other sources place the actual losses in this general
magnitude ranging between $50 and $100 million. Dondlinger asserts that 10 percent is a lower bound
estimate. Dondlinger, Book of Wheat, pp. 172-73. The direct estimates of losses to the fly are almost surely
lower bound, because when farmers adjusted varieties and cultural practices to avoid the fly there were real
costs in terms of yield losses and increased exposure to winterkill and rust. The USDA estimated in 1904
that annual wheat losses to all insects were “at least 20 percent of the crop.” Economic historians have
long noted how the boll weevil’s march across the South led to widespread failure and forced wholesale
changes in cultural practices and cotton varieties. But for all the attention given to the boll weevil, only in
its worst years did it depress cotton yields by as much as the Hessian fly affected wheat yields in a normal
year. The comparison here is with the weevil in the first decades of the twentieth century and the fly before
1910. According to Osband, yield losses to the weevil reached a maximum of 11 percent in 1932. Osband,
“Boll Weevil,” pp. 627-43. Marlatt, “Annual Losses,” p. 468.

25

losses from 6.0 percent of the crop over the 1923-27 period to about 2.2 percent over the
1928-35 period.94
What if the conventional wisdom (proclaiming a dearth of biological innovations)
that underlies Parker and Klein’s formal productivity estimates is correct, and farmers in
fact made no changes to combat the fly? Numerous accounts from the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries tell us that farmers that did not adjust simply lost their
crops.95 For later years, experiment station investigations repeatedly show that moving
the planting date a week or two earlier typically led to heavy losses. One Kansas study is
particularly noteworthy because it was based on the experiences of a large number of real
farms. It showed a close correlation between regional fly losses and the proportion of the
wheat sown before the fly free date.96 Another Kansas study reported what happened in
the absence of normal precautions such as planting early and destroying volunteer wheat.
In a controlled test, the wheat on the improperly managed field was nearly destroyed and
only produced about one-fifth the yield of the field following standard guidelines.97
Studies conducted in numerous other states also found that in most seasons early-sown
wheat suffered moderate to heavy damage, while wheat sown later escaped fly
infestation. As an example, a study conducted at eight locations over eight years in
Illinois showed that on average wheat sown after the fly-safe date yielded 29 percent
more than wheat sown before the date.98
More recent studies by modern agronomists show similar results. As an example,
in 1981 when researchers took no precautions on test plots near Colfax, Washington, the
entire crop was destroyed.99 To gain perspective, we asked three senior agronomists who
specialized in wheat culture what would have happened, given the conditions prevailing
in the early twentieth century, if farmers had not followed the normal precautions. Their
collective response was “those farmers would not have had a wheat crop worth

94

Hyslop, Losses Occasioned by Insects, p. 9.
As an example, see Fletcher, Pennsylvania Agriculture, pp. 147-48.
96
Headlee and Parker, “Hessian Fly,” p. 115.
97
McColloch, “Hessian Fly,” pp. 91-94.
98
Metcalf and Flint, Destructive and Useful Insects, pp. 410-11.
99
Cook and Veseth, Wheat Health, p. 56.
95

26

harvesting.”100 These findings lend credence to the 1909 assessment of C. L. Marlatt, a
leading scientist with the US Bureau of Entomology, that the “prevention of loss from the
Hessian fly, due to knowledge of proper seasons for planting wheat, and other direct and
cultural methods, results in the saving of from $100,000,000 to $200,000,000
annually."101 Relative to Marlatt’s reference value for the wheat crop ($500 million), the
biological investments to control this one pest led to yield savings of 20 to 40 percent.
As wheat culture expanded several other pests, including natives such as
grasshoppers and foreign invaders such as chinch bugs and greenbugs became growing
concerns. For the most part these insects posed only minor problems as of 1839, but
grew in importance as intensive wheat culture moved onto the Prairies and Great Plains.
Left unchecked each of these insects had the potential for destroying enough of the crop
to make commercial production problematic. But in each case the development of
integrated pest management systems limited the damage far below what it otherwise
would have been.
The Red Queen had yet another arrow in her quiver, because during the period
under investigation there was a serious deterioration in the weed environment in part due
to new introductions from other parts of the world. Referring to the northern Great Plains
Salmon asserts, “weeds were not an important factor on the new lands until near the end
of the century,” and for California he notes that “previous to 1900 any improvements in
per acre yield resulting from a choice of better varieties and from the increasing use of
fallow probably were more than offset by the increase in weeds.”102

Along with

bindweed and wild oats, among the most damaging was Russian thistle, a tumbleweed,
which entered the United States in the mid-1870s. The “best authorities” place and date
100

Interviews with Charles Schaller, interview by authors, Davis, Calif., 27 February 2001; Robert
Webster, interview by authors, Davis, Calif., 25 April 2000; and Calvin Qualset, interview by authors,
Davis, Calif., 25 April 2000. The fly would not have been a serious problem in every year, but the level of
destruction in most years probably would have been higher, and severe outbreaks would have been more
frequent and more widespread. Recent research shows the Hessian fly remains the “number one” wheat
pest. It is important to understand that the farmers still need to change varieties to combat the Hessian fly
because the insect continues to mutate to “find a way around the plants” defenses.” See Talley, “Hessian
fly genomics.”
101
Marlatt’s estimates recognize that even with preventative measures the Hessian fly caused losses in the
order of about 10 percent of the annual wheat crop in early in the twentieth century. Marlatt, "Losses Due
to Insects,” p. 308. Identical estimates appear in Marlatt, “Annual Losses” p. 463 and in Dondlinger, Book
of Wheat, p. 174.
102
Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” pp. 16 and 19.

27

the thistle’s introduction to Scotland, South Dakota, around 1873. The weed spread to
Iowa, Nebraska, and North Dakota by 1888, to Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, and
Indiana by 1890-91, and Kansas, Montana, and Idaho by 1894. Adapting to the times,
the thistle hitchhiked rides on the railroad, reaching as far east as New York and as far
west as California by the mid-1890s. Where it became established the weed caused crop
losses estimated between 15 and 20 percent. An Illinois observer noted: “No other weed
has caused such widespread discussion, or been the subject of such great fear.” In the
1890s numerous states and the USDA initiated successful programs to destroy the weeds.
We have a natural experiment that suggests what might have happened without control
measures. In Russia, with no similar collective efforts, “the cultivation of crops has been
abandoned over large areas….”103 In spite of widespread anti-weed campaigns, USDA
experts estimated that, by the early twentieth century, weeds reduced the yield of spring
wheat by 12-15 percent and of winter wheat by 5-8 percent.104
Our discussion has only touched on some of the most important of the hundreds
of insects, diseases, and weeds in the Red Queen’s arsenal in her war on wheat. But there
is a common pattern. In all cases the severity of the potential problems grew significantly
between 1839 and the early twentieth century, and in all cases the actions of scientists,
government agencies, and individual farmers in changing cultural practices dramatically
reduced the severity of the problems.

Rethinking Parker-Klein’s Estimates of the Sources of Productivity Growth

This section offers revisions to the Parker-Klein estimates of the sources of
nineteenth century labor productivity growth for wheat. We shun the heroic task of
modeling how diseases and pests might have evolved differently and how the wheat
economy might have changed if biological technologies had stagnated. Rather we simply
impose our estimates of the importance of IPM systems and new varieties on top of the
Parker-Klein analysis. Our counterfactual asks what would land and labor productivity
have been in wheat cultivation in 1909 if grain growers continued using 1839 varieties
103

Clinton, Russian Thistle, pp. 87-97; Dondlinger, Book of Wheat, pp.151-52.
Cates, “Weed Problem,” p. 205

104

28

and failed to invest to combat the rising threats from insects, weeds, and plant diseases.
This exercise assumes the 1909 distribution of wheat acreage. We next estimate how
much of this 1909 acreage would have fallen below a plausible yield threshold of
commercial viability.
Table 6 details our estimates of what 1909 yields and output per hour of work
would have been in the absence of the biological changes. This exercise is in the spirit of
modern “crop loss assessment” in the agricultural sub-discipline of plant protection.
Even today, one of the leading practitioners notes “crop loss assessment is not an exact
science… the alternative would be no estimates at all.”105 This is precisely what the
existing literature has done by implicitly attributing zero weights to the investments made
to ward off yield declines. Our approach is intended to produce conservative, lowerbound estimates of the impact of biological investments. In line with the experience
during the 1950s when durum yields fell by over 70 percent due to the emergence of stem
rust race 15B, the literature suggests that in the absence of biological adjustments to
control damage, disease epidemics and pest problems would have soon gotten out-ofhand, inflicting staggering yield losses.
To capture the direct effects of varietal changes, we use Parker and Klein’s 1839
yields in their Northeast, South, and West: Corn Belt regions in place of the 1909 yields.
For the other regions of the West, we follow the lead of Salmon, et al., and reduce the
1909 yields by one-third. The relatively poor performance of China Tea and Lost Nation
vis-à-vis Fife in the North Dakota-Minnesota trials, as well as the subsequent widespread
switch from Fife to yet higher yielding hard red spring and durum varieties by 1909,
suggest that our assumed 33 percent decline in yields would be an under-estimate for the
northern grain belt. The same conclusion applies to the Pacific region, which between
1839 and 1909 witnessed important changes in the location of production, several
wholesale turnovers in varieties, and the development of cultural methods different than
those found in the East.
To account for the adjustment for the increasing insect and weed problems, we
reduce yields by 10 percent everywhere and by an additional 10 percent (for a total of 20
105

Oerke, “Estimated Crop Losses,” p. 72. The standard experiment in this literature is more limited than
ours and basically relates varying levels of pesticide applications, pest densities, and crop yields.

29

percent) in the West, which first suffered serious infestations of Hessian flies, chinch bug,
and other insects after 1839. The 20 percent figure is likely a serious under-estimate of
the pest control savings because it is equal to Marlatt’s 1909 lower-bound estimates of
the saving from Hessian fly prevention measures alone, and thus ignores the vigorous
efforts directed against locust, chinch bugs, green bugs, tumble weeds, and hundreds of
lesser animal and plant enemies of wheat.106
An equally important task is to quantify the effect of controls for plant diseases.
We can construct lower-bound regional estimates of the magnitude of the difference
between potential and actual losses by examining the excess damage reported during
periods of serious disease outbreaks. Our estimates use the state-level loss estimates
published in the Plant DiseaseBulletin and Plant Disease Reporter over the 1919-39
period to compare damage in the worst three years with the average damage. This results
in yield losses averaging about 11.5 percent nationally.107 We take this estimate to
represent the additional decline in yields due to diseases if biological technologies had
remained constant.
There is a risk of double counting—the same wheat crop cannot be killed by the
Hessian fly and then be damaged again by rust or the chinch bug. (On the other hand, a
crop weakened by one enemy might be more susceptible to another). To address this
problem, we have taken lower-bound loss estimates and adopted the standard practice in
the crop protection literature of modeling the percentage losses as having a compound or
multiplicative effect rather than an additive effect on yields.
The resulting upper-bound counterfactual yield estimates, presented in Table 6
(Row 3), generate a stark picture. Without biological innovations, 1909 yields in Parker
and Klein’s West region (R3) would have been less than one-half of what was actually
achieved. They would have fallen to roughly 7.3 bushels per acre, attaining low, noneconomic levels in many sub-regions of the West. In other regions yields would have
106

As noted above, Marlett’s lower bound estimate is well below the fly losses noted in most case studies
in which recommended procedures were not followed.
107
The Plant Disease Bulletin, 1917-1922 and the Plant Disease Reporter, 1923-1939. This is a lowerbound estimate because in the complete absence of biological learning, diseases likely would have evolved
to be far more devastating than they were during the “bad” years of the relatively enlightened 1919-39
period. By region, the excess losses were West: Dairy, 21 percent; Small Grain, 13 percent; Range, 7
percent; and California and the Northwest, 4 percent.

30

been about one-third lower than actually achieved. National yields would have been
about 54 percent of those actually achieved in 1909 and about 67 percent of those
prevailing in 1839.108
Inserting the revised yield estimates into the Parker and Klein framework offers a
fresh perspective on the sources of growth in labor productivity. Parker and Klein show
that nationally bushels per hour of labor increased from 0.316 in 1839 to 1.318 in 1909
(Rows 12 and 13), meaning labor productivity increased by 4.17 times. But our estimates
show that without biological innovation, bushels per hour of labor in 1909 would have
increased to only 0.803. By this reckoning, biological innovations increased the output
per hour of labor by 0.515 bushels (that is, subject to rounding, 1.318-0.803) accounting
for about one-half of the total increase in labor productivity.
Using our alternative yield estimates, U.S. wheat production circa 1909 would
have been 46 percent lower. This calculation presumes that all land planted to wheat in
1909 remained in wheat. This is unlikely. With lower yields, substantial acreage would
have dropped below the threshold for sustained commercial viability in grain production.
Although commercial viability clearly depends on input and output prices, a breakpoint
of 6.5 bushels per acre can serve as a rough-and-ready standard. Yields below this
breakpoint were commonly considered “poor crops” or “failures” and very little wheat,
less than one percent of 1909 output, was produced in counties with average yields less
than this level.109 Applying our yield adjustments to the county-level wheat cultivation
data from the 1909 census offers an estimate on how much acreage would not have been
viable. These calculations show that without biological learning over one-quarter (28
percent) of U.S. wheat land in 1909 would have fallen below our 6.5 bushel standard.
Much of this acreage would presumably have remained rangeland.

Of course, the

reduction in production might have increased prices, leading to shifts back into wheat
cultivation in the East.110 The key point remains that without biological learning the
108

These changes are consistent with the analysis of Salmon, et al. for the first half of the twentieth century.
This invaluable study found that the improved varieties introduced since 1900 increased annual output by
about 231.8 million bushels or roughly 21 percent of 1949 output. Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 110.
109
See, for example, Patton, Relationship of Weather, p. 43.
110
Removing the unviable acreage from the cropland base would have reduced 1909 wheat production by
an additional 10 percent. It would also increase “measured” land and labor productivity relative to that
reported in the counterfactual estimates.

31

story of American agriculture over the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries would
have been fundamentally different.

Conclusion

In the mid-nineteenth century John Klippart, the corresponding secretary of the
Ohio State Board of Agriculture, was arguably the most informed individual in the
United States on wheat culture. In 1858 he published a 700-page tome detailing much of
what was then known about the wheat plant and wheat farming. In his view the
commercial wheat belt would be forever limited to Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Western
New York. The soils and climate of Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin would doom those
states to the haphazard production of low-quality and low-yielding spring wheat. Further
west the climate and soils made any wheat production unlikely. The entire territory south
of Southern Indiana and Southern Illinois could never yield reliable crops because of rust.
As a result, unless the United States husbanded its resources it would soon be an importer
of wheat.
How could Klippart have been so off the mark? He obviously was familiar with
the mechanical reaper and thresher, and he would not have been surprised by the next
generation of harvesting equipment—the self-binder. These are the machines that the
standard accounts assert made the settlement of the West possible. What so colored
Klippart’s vision was his inability to foretell the wholesale changes in the genetic makeup of the wheat varieties that would become available to North American farmers.
Mechanical inventions certainly lowered the cost of growing wheat in the West, but the
binding constraint was biological.

Without a biological revolution (assisted by the

transportation revolution), the centers of wheat production in the United States and
Canada could not have assumed their late nineteenth century dimensions.111
111

A reading of the histories of Australia and Canada lends support to our emphasis on the importance of
biological change in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. If the logic underlying the traditional
view for the US were sound, one might reasonably expect to find a similar emphasis on mechanization in
the histories of other land abundant and labor scarce frontier economies. This is not the case. The
Canadian literature emphasizes the crucial role that new rapid fruiting and drought and cold tolerant
varieties played in western settlement, and in particular credits Charles Saunders’ path breaking
achievement in creating Marquis. In a similar fashion, the Australian literature emphasizes the critical
importance of drought hardy and rust resistant varieties developed by William Farrar. Mechanization plays

32

During the nineteenth century the disease, pest, and weed environments seriously
deteriorated. If, as the literature assumes, generations of wheat farmers had simply
followed in their fathers’ footsteps (apart from adopting labor saving machinery), their
crops would have been ravaged. The fact that national yields increased slightly between
1839 and 1909 is strong testament to biological innovation. This is especially true
because of the wholesale shift in production to more marginal lands. Modern agricultural
scientists have long appreciated the importance of maintenance research to overcome the
effects of crop depreciation. One survey of 744 researchers yielded a mean estimate that
maintenance efforts constituted over 41 percent of all wheat research.112 It is likely that a
significant fraction of the nineteenth century research effort was also needed simply to
stay in one place.
Nineteenth century biological innovations carried over into the Green Revolution
era, because much of the genetic material that modern wheat breeders used to produce the
first generations of post-World War II hybrids came from Turkey wheat and other latenineteenth and early-twentieth century introductions from around the world. In 1969, 11
varieties of hard red winter wheat were grown on one million or more acres. Turkey was
important in the pedigree for all of these varieties. The semi-dwarf characteristics that
are the hallmark of the Green Revolution in the United States derive from a Japanese
variety called Norin 10. But one of the parents of Norin 10 was Turkey, which the
Japanese had imported from the United States around 1890.113 More generally, our
findings suggest that the high rate of return to agricultural research is not just a modern
phenomenon beginning with the spread of hybrid corn.114 Mark Carleton’s introductions
of foreign wheat varieties and Charles Saunders’ creation of Marquis are beacons of wise
government investments. Cyrus McCormick has long been eulogized as the man who
“made bread cheap.” But he needed considerable help. It is time that we add the names
a prominent role in the histories of both nations, but there is a clear recognition that biological innovation
was essential for the expansion of the wheat belts in both countries.
112
Adusei and Norton, “Magnitude of Agricultural Maintenance Research,” pp. 1-6.
113
Quisenberry and Reitz, “Turkey Wheat,” p. 110.
114
In their meta-analysis of the literature on rates of return to agricultural R&D, Alston, Marra, Pardey, and
Wyatt reported an overall mean across 1128 observations of 65 percent per annum. As well as the average,
they discussed the large range or reported rates of return, and a general tendency for the rates of return to be
biased up as a result of commonly used estimation methods. Alston and Pardey suggest that these biases

33

of Mark Carleton, William and Charles Saunders, David Fife, Cyrus Pringle, and the
other researchers who revolutionized North American wheat production to the high
pantheon of nineteenth century inventors.
The new wheat varieties that these individuals gave to North American farmers
represented radically new forms of genetic capital that revolutionized the location and
efficiency of wheat production, just as the steam engine, the Bessemer process, and
electricity revolutionized the structure and location of industry. By allowing wheat
production to move into more hostile climates, the new wheat technologies significantly
contributed to the pressure on eastern farmers to abandon wheat and seek other crops and
production systems. The ripple was also felt in Europe, because without the widespread
adoption of Red Fife, Turkey, and other new varieties, the grain invasion described by
Kevin O’Rourke and others would not have been possible.115

But, for the new

agricultural technologies to be effective, millions of small farms had to experiment and
fine-tune their production processes both to ward off pests and diseases and to adapt the
new and improved varieties to myriad geo-climatic niches that define American
agriculture.116 Wheat was not an exception. A cursory look at other crops and livestock
shows similar patterns of biological innovation during the pre 1940 era. This result
should not be a surprise because similar forces were at work. Major innovations were
necessary for most crops and livestock to facilitate western settlement and to maintain
yields in the face of new pests and diseases.
As we have repeatedly noted, Parker and Klein’s formal estimates downplayed
the role of biological change. This is the conclusion that economists have drawn from
their work, and this is what economists teach their students. But, in fact Parker clearly
appreciated the importance of biological innovation in the nineteenth century.

notwithstanding, agricultural research has nevertheless been a highly profitable investment. Alston, et al.,
“Research Returns Redux, “ pp. 185-216; Alston and Pardey, “Reassessing Research Returns,” in press.
115
O’Rourke, “European Grain Invasion,” pp. 775-801.
116
This emphasis on small-scale, farm-specific adaptations generating an important source of productivity
growth is consistent with Engerman and Sokoloff’s findings that a wide range of early nineteenth century
“manufacturing industries were able to raise productivity at nearly modern rates” without significant capital
deepening. The importance of learning by doing as a source of productivity growth in industry has long
been appreciated. Given the need for farmers to match cultural methods to specific soil and climatic
conditions one would suspect that learning by doing would be even more important in the agricultural
sector. Engerman and Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments,” p. 283.

34

This practice of many small-scale experiments appears also in the development of plant
strains and livestock breeds. Here, too, even after large-scale effort appeared in the form
of the Agricultural Experiment Stations, an enormous process of trial and error was at
work. Even more than in machinery development, local adaptation was essential in view
of the movement of crops continually into new geographic conditions…. Similarly in
farm practices, crop rotation, and times of planting, the two million farms in the United
States in 1860 constituted two million experiment stations….117

Our work simply suggests a balance that Parker advocated, but misrepresented in his
formal estimates of the sources of labor productivity growth.

117

Parker, “Productivity,” pp. 180-81. Also see, Parker, “Agriculture,” pp. 369-417.

35

References

Adusei, Edward O. and George W. Norton. "The Magnitude of Agricultural Maintenance Research in the
USA." Journal of Production Agriculture 3, no. 1 (1990): 1-6.
Alston, J. M., M. C. Marra, P. G. Pardey, and T. J. Wyatt. "Research Returns Redux: a Meta-Analysis of
Agricultural R&D Evaluations." Australian Journal of Agriculture and Resource Economics 44, no. 2
(2000): 185-216.
Alston, J. M. and P. G. Pardey. "Reassessing Research Returns: Attribution and Related Problems."
American Journal of Agricultural Economics (In press).
Atack, Jeremy, and Peter Passell. A New Economic View of American History From Colonial Times to
1940. 2nd ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1994.
Ball, Carleton R. "The History of American Wheat Improvement." Agricultural History 4, no. 2 (1930): 4871.
Ball, Carleton R. and J. Allen Clark. "Experiments With Durum Wheat." U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Bulletin,
no. 618 (1918).
Bidwell, Percy Wells, and John I. Falconer. History of Agriculture in the Northern United States, 16201860. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institute of Washington, 1925.
Boss, Andrew, L. B. Bassett, C. P. Bull, et al. "Seed Grain." In Seventeenth Annual Report, Minnesota
Agricultural Experiment Station, 363-79. Delano, MN: The Station, 1909.
Buller, A. H. Reginald. Essays on Wheat. New York: Macmillan, 1919.
Bushnell, William R., and Alan P. Roelfs, eds. The Cereal Rusts. Orlando: Academic Press, 1984.
Carleton, Mark Alfred. "The Basis for the Improvement of American Wheats." U.S. Dept. of Agriculture
Division of Vegetable Physiology and Pathology Bulletin, no. 24 ( 1900).
———. "Cereal Rusts of the United States: a Physiological Investigation." U.S. Dept. of Agriculture
Division of Vegetable Physiology and Pathology Bulletin, no. 16 (1899).
———. "Hard Wheats Winning Their Way." In Yearbook, 1914, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 391-420.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1915.
Carrier, Lyman. The Beginnings of Agriculture in America. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1923.
Carroll, Lewis. Through the Looking Glass. Illustrated by Ralph Steadman. New York: Clarkson N. Potter,
c1973.
Cates, H. R. "The Weed Problem in American Agriculture." In Yearbook 1917, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture,
205. Washington, DC: GPO, 1918.
Chester, K. Starr. "Plant Disease Losses: Their Appraisal and Interpretation." Plant Disease Reporter.
Supplement, no. 193 (1950 ): 189-362.
Clark, J. Allen and John H. Martin. "Varietal Experiments With Hard Red Winter Wheats in the Dry Areas
of the Western United States." U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Bulletin, no. 1276 (1925).
Clark, J. Allen, John H. Martin, and Carleton R. Ball. "Classification of American Wheat Varieties." United

36

States Department of Agriculture Bulletin, no. 1074 (1922).
Clark, J. Allen and K. S. Quisenberry. "Distribution of the Varieties and Classes of Wheat in the United
States in 1929." U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Circular, no. 283 (1933).
Clay, Clarence Albert. A History of Maine Agriculture, 1604-1860. University of Maine Studies, Second
Series, 68. Onono, ME: University Press, 1954 .
"Climatological Summary for Hays, KS." [Online], Agricultural Research Center-Hays home page, 9
February 2001. <http://www.oznet.ksu.edu/wkarc/Arch/W_History.htm> (21 February 2001).
Clinton, George Perkins. "Russian Thistle and Some Plants That Are Mistaken for It." Illinois Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin, no. 39 (1895): 87-118.
Cochrane, Willard W. The Development of American Agriculture: a Historical Analysis. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1979.
Collins, Charles W. Ohio, an Atlas. Madison, WI: American Printing & Publishing, Inc., 1975.
Cook, R. James, and Roger J. Veseth. Wheat Health Management. St. Paul, MN: APS Press, 1991.
Cox, T. S., J. P. Shroyer, Liu Ben-Hui, R. G. Sears, and T. J. Martin. "Genetic Improvement in Agronomic
Traits of Hard Red Winter Wheat Cultivars From 1919-1987." Crop Science 28(1988): 756-760.
Craig, Lee A., Michael R. Haines, and Thomas Weiss. "Development, Health, Nutrition, and Mortality: the
Case of the ‘Antebellum Puzzle’ in the United States." NBER Working Paper Series on Historical Factors
in Long Run Growth, Historical paper # 130, Cambridge, MA, 2000.
———. "U.S. Censuses of Agriculture, by County, 1840-1880." [computer file] Unpublished files
graciously provided by the authors, Dept. of Economics, North Carolina State University, 2000.
Dahms, R. G. "Insects Attacking Wheat." In Wheat Improvement, edited by K. S. Quisenberry and L. P.
Reitz, 411-43. Madison, WI: American Society of Agronomy, 1967.
Dalrymple, Dana G. "Changes in Wheat Varieties and Yields in the United States, 1919-1984."
Agricultural History 62, no. 4 (1988): 20-36.
Danhof, Clarence H. Changes in Agriculture: the Northern United States, 1820-1870. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1969.
"Dickinson Exp Stn, ND (322188) Period of Record Monthly Climate Summary." [Online], High Plains
Regional Climate Center home page, 5 January 2001. <http://www.hprcc.unl.edu/cgibin/cli_perl_lib/cliRECtM.pl?nd2188> (21 February 2001).
Dondlinger, Peter Tracy. The Book of Wheat: an Economic History and Practical Manual of the Wheat
Industry. New York: Orange Judd, 1908.
Elliott, E. E. and C. W. Lawrence. "Some New Hybrid Wheats." Washington Agricultural Experiment
Station Popular Bulletin, no. 9 (1908).
Elwood, Robert B., Lloyd E. Arnold, D. Clarence Schmutz, et al. Changes in Technology and Labor
Requirements in Crop Production: Wheat and Oats. Studies of Changing Techniques and Employment in
Agriculture, Report no. A-10. Philadelphia: Works Progress Administration, 1939.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths

37

of Growth Among New World Economies.” In How Latin America Fell Behind, Essays on the Economic
Histories of Brazil and Mexico 1800-1914, edited by Stephen Haber, 260-304. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1997.
Fisher, Franklin M. and Peter Temin. "Regional Specialization and the Supply of Wheat in the United
States, 1867-1914." Review of Economics and Statistics 52, no. 2 (1970): 134-149.
Fletcher, Stevenson Whitcomb. Pennsylvania Agriculture and Country Life, 1640-1840. Harrisburg:
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, 1950.
Flint, Charles L. "Progress in Agriculture." In Eighty Years' Progress of the United States, 2-102. New
York: New National Publishing House, 1864.
Freeman, E. M. and E. C. Stakman. "Smuts of Grain Crops." University of Minnesota Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin, no. 122 (1911).
Goodman, Lowell R., and R. Jerry Eidem. The Atlas of North Dakota. Fargo: North Dakota Studies, Inc.,
1976.
"Grain and Forage Crops." North Dakota Agricultural Experiment Station (Fargo) Bulletin, no. 10 (1893).
"Grain and Forage Crops." North Dakota Agricultural Experiment Station (Fargo) Bulletin, no. 11 (1893).
"GrainGenes." [Online database], Ver. 1.8+. March 2001. <gopher://greengenes.cit.cornell.edu/> (March
2001).
Griliches, Zvi. “Agriculture: Productivity and Technology.” In International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, vol. 1, 241-45. New York: Macmillan and Free Press, 1968.
Hamilton, Laura M. "Stem Rust in the Spring Wheat Area in 1878." Minnesota History 20, no. 2 (1939):
156-164.
Hayami, Yujiro, and Vernon Ruttan. Agricultural Development: an International Perspective. rev. and exp.
ed. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985.
"Hays 1 S, KS (143527) Period of Record Monthly Climate Summary." [Online], High Plains Regional
Climate Center home page, 5 January 2001. <http://www.hprcc.unl.edu/cgibin/cli_perl_lib/cliRECtM.pl?nd2188> (21 February 2001).
Headlee, T. J. and J. B. Parker. "The Hessian Fly." Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin, no.
188 (1913): 83-138.
Hecht, Reuben W. and Glen Y. Barton. "Gains in Productivity of Farm Labor." U.S. Dept. of Agriculture
Technical Bulletin, no. 1020 (1950).
Hedrick, Ulysses Prentiss. A History of Agriculture in the State of New York. New York: New York
Agricultural Society, 1933.
Hibbard, Benjamin Horace. The History of Agriculture in Dane County Wisconsin: a Thesis Submitted for
the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, University of Wisconsin, 1902. Bulletin of the University of
Wisconsin, 101; Economics and Political Science Series, 1, no. 2, (1904): 67-214. Madison, WI: 1904.
Hind, H. Y. "The Agricultural History of Canada." In Eighty Years' Progress of British North America,
edited by H. Y. Hind, T. C. Keefer, et al., 32-64. Toronto: L. Nichols, 1865.

38

———. Essay on the Insects and Diseases Injurious to Wheat Crops. Toronto: Lovell & Gibson, 1857.
Hughes, Jonathan R. T. American Economic History. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1987.
Hyslop, J. A. Losses Occasioned by Insects, Mites, and Ticks in the United States. Washington, DC: United
States Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine, Division of Insect Pest Survey and Information, 1938.
Johnson, D. Gale. "Agriculture and the Wealth of Nations." American Economic Review 87, no. 2 (1997):
1-12.
Johnson, D. Gale, and Robert L. Gustafson. Grain Yields and the American Food Supply: an Analysis of
Yield Changes and Possibilities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.
Kephart, Kenneth D. "Commercial Wheat Cultivars of the United States." [Online], Ver. 1.1. June 1993.
<gopher://greengenes.cit.cornell.edu/11/.cwc> (20 February 2001). Introduction.
Kiesselbach, T. A. "Winter Wheat Investigations." Nebraska Agricultural Experiment Station Research
Bulletin, no. 31 (1925).
Klose, Nelson. America's Crop Heritage: the History of Foreign Plant Introduction by the Federal
Government. Ames: Iowa State College Press, 1950.
Knopf, Henry A. "Changes in Wheat Production in the United States." Ph.D. Thesis, Cornell University,
1967.
Large, E. C. The Advance of Fungi. New York: Henry Holt, 1940.
Loegering, W. Q., C. O. Johnston, and J. W. Hendrix. "Wheat Rusts." In Wheat Improvement, edited by K.
S. Quisenberry and L. P. Reitz, 307-35. Madison, WI: American Society of Agronomy, 1967.
Loomis, Ralph A. and Glen T. Barton. "Productivity of Agriculture: United States, 1870-1958." U.S. Dept.
of Agriculture Technical Bulletin, no. 1238 (1961).
Malin, James C. Winter Wheat in the Golden Belt of Kansas. Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press,
1944.
Marlatt, C. L. "The Annual Losses Occasioned by Destructive Insects in the United States." In Yearbook
for 1904, United States Department of Agriculture, 461-74. Washington, DC: GPO, 1905.
———. "The Principal Insect Enemies of Growing Wheat." Farmers' Bulletin, no. 132 (1901).
———. "Losses Due to Insects, Part I, Insects as a Check on Agricultural Production and as a Source of
Waste to Accumulated Supplies" Report of the National Conservation Commission, Vol. 3, pp. 301-9, 60th
Cong. 2nd Sess. Senate Document No. 676 (1909).
McColloch, James W. "The Hessian Fly in Kansas." Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station Technical
Bulletin, no. 11 (1923).
Metcalf, Clell Lee, and Wesley Pillsbury Flint. Destructive and Useful Insects: Their Habits and Control.
4th ed. New York: McGraw Hill, 1962.
Midwestern Regional Climate Center. "Historical Climate Summaries for Wooster_Exp_Stn, OH."
[Online], Midwest Climate Watch home page, 26 January 2000.
<http://mcc.sws.uiuc.edu/Summary/Html/339312.html> (21 February 2001).
Miller, J. D., R. M. Hosford, R. W. Stack, et al. "Diseases of Durum Wheat." In Durum Wheat: Chemistry

39

and Technology, edited by Giuseppe Fabriani and Claudia Lintas, 66-92. St. Paul, MN: American
Association of Cereal Chemists, 1988.
Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station. 1894 Annual Report. St. Paul, MN: Pioneer Press Co, 1895.
Montgomery, E. G. "Wheat Breeding Experiments." Nebraska Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin,
no. 125 (1912).
Murray, Stanley N. The Valley Comes of Age: a History of Agriculture in the Valley of the Red River of the
North, 1812-1920. Fargo: North Dakota Institute for Regional Studies, 1967.
Norrie, K. H. "The Rate of Settlement of the Canadian Prairies, 1870-1911." The Journal of Economic
History 35, no. 2 (1975): 410-427.
O'Rourke, Kevin H. "The European Grain Invasion, 1870-1913." The Journal of Economic History 57, no.
4 (1997): 775-801.
Oerke, Erich-Christain. "Estimated Crop Losses Due to Pathogens, Animal Pests, and Weeds." In Crop
Production and Crop Protection: Estimated Losses in Major Food and Cash Crops, edited by ErichChristain Oerke, Heinz-Wilhelm Dehne, Fritz Schönbeck, et al., 72-741. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1994.
Ohio State Board of Agriculture. Annual Report for the Year 1857. Columbus: State Printer, 1858.
Osband, Kent. "The Boll Weevil Versus 'King Cotton'." The Journal of Economic History 45, no. 3 (1985):
627-643.
Pardey, Philip G., Julian M. Alston, Jason E. Christian, et al. Hidden Harvest: U.S. Benefits From
International Research Aid. Food Policy Report. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research
Institute, 1996.
Parker, William N. "Agriculture." In American Economic Growth, Lance E. Davis, Richard A. Easterlin,
William N. Parker, et al., 369-417. 1972: New York, Harper & Row.
Parker, William N. Europe, America, and the Wider World: Essays on the Economic History of Western
Capitalism. America and the Wider World, 2. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
———. "Productivity Growth in American Grain Framing: an Analysis of Its 19th-Century Sources." In
The Reinterpretation of American Economic History, edited by Robert W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman,
175-86. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
Parker, William N., and Judith Klein. "Productivity Growth in Grain Production in the United States, 184060 and 1900-10." In Output, Employment, and Productivity in the United States After 1800,523-80. New
York: Columbia University Press for NBER, 1996.
Patterson, F. L., and R. E. Allan. "Soft Wheat Breeding in the United States." In Soft Wheat: Production,
Breeding, Milling, and Uses, edited by W. T. Yamazaki and C. T. Greenwood, 36-41. St. Paul, MN:
American Association of Cereal Chemists, 1981.
Patton, P. "The Relationship of Weather to Crops in the Plains Region of Montana." Montana Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin, no. 206 (1927).
Paullin, Charles O. Atlas of the Historical Geography of the United States. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie
Institution, 1932.

40

Peterson, R. F. Wheat. London: Leonard Hill Books, 1965.
The Plant Disease Bulletin. Vols. 1-6. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant
Industry, 1917-1922.
The Plant Disease Reporter . Vols. 7-22. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant
Industry, 1923-1939.
Pritchett, John Perry. The Red River Valley, 1811-1849: a Regional Study. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1942.
Quisenberry, Karl S. and L. P. Reitz. "Turkey Wheat: the Cornerstone of an Empire." Agricultural History
48, no. 10 (1974): 98-114.
Ratner, Sidney, James H. Soltow, and Richard Sylla. The Evolution of the American Economy. New York:
Macmillan Publishing, 1993.
Roberts, I. P., M. V. Slingerland, and J. L. Stone. "The Hessian Fly: Its Ravages in New York in 1901."
Cornell University Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin, no. 194 ( 1901): 239-260.
Roelfs, Alan P. "Effects of Barberry Eradication on Stem Rust in the United States." Plant Disease 66, no.
2 (1982): 177-181.
———. "Estimated Losses Caused by Rust in Small Grain Cereals in the United States, 1918-76." U.S.
Dept. of Agriculture Miscellaneous Publication, no. 1363 (1978).
Salmon, S. C. "Climate and Small Grain." Yearbook of Agriculture, 1941, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 33435. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1942.
———. "Developing Better Varieties of Wheat for Kansas." In Wheat in Kansas, 210-17. Topeka: Kansas
State Board of Agriculture, 1920.
Salmon, S. C., O. R. Mathews, and R. W. Luekel. "A Half Century of Wheat Improvement in the United
States." In Advances in Agronomy, edited by A. G. Norman, 1-145. Vol. 5. New York: Academic Press,
1953.
Schafer, E. G., E. F. Gaines, and O. E. Barbee. "Wheat Varieties in Washington." Washington Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin, no. 207 (1926).
Schmidt, Hubert G. Agriculture in New Jersey: a Three-Hundred-Year History. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 1973.
Sechrist, Robert P. Basic geographic and historic data for interfacing ICPSR data sets, 1620-1983 [United
States] [Computer file]. ICPSR version. Baton Rouge, LA: Robert P. Sechrist, Louisiana State University
[producer], 1984. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2000.
Socolofsky, Homer E., and Huber Self. Historical Atlas of Kansas. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
1972.
"Statistics of Grain Crops, 1921. Wheat." In Yearbook 1921, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 530-31.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1922.
Stanelle, Jim. “Certified: This Seed Will Inspire Trust and Confidence.” Seed World. (June 1999) p. 18.

41

Stucky, Harley J. A Century of Russian Mennonite History in America. North Newton, KS: Mennonite
Press, 1973.
Talley, Steven. “Hessian fly genomics research will benefit wheat farmers, others.” Purdue News. (March
2001). http://www.purdue.edu/UNS/html4ever/010119.Stuart.hessian.html. (12 December 2001).
Todd, Sereno Edwards. The American Wheat Culturist: a Practical Treatise on the Culture of Wheat,
Embracing a Brief History and Botanical Description of Wheat, With Full Practical Details for Selecting
Seed, Producing New Varieties, and Cultivating on Different Kinds of Soil. New York: Taintor Brothers,
1868.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States on CD-ROM: Colonial Times to 1970.
Bicentennial ed. Electronic edition edited by Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines,
et al. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
———. Statistical Atlas of the United States. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1925.
———. Thirteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1910. Vol. 6-7. Agriculture: 1909 and
1910, Reports by States, With Statistics for Counties. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1913.
U.S. Census Office. Agriculture of the United States in 1860: Compiled From the Original Returns of the
Eighth Census. Washington, DC: GPO, 1864.
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the Year 1866. Washington, DC:
GPO, 1867.
U.S. Patent Office. Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents. Agriculture. Vols. 1847-1855.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1848-1856.
Van Valen, L. "A New Evolutionary Law." Evolutionary Theory. 1 (1973): 1-30.
Walton, Gary M., and Hugh Rockoff. History of the American Economy. Orlando: Dryden Press, 1998.
Ward, Tony. "The Origins of the Canadian Wheat Boom, 1880-1910." Canadian Journal of Economics 27,
no. 4 (1994): 864-883.
"Weather Extremes - Hays, KS." [Online], Agricultural Research Center-Hays home page, 9 February
2001. <http://www.oznet.ksu.edu/wkarc/Arch/W_Extremes.htm> (21 February 2001).
Webster, F. M. "The Hessian Fly." Ohio Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin, no. 107 (1899): 257288.

42

0
1860

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

1880

1900

1920

1940

Figure 1: US Whe at Yie lds, 1866-1969

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics, Series K 506 and 507.

Bushels Per Harvested Acre

1960

Trend

Yield

Compiled using the following sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Thirteenth Census, Vol. 5, plate no. 3;
Paullin, Atlas, plate 143P; Salmon, et al., “Half Century,” p. 53.

3.08
1.02

0.334
0.046

0.259
0.037

0.73
0.19

14.5
17.5

15.0
3.0

R1
Northeast
19.1
11.6

3.56
1.40

0.342
0.075

0.459
0.085

0.73
0.29

8.4
12.3

12.5
3.0

South
11.3
10.7

R2

2.84
0.69

0.324
0.879

0.282
0.878

0.73
0.19

13.0
14.0

15.0
2.3

West
12.4
4.7

R3

0.762

0.235

0.207

0.224

15.8

3.0

2.838

0.324

0.282

0.73

13.0

15.0

0.760

0.108

0.098

0.165

15.3

3.0

R3 Breakdown
Corn
Western
Belt
Dairy
12.4
5.5
6.1

ND
0.690

ND
0.408

ND
0.477

ND
0.190

ND
12

ND
1.8

Sm. Grain &
W. Cotton
ND
4.2

ND
0.952

ND
0.02

ND
0.015

ND
0.226

ND
18.6

ND
7.5

ND
6

Range

ND
0.433

ND
0.108

ND
0.081

ND
0.165

ND
19.4

ND
2

California
& Northwest
ND
3.2

Notes: Period 1 is 1839; Period 2 is 1907-11. ND means no data. For regional definitions, see text footnote 12. In 1839, the Corn Belt and Western Dairy are not segregated.
"Mechanization Effect” assumes A, B, C=2; Y, V=1; “Yield Effect”: Y=2, A, B, C, V=1; Western Settlement Effect": V=2; A, B, C, Y=1, "Combined Mechanization and
Settlement Effects": A, B, C, V=2; Y=1.
Source: Parker and Klein, “Productivity Growth,” pp. 532-35..

0.84

"Combined Mechanization
and Settlement Effects"

3.17
0.76

2.90

1
2

Total Labor Per Bushel
(A+B)/Y+C

1.000
1.000

"Western Settlement Effect"

1
2

V: Output Shares

1.000
1.000

2.68

1
2

W: Acreage Shares

0.73
0.20

"Yield Effect"

1
2

C:Post-Harvest Labor
(hours per bushels)

11.3
14.0

1.29

1
2

Y: Yield per Acre
(bushels per acre)

13.9
2.4

13.6
5.5

"Mechanization Effect"

1
2

B: Harvest Labor
(hours per acre)

A: Pre-Harvest Labor
(hours per acre)

Period
1
2

United
States

Table 1: Parker-Klein's Analysis of Labor Productivity Growth in Wheat Cultivation, 1839-1909

40

39

40

40

39

41

42

40

1849

1859

1869

1879

1889

1899

1909

1919

36

12

39

33

36

39

59

14

30

20

18

19

53

14

17

59

18

00

95

95

94

93

90

88

86

81

80

42

53

59

09

30

48

01

58

48

39

13

23

18

46

40

38

49

00

sec

111 miles SE of Sioux City, IA

48 mile SE of Sioux City, IA

70 miles W of Des Moines, IA

138 miles SE of Des Moines, IA

69 miles NW of Springfield, IL

82 miles NE of Springfield, IL

18 miles NE of Indianapolis, IN

57 miles NE of Columbus, OH

60 miles SW of Wheeling, WV

Approximate Location

- 1919

- 1909

- 1899

- 1889

- 1879

- 1869

- 1859

- 1849

Total 1839-1909

1909

1899

1889

1879

1869

1859

1849

1839

809

111

36.2
16.2
22.8

39.1
27.7
40.1

Mean low
Temperature
(degrees F)
58.5
53.9
67.3

Mean high
temperature
(degrees F)

155
120
170

Frost free
days

Sources: Collins, Ohio, pp. 26 and 34; Goodman, Atlas, p. 18; Socolofsky, Historical Atlas, p. 4; Midwestern Regional Climate Center, “Historical Climate Summaries.” ; “Dickinson
Exp Stn, ND.”; “Hays 1 S, KS.”; “Weather Extremes.”; “Climatological Summary.”

Wooster, OH
Dickinson, ND
Ft. Hays, KS

Precipitation
(inches)

Table 3: Weather Indicators in Old and New Regions

60

173

157

89

153

214

81

Miles

Movement of Mean Location
Decade

Note: The Total Miles of Movement between 1839 and 1909 is based on the starting and ending locations and, due to variations in the
direction of movement, is less than the sum of decadal Miles of Movement.
Sources: The 1839 data are from Craig, et al., U.S. Censuses of Agriculture and Craig, et al., “Development.” Those for 1909 data are
from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Thirteenth Census, Vols. 6-7. The information for 1849-1899 and 1919 (mean only) are from U.S. Bureau
of the Census, Statistical Atlas, p. 22. The county seat location data are from Sechrist, Basic Geographic and Historic Data.

39

1839

min

Longitude
deg

sec

deg

min

Latitude

Mean Location

Table 2: The Changing Geographic Center of Wheat Production, 1839-1919

47.0
55.2
58.3
57.0
53.3

Four States
MN, MT, ND, SD
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921
16.2
19.2
22.2
26.4
34.0

11.6
12.5
16.5
19.3
23.6
28.5
37.6

(3)

17.6
13.1
10.6
8.4
5.3

20.9
22.4
18.8
14.3
10.7
9.0
5.8

(percent)

Chaff

Velvet

(4)

13.6
7.9
5.3
4.1
3.0

44.2
22.3
14.1
6.5
5.3
3.9
2.9

(percent)

Bluestem

(5)

4.9
3.5
2.7
2.4
2.4

15.6
9.1
5.0
3.6
2.7
2.4
2.3

(percent)

Fife

3.6

0.7

1.7

1.2

2.0

1810-19

1820-29

1830-39

1840-49

1850-59

of

Unknown

1910-19

1900-09

1890-99

1880-89

1870-79

1860-69

Decade

6.9

17.0

9.8

8.7

9.7

31.6

6.7

Percent

Sources: Clark, et al., “Classification”; “GrainGenes,” [Online database].

0.2

Percent
Acreage
0.2

1800-09

Decade of
Introduction
Before 1800

Table 5: Vintage of US Wheat Varieties in 1919

(6)

0.8
1.1
0.9
1.7
2.0

3.7
0.4
0.7
1.2
0.7
1.4
1.6

(percent)

Other

Source: “Statistics of Grain Crops,” USDA Yearbook of Agriculture 1921, pp. 530-31.

4.1
33.2
45.0
55.2
56.9
54.8
49.8

(percent)

(percent)

1914
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921

Three States
MN, ND, SD

(2)
Durum

(1)

Marquis

Shares of Production by Variety

63.2
74.4
80.5
83.4
87.3

15.7
45.7
61.5
74.5
80.4
83.3
87.4

(percent)

(1)+(2)

Total New

(7)

Table 4: Diffusion of New Wheat Varieties in the Hard Spring Wheat States, 1914-21

2

1
2

1
2

2

Bushels per Hour
11 Actual
12

13 Counterfactual
0.803

0.316
1.318

1.246

3.167
0.76

7.5
0.54

11.3
14.0

0.764

0.324
0.976

1.309

3.082
1.02

1839 Yd
0.90
1.00

13.1
0.75

14.5
17.5

R1
Northeast

0.476

0.281
0.712

2.102

3.563
1.40

1839 Yd
0.90
1.00

7.6
0.61

8.4
12.3

South

R2

0.883

0.352
1.449

1.132

2.838
0.69

7.3
0.52

13.0
14.0

West

R3

13.0

0.960

1.312

1.041

0.762

0.352

2.838

1839 Yd
0.80
1.00

10.4
0.66

15.8

R3 Breakdown
Corn
Belt

0.637

1.316

1.570

0.760

2/3*1909 Yd
0.80
0.79

6.5
0.42

15.3

Western
Dairy

0.792

ND
1.449

1.262

ND
0.690

2/3*1909 Yd
0.80
0.87

5.6
0.47

ND
12

Sm. Grain &
W. Cotton

0.595

ND
1.051

1.682

ND
0.952

2/3*1909 Yd
0.80
0.93

9.3
0.50

ND
18.6

Range

1.458

ND
2.309

0.686

ND
0.433

2/3*1909 Yd
0.80
0.96

10.0
0.51

ND
19.4

California
& Northwest

Notes: The regions R1, R2, R3 (and its subregions) refer to Parker and Klein's regions. See text footnote 12 for regional definitions. In 1839, the Corn Belt and Western Dairy
are not segregated. The yield adjustments are based on assuming (a) the Northeast, South, and West: Corn Belt regions used 1839 varieties and received 1839 yields;
(b) following Salmon that yields in other regions of the West are 2/3 of 1909 yields; (c) insect and weed losses are 10 percent everywhere and an additional 10 percent
higher in the West region first hit by the Hessian fly, the chinch bug, and other insects after 1839; (d) the plant disease losses in the new areas of the West equal the difference
between the average and the peak three years in the 1919-1939 period as indicated in the Plant Disease Reporter and Plant Disease Bulletin.

2

10 Counterfactual

Total Labor Per Bushel
8 Actual
1
9
2

Yield Adjustments
5 Varieties
6 Insects & Weeds
7 Plant Diseases

3 Counterfactual
4 Relative to actual

Yields
1 Actual
2

Period

United
States

Table 6: The Estimated Impact of Biological Innovation on Land and Labor Productivity in 1909

