                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE CORPORATE PROFIT BASE, TAX SHELTERING ACTIVITY,
             AND THE CHANGING NATURE OF EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION


                                             Mihir A. Desai


                                          Working Paper 8866
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8866


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




Comments from participants at the International Seminar in Public Economics conference held at the
University of California at Berkeley, research assistance from Mark Veblen, James Zeitler and Yuming Zou
and financial support from the Division of Research at Harvard Business School are gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Mihir A. Desai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Corporate Profit Base, Tax Sheltering Activity, and the
Changing Nature of Employee Compensation
Mihir A. Desai
NBER Working Paper No. 8866
April 2002
JEL No. D33, G30, H25, H26



                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper examines the evolution of the corporate profit base and the relationship between book
income and tax income for U.S. corporations over last two decades. The paper demonstrates that this
relationship has broken down over the 1990s and has broken down in a manner that is consistent with
increased sheltering activity. The paper traces the growing discrepancy between book and tax income
associated with differential treatments of depreciation, the reporting of foreign source income, and, in
particular, the changing nature of employee compensation. For the largest public companies, proceeds
from option exercises equaled 27 percent of operating cash flow from 1996 to 2000 and these deductions
appear to be fully utilized thereby creating the largest distinction between book and tax income. While
the differential treatment of these items has historically accounted fully for the discrepancy between book
and tax income, the paper demonstrates that book and tax income have diverged markedly for reasons
not associated with these items during the late 1990s. In 1998, more than half of the difference between
tax and book income - approximately $154.4 billion or 33.7 percent of tax income - cannot be accounted
for by these factors. This paper proceeds to develop and test a model of costly sheltering and
demonstrates that the breakdown in the relationship between tax and book income is consistent with
increasing levels of sheltering during the late 1990s. These tests also explore an alternative explanation
of these results - coincident increased levels of earnings management - and finds that the nature of the
breakdown between book and tax income cannot be fully explained by this alternative explanation.




Mihir A. Desai
Harvard Business School
Morgan 363
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
1.      Introduction

        Recent trends in the corporate profit base and the tax revenues it generates have

drawn considerable attention. In particular, the gap between book income and tax income

has reportedly widened over the last decade and corporate tax receipts have been lower

than expected. These trends, against the backdrop of a protracted economic expansion

over the 1990s, have generated considerable concern over the proliferation of tax

sheltering activity by corporations. These concerns have been further amplified by

anecdotal evidence on the proliferation of these schemes and high-profile cases associated

with large corporations. Estimates of tax sheltering activity have ranged widely depending

on the source and methodology employed in generating those estimates.1


        While sheltering activity has historically been associated with individuals, the focus

on corporate tax shelters raises several new questions related to the integrity of the

corporate tax base. In particular, financial innovations that reduce the costs of, and widen

the scope for, recharacterizing income may lead to difficulties in maintaining the corporate

tax base. Similarly, the increased importance of legitimate foreign operations for U.S.

firms, the attendant transfer pricing opportunities afforded by such operations, and

increased competition by jurisdictions for those investments may increase the scope for

income shifting. In short, American firms are faced with enhanced opportunities for

avoiding or evading corporate taxes through cheaper, more sophisticated, and less

transparent mechanisms.


1
 The concerns regarding the scope and increased incidence of tax shelters can be found in a variety of
sources including Bankman (1999), Sullivan (1999a, 1999b, 2000a) and U.S. Treasury (1999). Talisman
(1999) and Kies (1999a, 1999b, 1999c, and 2000) provide alternative interpretations of these trends. For a
perspective on the variety of instruments associated with sheltering activity, see U.S. Treasury (1999).


                                                                                                        1
         These questions and concerns over the viability of the corporate tax base and the

scope of sheltering activity have given rise to varied legislative proposals but limited

empirical analysis of the claims associated with increased sheltering activity. Additionally,

evidence on sheltering activity that comes from reported book and tax income raises the

issue of other differences that might arise between book and tax income and their growing

incidence or magnitude. As such, empirical explorations of the nature of sheltering

activity must jointly investigate the changing nature of book and tax income in order to

identify any underlying trends in the gaps that separate them.2


         This paper attempts to illuminate recent trends in the corporate profit base in order

to highlight the possible aggregate scope of sheltering activity, the other determinants of

gaps between book and tax income and their scope for explaining recent trends, and the

dynamics of the relationship between tax and book income over the last decade. The

evidence provided in the paper demonstrates that the link between book and tax income

has broken down over the last decade for two reasons. First, the identifiable factors that

have traditionally been associated with the distinction between book and tax income have

grown tremendously. In addition to the growing relevance of overseas operations and

different measures of depreciation, the paper explores the proliferation of employee stock

options (ESOs) and quantifies their impact on the corporate profit base. From 1996 to

2000, net proceeds from the exercise of ESOs for the largest U.S. corporations



2
  The difficulties in precisely isolating these activities should not be understated. After surveying varied and
conflicting estimates of the nature of sheltering activity, JCT (2000) states (p. 16) that “the Joint Committee
staff believes that direct measurement of corporate tax shelter activity through macroeconomic data is not
possible. Instead, a more instructive approach may be to analyze specific tax shelter transactions that have
come to light and evaluate their effect on corporate receipts.” While not disagreeing with this approach, this
paper attempts to at least uncover evidence of the underlying trend in sheltering activity and some evidence
of the overall scope at the macroeconomic level in order to inform the debate.


                                                                                                             2
approximated 27 percent of operating cash flows. These net proceeds appear to be utilized

nearly fully as deductions against pretax income for the corporations studied.


        Second, the breakdown between tax and book income is not limited to the growth

of these traditional distinctions between tax and book income. While the distinctive

treatment of these items has historically accounted fully for the difference between book

and tax income, the paper demonstrates that book and tax income have diverged markedly

for reasons not associated with these items during the late 1990s. In 1998, more than half

of the difference between tax and book income – approximately $154.4 billion or 33.7% of

tax income – cannot be accounted for by these historically relevant measures of the

discrepancy between tax and book income.


        In order to identify the reasons for this breakdown, the paper develops a model of

sheltering and then tests that model by exploring the dynamic of the link between tax

income and book income over time and by levels of tax income. The estimates motivated

by this model of sheltering provide evidence that the patterns of the deteriorating link

between tax and book income are consistent with increased levels of sheltering over the

decade. One important alternative hypothesis – that the breakdown of the link between tax

income and book income reflects coincident increased levels of earnings management – is

also investigated. Measures traditionally associated with different levels of, or motives for,

earnings management do not appear to fully explain the distinctive nature of the

breakdown of the link between tax and book income in the latter part of the decade. Taken

together, the evidence suggests that the large unexplained gaps between tax and book

income that have arisen during the late 1990s are at least partly associated with increased

sheltering activity.


                                                                                           3
       Section 2 reviews alternative methodologies for understanding the dynamics of

corporate profits and their relative merits and recent findings. Section 3 examines the

changing relationship between tax and book income as viewed through the lens of

aggregated data generated from tax forms where firms reconcile tax and book income.

Section 4 reviews in detail the changing nature of employee compensation and its impact

on the corporate profit base by exploiting several different sources of data on option

exercises. Section 5 of the paper develops a model of sheltering activity and then tests that

model through analyses of book and tax income generated from accounting statements

over the 1990s with special attention paid to the alternative explanation of earnings

management. Section 6 is the conclusion.


2.     Previous work and review of alternative methodologies


       Efforts to understand the dynamics of corporate profits and tax revenues typically

rely on three distinct sources – economy-wide aggregate data taken from national income

accounts, reported taxable and book income from tax forms, and reported book income and

simulated tax income from accounting statements. Each of these sources has distinct

advantages and disadvantages in understanding the scope of sheltering activity and,

unsurprisingly, yields distinct conclusions. These distinct sources and methodologies also

yield the scope for much confusion about their conflicting implications.


       National income accounts provide the most aggregate picture of corporate

profitability and allow for a disentangling of the different reasons why average tax rates

depart from statutory rates. By implementing the procedure proposed in Auerbach and

Poterba (1987), Mackie (2000) provides this perspective on recent corporate profitability



                                                                                             4
and the implications for recent tax collections. He documents a reduced average tax rate

amid rising corporate profitability and traces through several rationales for this

phenomenon. Mackie concludes that this aggregate perspective is unable to illuminate the

nature of tax sheltering activity as the basic income measure employed prevents any

corresponding measure of what income would have been in the absence of sheltering

activity. In other words, typical shelters reduce both income and taxes leaving average tax

rates unaffected.3


        In order to understand the scope of sheltering activity, the joint reporting of book

income and tax income affords the promise of measuring activity reported to shareholders

but not reported to tax authorities. Indeed, much of the recent concern over tax shelters

reflects the use of Treasury data to construct comparisons between tax income and book

income as reported in schedule M-1. The joint reporting of book income and tax income

by firms in their tax forms affords the possibility to analyze the gap between the two

notions of income and the varied determinants of that gap. The reconciliation between

book and tax income in schedule M-1 is, however, of limited detail and, consequently,

parsing out alternative explanations of the gap is difficult. Finally, the use of the micro-

data is limited given accessibility and the confidentiality requirements imposed by the IRS.

Nonetheless, the aggregate perspective afforded by this reporting along with the ability to

analyze true tax income, as opposed to simulated tax income, makes this a valuable source.


        Accounting statements can also be used to generate comparisons between book

income and simulated tax income. In particular, there is an extensive literature gauging the


3
 For a related effort, see Petrick (2001) for a comparison on NIPA profits with S&P 500 profits and a
discussion of the compositional reasons why these measures may differ.


                                                                                                        5
reliability of alternative estimates of tax income generated from accounting statements by

explicitly comparing them to IRS data on tax income.4 These studies then typically go on

to study book-tax income differences as generated by the accounting statements to study

the nature of permanent and temporary differences in tax accounting. These estimates of

book and simulated tax income can also be employed to infer something about sheltering

activity as in Manzon and Plesko (2001). Manzon and Plesko (2001) study the gap

between accounting-based definitions of tax income and book income and demonstrate that

a few measures approximating the demand for tax shelters help explain the cross-sectional

variation in these gaps.5


         As noted by Hanlon and Shevlin (2001), the estimates of book and tax income

generated by accounting statements do not encompass the same differences as those

generated by viewing differences between book and tax income as reported on tax forms.

In particular, deductions associated with the exercise of stock options will not be

represented in the gap between book and tax income generated from accounting statements

but will show up in the gap generated using tax forms.6 In addition to this distinction in

reporting of deductions associated with option exercises, any analysis of book income must

address potential managerial motives to manage earnings. A large literature has evolved

that tries to define, document, and understand the motivation behind earnings

4
  See Plesko (1999, 2000) and Mills and Newberry (2000) for a discussion of these alternative measures and
their relative merits.
5
  Manzon and Plesko (2001) relate the absolute magnitude of the gap to possible determinants of demand for
sheltering activity. They find that dummy variables associated with presence of pretax profits and NOLs
help predict the size of the gap in a cross-sectional regression.
6
  This difference results from the departure from “clean surplus” accounting in the accounting of stock
options. In short, tax benefits from exercise of ESOs do not flow through the income statement but are
simply transferred to additional paid-in-capital. As a consequence, tax expenses from accounting statements
won’t allow for consideration of the deductions associated with exercises. The reporting of these tax benefits
associated with employee exercises is continuing to evolve and Hanlon and Shevlin (2001) argue that varied




                                                                                                          6
management.7 While the magnitude and impact of such behavior remains in question, it is

conceivable that trends in earnings management could result in systematic variation in

book and tax income.


         The analysis that follows attempts to use the IRS and accounting sources of tax and

book income to illuminate the problem of tax shelters. The aggregate view as represented

by IRS data is analyzed in section 3 in tandem with an exploration of the impact of ESOs

in section 4. The disaggregated view generated by accounting statements is analyzed in

section 5 by developing a model of sheltering and then testing it. This analysis also

discusses the possibility that earnings management might result in similar empirical

patterns and tries to distinguish sheltering activity from earnings management.


3.       Tax Income, Simulated Book Income and Actual Book Income


         Concerns over increased sheltering activities by corporations are typically

associated with trends in corporate tax receipts and trends in the gap between tax income

and book income employing figures extracted from tax returns. Figure 1a considers the

ratio of federal corporate tax receipts to all federal on-budget tax receipts from 1971 to

2001 as reported in OMB (2002). The figure depicts the overall decline in that ratio from

nearly 19.7% in 1977 to 10.2% in 2001. Much of the pattern in this ratio for the

intervening years can be explained by large legislative changes and general economic

conditions. The recent decline, beginning in 1996, is more puzzling given the coincident




estimates of tax rates make the mistake of inferring tax rates without consideration for the effects of these tax
benefits.
7
  See Dechow and Skinner (2000), Healy and Wahlen (1999) and Schipper (1989) for review articles of this
large literature.


                                                                                                             7
economic expansion. In particular, this ratio falls from 15.8% in 1996 to 13.5% in 2000

and then, even more dramatically, to 10.2% in 2001.


       The relationship between tax and book income as reported in schedule M-1

demonstrates a similarly curious trend. These figures have been employed by the Treasury

Department to emphasize the increased incidence and magnitude of corporate tax shelter

activity. Figure 1b reproduces a figure from Talisman (1999) that is also related to the

figure employed in the Treasury Department’s study of corporate tax shelters (U.S.

Treasury, 1999). This graph employs data for only those corporations with assets greater

than $1 billion. Inferring a multiple of book income over tax income from that picture

illustrates the concern that tax shelter activity has increased over that period. In particular,

the ratio of book income to tax income grows to 1.4 from 1.0 over five years.

Alternatively, book income exceeds tax income by approximately $120 billion (in 1992

dollars) by 1996. This figure, and the gap it highlights, has served as the most important

source of data for the debate on corporate tax shelters. Unfortunately, as pointed out by

Kies (1999a), there are a number of alternative explanations for this gap that make such a

picture inconclusive.


       In order to understand the implication of this widening gap for the scope of tax

sheltering activity, it is useful to construct a measure of simulated book income that

incorporates identifiable sources of that gap. In particular, discrepancies between tax and

book income may be attributable to causes unrelated to tax sheltering activity. The

evidence in Table 1 and Figure 2 considers the dynamics of tax and book income for firms

that have assets greater than $250 million and isolates the impact stemming from three

potential sources of that gap: the differential treatment of depreciation expense on tax and


                                                                                             8
book forms, reinvested earnings abroad, and deductions associated with the exercise of

non-qualified stock options. Before analyzing the data, the distinctions between the two

sets of data should be emphasized. Figure 1 employs actual tax return data to analyze the

gap between actual tax and book income for corporations that have more than $1 billion in

assets and are not S-corporations, RICs, or REITs from 1991 to 1996. In contrast, Table 1

and Figure 2 initially simulate that gap for similar corporations but with a cutoff of $250

million in assets over the period from 1982 to 2000.


       Table 1 provides data, in current dollars, for simulating book income for these

corporations and begins with an estimate of tax income comparable to the base in the

Talisman picture. In order to analyze the impact of the discrepancy between depreciation

expense allowed for tax purposes and that associated with book accounting, Table 1 draws

on BEA estimates of the capital consumption allowance (CCA) adjustment which

measures the discrepancy between tax measures of depreciation and economic

depreciation. This aggregate measure of the discrepancy is scaled by that fraction of

depreciation expenses associated with firms over $250 million in assets. To the degree that

economic depreciation is not representative of depreciation associated with historic cost-

accounting, and to the degree that this link between accounting and economic depreciation

has become more tenuous over time given the changing nature of assets, the evidence in

Table 1 likely understates the impact associated with gaps between tax and accounting

notions of depreciation. Similarly, Table 1 captures the discrepancy between income

earned by U.S. corporations operating abroad and that income which is repatriated from




                                                                                          9
BEA data on capital flows.8 Finally, Table 1 provides data from Execucomp on the

aggregate level of option exercises by employees that is discussed in greater detail below.

These data are only available for years subsequent to 1992. Tax income from 1999 and

2000 is not yet available but is presumed to stay at 1998 levels in order to facilitate a

baseline comparison for 1999 and 2000.


           Figure 2 relates the findings of Table 1 in a format comparable to the evidence

provided in Figure 1 by translating the figures from Table 1 into 1992 dollars. The bottom

line in Figure 2 presents tax income and each line above it adds on an identifiable source of

the difference between tax and book income so that the uppermost line represents

simulated book income. The evidence provided in Figure 2 indicates several important

features of the changing nature of the relationship between book and tax income. First,

while gaps between tax and book income were associated with differing notions of

depreciation during the 1980s, the role of depreciation differences is now considerably

smaller. Nonetheless, recent years feature a renewed distinction between tax and economic

notions of depreciation that maps to the tax and book income gap. Second, reinvested

earnings abroad, which may reflect both increased foreign activity as well as changed

repatriation patterns, are growing in importance and are contributing significantly toward a

larger gap. Finally, differing treatment of exercises of ESOs now provides the largest

component of the growing gap between tax and simulated book income. By 1998, these

three sources comprise 29.0% of tax income. The divergence of simulated book and tax

income through the last decade appears to be growing particularly rapidly near the end of

the decade. While precisely comparable ratios are not yet available for 1999 and 2000 as

8
    These figures are scaled by the annual fraction of FTCs attributable to firms with assets more than $250



                                                                                                               10
tax income is not available, it is clear that these discrepancies – particularly option

exercises and reinvested earnings abroad – have grown even more rapidly after 1998.


            While this comparison between tax and simulated book income suggests that these

two series have become increasingly distinct during the 1990s for identifiable reasons, it is

even more striking how actual book income relates to reported tax income and simulated

book income. Figure 2 plots actual book income from 1986 to 1998 for this same set of

firms with dots.9 From 1986 to 1993, actual book income tracks simulated book income

remarkably well with the exception of 1992 when actual book income dips below both

simulated book income and tax income. Beginning in 1994, however, actual book income

begins to diverge from both tax income and simulated book income in a rapid fashion.

This divergence is most acute in 1998 when tax income falls by 10.9%, simulated book

income falls by 5.9%, and actual book income rises by 0.8%. By 1998, this divergence

results in actual book income being 1.63 times tax income and 1.26 times simulated book

income. Indeed, in 1998, more than half of the difference between tax and actual book

income – approximately $154.4 billion or 33.7% of tax income – cannot be accounted for

by these sources of the distinction between tax and book income.


            This breakdown between both actual book income and tax income and between

actual book income and simulated book income can have several alternative explanations.

First, the identified sources of differences between tax and book income that have been

estimated – particularly the scope of option exercises – could be understated in Figure 2

and Table 1 and these sources could account for an even larger fraction of the difference


milllion.




                                                                                            11
between tax and actual book income. The following section investigates the actual scope

of option exercises in more detail to consider this possibility. Second, alternative

discrepancies between book and tax income such as the proliferation of hybrid instruments

that provide for deductions to tax income but not book income or the differential treatment

of pension earnings could account for some fraction of the gap. Aggregate estimates of

such activity suggest that these sources are not likely to be large enough to comprise

significant fractions of the unexplained difference between book and tax income.10


         Third, earnings management, either through the intertemporal shifting of income or

through fraudulent book reporting could be associated with this gap. This possibility is

investigated further in section 5 but it is worth noting the distinction in the beliefs of

practitioners and researchers on the scope of earnings management. In particular, Dechow

and Skinner (2000) note “while practitioners and regulators seem to believe that earnings

management is both pervasive and problematic, academic research has not demonstrated

that earnings management has a large effect on average on reported earnings, or that

whatever earnings management does exist should concern investors.” Finally, in contrast

to an earnings management explanation that emphasizes the inflation of book earnings, this

9
  This series was provided by the IRS. Figures for 1989 are only available for all firms so the amounts
associated with filers with more than $250 million in assets is interpolated from similar ratios for 1988 and
1990.
10
   For example, Engel, Erickson and Maydew (1999) study a sample of all trust preferred stock issued
between 1993 and 1996 that amounts to $36 billion of issuances. A current query of the SDC database for all
securities classified as MIPS, TOPRS, TRUPS, TRACES or trust preferred of any kind provides for $73
billion of issuance from 1993 to 2001. Given that only the periodic payments of these instruments would be
associated with the gap between book and tax income, it seems unlikely that such debt-equity hybrid
instruments can account for meaningful fractions of the unexplained difference. As reported widely in the
press, Adams (2001) reports that for 30% of S&P 500 companies, pension earnings comprise an average of
12% of pretax income in 2000. Such a figure, if true for all companies, would begin to account for a more
significant portion of the gap. For example, in 1998, such a ratio could account for 57% of the unexplained
difference. Given that firms that report such a figure, and on which such an average ratio is based, are biased
toward having material amounts to report and that many firms do not have defined benefit plans which give




                                                                                                           12
gap could reflect the artificial underreporting of tax income relative to book income. This

hypothesis is investigated through the model developed in section 5.


4.      Changing Trends in Employee Compensation and the Corporate Tax Base


        The large and growing importance of option exercises as a reason that the corporate

tax base is shrinking is further explored in Tables 2, 3, 4 and Appendix Table 1. While

various studies have considered the incentive and behaviorial consequences of options as a

form of compensation, 11 few have considered the consequences associated with the

proliferation of option instruments for the corporate tax base.12 Tax-related studies (e.g.,

Hall and Liebman (2000) and Goolsbee (2000a, 2000b)) have emphasized the behavior of

top executives rather than the impact of these changed compensation instruments on the

corporate profit base.


        Table 2 provides an overview of option granting and exercise behavior for nearly

2,000 firms from 1992 to 2000 from the Execucomp database.13 The data provided

through Execucomp is limited to the granting and exercise behavior of the top five

executives given that mandatory reporting centers on their behavior. However, it is

possible to extrapolate to all-employee grants and exercises as firms are required to report

the share of total grants that correspond to the grants to the top five executives. While this


rise to these differences, such an extrapolation provides an extreme upper bound on the potential for pension
accounting to contribute to this difference.
11
   See Murphy (1999) for an overview or Core and Guay (2001) and Huddart and Lang (1996) for a detailed
study of exercise behavior.
12
   Sullivan (2000b), Bear Stearns (2000) and McIntyre (2000) are exceptions – each considers a subsample of
up to forty firms in an effort to gauge the overall impact of option exercises on the corporate tax base.
13
   The Execucomp database contains information on various types of compensation for top executives in
companies including options granted and exercised to each executive and the percentage these represent of
all options granted and exercised, respectively, by all employees each company each year. These data are
presented by executive and company, with up to five records (one for each executive) for each company for




                                                                                                        13
process is straightforward for grants (as the share for the top five is based on grants), the

extrapolation is somewhat more complicated for exercises requiring some additional

assumptions.14


         Table 2 provides evidence of several trends in the impact of option granting and

exercise behavior on the corporate profit base. First, the remarkable rise in aggregate

grants and exercises by the top five officers of these firms over the period has resulted in

grant values of over $16 billion in 2000 to just the top five officers. This corresponds to a

tenfold increase over the decade. Second, option granting behavior appears to be

deepening within firms at a rapid pace as the share represented by the top five has

decreased steadily from 29% in 1994 to 24% in 2000. Finally, the aggregate levels of

grant values and exercises across all employees across all firms mushroomed to over $100

billion, in the case of annual exercises, in 2000 which corresponds to a sixfold increase

over the decade. The deepening of the use of incentive instruments in organizations, the

absolute magnitudes of the amounts involved, and the proliferation of repricing strategies

suggests that the proliferation of options will likely survive a market downturn.15




each year. From these individual executive/company/year records, it is possible to calculate aggregate grants
and exercises for the top five executives.
14
   Exercises for all employees were calculated by grossing up the exercises of the top five executives in a
year by the average ratio of grants to the top five over grants to all employees for the sample period. If this
average proved particularly low, this estimate was recalculated using a ratio of 20% to prevent any spurious
overstatement of aggregate exercise levels. Implicit in this calculation is the assumption that all employees
behave similarly in their exercise behavior. Core and Guay (2001) and Huddart and Lang (1996) compare
the behavior or top executives and employees more generally and find both are sensitive to recent price
performance. Given the additional reporting requirements of the top five, it is conceivable that other
employees are more opportunistic than the top five executives.
15
   Such a conclusion is necessarily speculative but the evidence on repricings in Brenner, Sundaram and
Yermack (2000) and recent high-publicity events surrounding CEO compensation suggest that levels of
compensation are being adjusted on other margins to accommodate the levels of compensation recently
enjoyed by CEOs.


                                                                                                           14
         Given the extrapolation involved in Table 2, it is useful to undertake a more

detailed analysis of the largest 150 firms (by market value of equity) in order to ascertain

the reliability of these estimates and the degree to which they correspond to actual tax

benefits.16 Table 3 summarizes the evidence provided in Appendix Table 1 on the

behavior of these firms and yields more precise, and comparable, estimates of the impact

of the proliferation of options on the corporate tax base.17 Using hand-collected data on

the exercise of options, $78 billion was realized as proceeds from option exercises for just

the top 150 firms in 2000. This figure corresponds to a mean ratio of proceeds from option

exercises to operating cash flow of 29%. Table 3 highlights the growing absolute

magnitude of the exercises and the growing ratio of those exercises to measures of

corporate profitability during the late 1990s. The detail in Appendix Table 1 demonstrates

that the use of options is proliferating through firms of all types and are not limited to high-

technology or “new economy” companies. For a variety of traditional consumer goods and

financial services firms, option net proceeds appear to comprise greater than 10% of

operating cash flow or net income.


         The proceeds from option exercises might not translate into tax deductions at the

firm level for a variety of reasons. In particular, loss-making firms, firms employing

incentive stock options, or firms employing variable-priced options may not realize

comparable tax benefits as indicated by their net proceeds from options exercises. Table 4

16
   Selecting on market value may create some biases. First, by selecting on market value, these firms are
likely to have the some of the largest five-year returns. As such, the potential for realized gains might be the
largest in this group. At the same time, this group excludes a variety of smaller capitalization stocks that
would have recently gone public and are most likely to have used ESOs heavily during their earlier years.
Finally, the market value ranking was taken as of early November and, consequently, does not include a
variety of firms that experienced rapid gains and subsequent losses during the period from 1996 to 2000
which may have experienced large proceeds from stock option realizations.




                                                                                                             15
takes the 30 firms with the largest ratio of option exercises to operating cash flow from

Appendix Table 1 and details their reporting of the tax benefits associated with option

exercises.18 As described in Hanlon and Shevlin (2001), the incipient reporting of these

tax benefits need not reflect the actual tax benefits realized by firms. Nonetheless, 18 of

the 30 firms (this propensity to report tax benefit figures corresponds to the figures

reported in Hanlon and Shevlin for Nasdaq firms) with the largest ratios of option

exercises to operating cash flow report tax benefits associated with the exercises.


         Unsurprisingly, there is considerable heterogeneity with some firms - for example

eBay - reporting limited, if any, tax benefits from the deductions associated with the

exercise of stock options. Nonetheless, for all these firms reporting tax benefits, the

average ratio of tax benefits to estimated net proceeds from option exercises is 32% across

the three years suggesting that the option exercise figures correspond to tax deductions that

are being close to fully employed.19 Taken together, Tables 2, 3, and 4 suggest that the

proliferation of option instruments to compensate employees has had a significant role in

creating a large and growing gap between tax and book income and in changing the

corporate profit base. Additionally, the more detailed study of the largest firms suggests

that the estimates from Execucomp for the overall corporate universe are reliable estimates

for the aggregate levels of the impact of option exercises on the corporate tax base.




17
   A more detailed discussion of the methodology employed in constructing Appendix Table 1 is provided in
the Data Appendix.
18
   The tax benefits from employee exercises of stock options were collected for 1998 through 2000 by
examining both the statement of cash flows and the statement of shareholders’ equity in the consolidated
financial statements reported in the 10-K (or other documents if incorporated by reference).
19
   Given that reporting of the tax benefits does not appear to be standardized nor, as demonstrated by Hanlon
and Shevlin (2001), to be necessarily correlated with the tax deductions actually taken by firms, it is not clear
that there is any sample bias by selecting on those firms with the largest ratios.


                                                                                                             16
5.     Testing a Model of Costly Sheltering with Accounting Data


       In order to isolate the degree to which the growing gap between tax and book

income is associated with increased sheltering activity, this section begins with a

discussion of the use of firm-level accounting data to isolate book and tax income. In this

subsection, special attention is paid to an alternative explanation for the emerging book-tax

income gap – increasingly aggressive earnings management. In order to motivate specific

empirical tests of sheltering, a model of costly sheltering is then developed and

implemented with these accounting-based measures of book and tax income.


5.1    The Use of Accounting Data to Compare Book and Tax Income


       While Figures 1 and 2 consider the gap between tax income and book income as

generated by data from tax forms, an alternative methodology that employs accounting

data can be used to generate a related notion of what the gap between tax and book income

is. As noted previously, the gap generated by this methodology has an important

difference from the gap generated using data from tax forms: the accounting of stock

option activity removes this deduction from both tax income and book income. As such

the gap between estimates of tax and book income generated from accounting data is

unlikely to be associated with stock option activity but could be associated with

depreciation discrepancies or the reporting of foreign source income as well as sheltering

activity. The use of accounting data also holds out the possibility of using micro data more

readily than what is available from aggregates based on tax forms.


       Inferring tax income from accounting reported book income involves a variety of

alternative measures of tax expense. Current and deferred tax expenses are jointly


                                                                                         17
considered in order to capture permanent and temporary differences between tax and

accounting reporting of income. Plesko (1999) reviews the varied alternative methods for

calculating tax expenses and their correlations with actual tax income.20 The analysis that

follows employs the measure of tax liability associated with Stickney and McGee (1982).21

Use of the measures argued for by Porcano (1986), Zimmerman (1983), and Shevlin

(1987) do not yield dissimilar results in the regression results that follow.


         Figure 3 reports calculated tax and book income, generated from accounting

statements, in 1992 dollars for a large universe of public companies that comprise an

unbalanced panel from 1982 to 2000. For this large sample, there appear to be three

distinct phases of the relationship between book and tax income. First, until the Tax

Reform Act of 1986, book income far exceeded tax income. Second, from TRA through

the early 1990s, differences between book and tax income became considerably smaller.

Finally, from the early 1990s book income has begun to diverge in a consistent manner

from tax income. This gap reassuringly mirrors the gap between book and tax income

presented in Figure 1.


         While deductions associated with the net proceeds from stock option exercises are

not likely to be part of that gap, it is possible that changed patterns of depreciation

differences and reinvested earnings abroad might contribute to this gap. Applying the

same figures from Table 1 to the gap in Figure 3 demonstrates that there still appears to be

a considerable gap between actual aggregate book income and simulated book income for

much of the 1990s. Given that the adjustments associated with depreciation differences

20
  See also Callihan (1994), Kinney and Swanson (1993), Omer, Molloy and Ziebart (1991), and Dworin
(1985) for further discussion of the varied methodologies in using Compustat data and the relative merits of



                                                                                                          18
and reinvested earnings abroad are for all firms with assets greater than $250 million, the

gap between book income and calculated tax income would be even larger during the

1990s as the evidence in Figure 3 is only for 6,000 firms. This gap appears to persist in a

balanced panel from 1982 to 2000 of 500+ firms and for an unbalanced panel from 1992 to

2000 for which there exists detailed compensation data as presented in Appendix Figures

1a and 1b.


         The gap between tax and book income could be associated with a secular increase

in managerial efforts to boost book income through earnings management rather than a

secular increase in efforts to depress tax income. As discussed above, researchers have

struggled to find aggregate evidence of a meaningful, sustained role for earnings

management. Nonetheless, it is useful to consider the motives and evidence related to

earnings management so that empirical tests can attempt to discriminate between these two

explanations. Theories of earnings management typically try to explain management of

earnings through smoothing whereby managers intertemporally shift income to accomplish

a variety of objectives. Managers may smooth earnings in order to signal firm quality

(Barnea, Ronen and Sadan (1975)), to influence future shareholders and long-run share

prices (Dye (1988) and Goel and Thakor (2001)), to derive incumbency rents (Fudenberg

and Tirole (1995)), or to lower borrowing costs due to reduced perceived probabilities of

financial distress (Trueman and Titman (1988)). For smoothing to explain the gaps

depicted in Figure 2 would require a massive, sustained borrowing from future earnings

during the 1990s. Moreover, earnings smoothing explanations of Figure 2 would require

that the period during which earnings have been mortgaged has yet to occur. Given that


alternative measures.



                                                                                          19
most of these models correspond to quarterly, and possibly annual, smoothing of income, it

is hard to imagine the managerial motives that could correspond to long-run acceleration of

income as would be required for earnings smoothing to explain the gaps in Figure 2.22


           Empirical efforts to isolate earnings management typically employ one of three

methods that provide some instruction for the empirical tests that follow. First, earnings

management and smoothing can be detected by looking for evidence of discretionary

accrual accounting. In particular, Jones (1991) develops a model of discretionary accruals

that attempts to isolate firms or industries with large amounts of discretion in accrual

methods. Studies tend to emphasize those industries with particularly large opportunities

for discretionary accruals such as provided in banking with provisions for loan loss

reserves in searching for evidence of earnings management. Second, Burgstahler and

Dichev (1997) and Degeorge, Patel and Zeckhauser (1998) try to detect earnings

management by examining the distribution of earnings around threshold levels such as the

expected earnings of financial analysts. Finally, the underlying economics of specific

accounts can be modeled, such as valuation allowances for deferred tax assets as in Miller

and Skinner (1998), and then actual accrual behavior can be compared with predicted

levels to isolate discretionary accruals. The most convincing evidence of earnings

management comes from studies of distributions of earnings around threshold levels while

other efforts reach contradictory conclusions regarding increased levels of earnings

management and the overall relevance of earnings management. The industry-specificity

of discretionary accruals and the objective of smoothing earnings relative to thresholds

21
     This involves total tax expense with an adjustment for deferred tax expenses.




                                                                                            20
suggest that industry fixed-effects as well as sorting firms by relative levels of the

variability of book income relative to tax income might usefully distinguish earnings

management explanations from tax sheltering activities.


5.2      A model of corporate tax shelter activity


         In order to motivate the empirical tests of increased sheltering, it is useful to

specify a model of costly sheltering. Let I equal true economic income, B equal reported

book income and T equal reported tax income. Book income is presumed to correspond to

true economic income with noise so that:


(1)      B = Ieu           where u         (
                                         N 0, σ 2   )
In order to specify what tax income would be, let s equal sheltered income which is

associated with costs γ ( s ) which are characterized by γ ′ ( s ) > 0 and γ ′′ ( s ) > 0 . In this

setting, costs of sheltering only correspond to the amount of income sheltered and not the

amount of true economic income. In other words, larger firms have no advantage in

sheltering income relative to smaller firms. As a consequence, tax income is given by:


(2)      T = I − s − γ (s )


and the tax rate is a function of this taxable income as represented by τ ( I − s − γ ( s )) .


         Firms choose the amount of income to shelter by solving:



22
  In contrast to earnings smoothing, earnings management could take on the form of fraudulent reporting of
book income. This practice is more difficult to distinguish from tax sheltering and efforts to disentangle the
two are considered below.


                                                                                                           21
(3)                               (
        max  I − s − γ ( s ) 1 − τ ( I − s − γ ( s )) + s
          s
                                                              )

which yields the first-order condition:


(4)     − (1 + γ ′ ( s )) (1 − τ (⋅)) +  I − s − γ ( s ) (1 + γ ′ ( s ))τ ′ (⋅ ) + 1 = 0 .


To analyze this problem further, it is useful to consider two regions of the tax schedule

where there is progressivity and where there is no progressivity. At sufficiently high levels

of income, then the tax rate will exhibit no progressivity, τ ′ (⋅) = 0 , and then (4) will

collapse to:


(5)     (1 + γ ′ ( s )) (1 − τ (⋅)) = 1

At such levels of income, levels of sheltering will no longer vary with levels of income, as

ds
   = 0 . As a consequence, it is possible to rewrite the level of tax income in (2) as:
dI


                                       _
(6)     T = I − s − γ (s ) = I − k


Taking logarithms of both sides of (6) and (1) and employing a first-order Taylor

approximation, it is possible to rewrite (1) as:


                                k
(7)     ln ( B ) = ln ( I ) +     +u
                                I


which in turn becomes the estimating equation in the empirical analysis that follows.




                                                                                                 22
        When levels of income are such that τ ′ (⋅) ≠ 0 , the first order condition in (4) can

be rewritten as an expression for tax income,


                                                        1
                                     (1 − τ ) −
(8)     T =  I − s − γ ( s ) =
                                                  (1 + γ ′ ( s ))   .
                                             τ ′ (⋅)


In order to make this tractable, it is useful to transform this into:


                      −1
(9)     F (T ) =               where F ( x) = τ ′ (⋅) x + τ (⋅) − 1
                   1+ γ ′ (s )


and to define the inverse function as G ( z ) ≡ F −1 ( z ) . This specification allows tax income

to be rewritten as:


               −1 
(10)    T = G              
               1 + γ ′ (s ) 


Given that the curvature of G (⋅) will be small when the curvature of F (⋅) is high, it

                                                             dT
becomes clear that at low levels of income,                     ≅ 0. 23 With respect to the estimating
                                                             dI

equation provided in (7), this model suggests that the relationship between book income

and tax income will be distinctive at low levels of tax income necessitating a piecewise

linear model to estimate (7). More specifically, the model suggests that sheltering will be

reflected by a relatively flatter relationship between book and tax income at low levels of




                                                                                                         23
tax income. Correspondingly, increased levels of sheltering will be reflected in a flattening

of the relationship between tax and book income.


              The intuition behind this result comes from the nature of the costs of sheltering in

the model. It is useful to imagine a world without sheltering initially. In such a world,

estimation of (7) would result in a forty-five degree line that mapped tax income to book

income and that passed through the origin. The impact of sheltering in altering the shape

of that line will be a function of the nature of the costs of sheltering. In particular, costs of

sheltering in this model are associated with the amounts sheltered and not the levels of true

income conferring no advantage on those firms with large amounts of true economic

income. As a consequence, all firms shelter in a manner to avoid the same amount of tax.

If there were no progressivity in the tax schedule, then estimation of (7) would still result

in a forty-five degree line but would intersect the y-axis at some non-zero level of book

income reflecting the fact that all firms shelter some income to avoid a given amount of

taxes. Progressivity in the tax schedule, however, will result in a flattening of the

relationship between book income and tax income at low levels of tax income because

more income can be sheltered given the lower tax rates and the constant amount of tax

liabilities being avoided. In turn, increased levels of sheltering will be associated with a

flattening of the relationship between book and tax income at low levels of tax income.24


23
     More precisely, this requires the additional assumption that τ ′′ (⋅) = 0 and that γ ′′ (⋅)    τ ′ (⋅) as
                    2τ ′ (⋅) (1 + γ ′ ( s ))
                                            3
     dT
        = 1−
             γ ′′ ( s ) + 2τ ′ (⋅) (1 + γ ′ ( s ))
     dI                                           3

24
  While it is possible to recast the problem of costly sheltering as a problem of costly earnings management,
a model of earnings management where inflating book income was costly would not generate the curvature at
low levels of tax income as it arises from the progressivity of the tax schedule. Only if zero earnings was a
particularly important threshold level and the costs of earnings management were a function of such a
threshold, it is possible to arrive at a theoretical model of earnings management that delivers corresponding


                                                                                                                  24
        Alternative specifications of the costs of sheltering would result in distinctive

patterns in the relationship between tax and book income. For example if costs of

sheltering were a function the fraction of true income sheltered, thereby suggesting that

firms with large amounts of income find it easier to shelter more income, then increased

sheltering would be associated with the initial forty-five degree line taking on a parabolic

shape. The specification employed above and tested below has the advantage of being

consistent with taxing authorities that maximize revenue collection and the notion that

firms of different sizes face the same probability of detection when sheltering a given

amount of income.


5.3     Testing the model of sheltering


        As indicated above, increasing levels of sheltering should be evident through a

changed relationship between book and tax income at low levels of tax income. The

analysis in Table 5 and Figures 4a and 4b employs a piece-wise linear regression

framework for relating the logarithm of book income to the logarithm of tax income and

traces that relationship through the decade. This approach has the advantage of tracing the

changing relationship of tax income to book income over the decade and testing for

whether the disconnect between book and tax income has become most pronounced for

reporters with small amounts of tax income.


        In Table 5, observations are aggregated into three distinct buckets in order to

isolate the trends in the relationship between book income and tax income. The

specification employing data from 1992 to 1994 demonstrates that coefficients become


empirical predictions. The empirical analysis below employs measures of the variability of earnings to



                                                                                                         25
larger and more statistically significant as tax income becomes larger. The more

interesting pattern is the comparison across time periods. First, coefficients on the splines

at low levels of tax income become considerably smaller dropping from 0.61 and 0.69 in

1992-1994 to 0.22 and 0.60 in 1998-2000, respectively. Additionally, the significance of

these estimates drops and the overall degree to which tax income predicts book income is

reduced. Finally, the decreased levels of coefficients are not nearly as pronounced at

higher levels of tax income.


        Given the industry-specificity of discretionary accrual opportunities, it is useful to

employ industry fixed effects in these piecewise linear regressions in an effort to isolate a

sheltering explanation for this phenomena from an earnings management explanation. The

results presented in Table 5 with the inclusion of industry fixed effects demonstrate that

within-industry variation provides even stronger results for a weakening of the relationship

between book and tax income at low levels of tax income. The coefficients from the three

specifications employing industry fixed effects are used to construct the lines in Figure 4a.

This figure provides the flattening of the relationship between book and tax income as

predicted in the model of costly sheltering over the course of the 1990s.


        This same exercise is repeated by year in Table 6 and Figure 4b. Industry fixed-

effects are again employed in an effort to parse out earnings management explanations

from tax sheltering explanations. The regressions presented in Table 6 are consistent with

the results from the grouped years. While the coefficients on the first spline are positive

and significant in early years of the sample, the coefficients on the first spline are close to

zero by 2000. These coefficients are insignificant in later years but correspond to a


distinguish between these models.


                                                                                             26
significantly reduced link between book and tax income at low levels of tax income.

Finally, the R-squareds of the regressions decline generally over the sample period

suggesting further the reduced link between book and tax income. Figure 4b provides a

graphical representation of these annual results and illustrates the changing nature of the

relationship between tax and book income over the course of the decade.


       This regression evidence is difficult to reconcile with alternative rationales for the

disparity between tax and book income. For example, if the differential measurement of

depreciation or of reinvested earning abroad were to wholly account for this changed

pattern, this differential measurement would have to have become more concentrated

amongst low tax income firms during the 1990s. While these possibilities appear unlikely,

it is possible that the accounting of option exercises, if firms follow clean surplus

accounting, would have reduced tax income, as measured by accounting statements, for

young growth firms with low tax income. Controlling separately for the levels of option

activity in these regressions demonstrates that option activity cannot explain this

decoupling of book and tax income at low levels of tax income. In order to ensure that

results are not being disproportionately the different behavior of small or large firms,

Appendix Table 2 and Appendix Figures 1a and 1b attempt the same piecewise linear

regressions provided in Table 5 by dividing the sample at the median level of sales. The

same patterns appear to hold.


       In addition to using industry fixed effects to separate out earnings management

explanations from tax sheltering explanations, it is possible to consider the relative

variability of book and tax income in an effort to segregate active earnings managers from




                                                                                           27
non earnings managers.25 In order to do so, ratios of the standard deviations of book

income to tax income are calculated for all the firms in the sample and firms. This ratio

has a median of 0.91 and firms with a ratio below the median are considered earnings-

smoothing firms and firms with a ratio above the median are considered non-smoothers. If

earning management were a primary driver of the breakdown of the relationship between

book and tax income at low levels of tax income, then firms with different propensities to

smooth book income should exhibit a different relationship between tax and book income

at low levels of tax income over the course of the decade. The evidence provided in Table

7 and Figures 5a and 5b suggest otherwise as both earnings-smoothers and non-earnings

smoothers exhibit similar underlying trends over the course of the decade with respect to a

flattening of the book-tax income relationship at low levels of tax income.


         The regression framework explored in Tables 6 and 7 and Figures 4 and 5 provides

evidence that is consistent the model of sheltering provided in section 5.2. The implication

of these results is that sheltering became considerably less costly, either through lowered

probabilities of detection or perceived lower penalties, and that firms became more

aggressive during the 1990s. The alternative explanation of a secular increase in earnings

management is difficult to reconcile with the data provided in the paper. First, earnings

management theories typically do not allow for such long-run intertemporal shifting of

income as would be required to explain the aggregate trends in Figure 2. Second, if

earnings management opportunities are particularly associated with discretionary accrual

opportunities in some industries, then within industry variation should have reduced, rather


25
   Such a distinction resembles other studies that attempt to isolate earnings smoothers by the relative absence
of variability in reported earnings as in Myers and Skinner (2001) who study firms with consistent increases
in reported earnings.


                                                                                                           28
than increased, evidence of this underlying behavior in the micro evidence. Finally, if

increased earnings management were the cause of the flattening of the relationship

between book and tax income at low levels of tax income, simple distinctions in the

relative variability of book and tax income should have demonstrated more pronounced

differences in this breakdown. While it is not possible to definitively rule out earnings

management – particularly fraudulent book reporting of income - as a source of some of

the aggregate phenomena observed in Figure 2, this micro analysis suggests that the

distinctive way in which the relationship between book and tax income has deteriorated

over the decade is consistent with increased levels of costly sheltering.


6.     Conclusion


       This paper attempts to illuminate the debate on tax sheltering by disentangling

varied explanations for the relationship between tax and book income over the last decade.

First, the paper demonstrates that estimates of tax income and book income generated from

tax returns are increasingly becoming disconnected for two reasons – the growing

importance of identifiable factors that distinguish these factors and an increasing

unexplained residual. Second, the paper demonstrates that changed patterns in employee

compensation are transforming the corporate profit base and contributing significantly to

aggregate differences between tax and book income.


       Finally, the paper demonstrates that the relationship between tax and book income,

as measured by accounting statements, has similarly broken down. The evidence in the

piecewise linear regressions suggests that this breakdown has been particularly pronounced

at low levels of tax income and has degenerated over the decade. These results are



                                                                                            29
consistent with the model of costly sheltering presented in the paper and decreased costs of

sheltering over the decade leading to greater gaps between tax and book income. Simple

tests to check if these results are driven by increased levels of earnings smoothing do not

appear to diminish the results that suggest that increased sheltering is responsible for the

distinctive breakdown in the relationship between book and tax income.


       The large discrepancy reported between simulated and actual book income from

Figure 2 along with the regression evidence suggests that efforts by firms to circumvent

tax payments are becoming more significant, cheaper to implement, and harder to detect.

These developments provide yet another reason to reevaluate the manner in which

corporate earnings are taxed as the underlying developments driving these phenomena –

including increased access to global opportunities and the rapid development of financial

innovations – are unlikely to decline in importance in the near future.




                                                                                           30
References

Adams, Jane B. 2001. “A Pension Accounting Primer,” CSFB Equity Research Report
      (June 13).

Auerbach, A. and J. Poterba. 1987. “Why Have Corporate Tax Revenues Declined?” In
      Tax Policy and the Economy 1, L. Summers, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 3-
      29.

Bankman, J. 1999. “The New Market in Corporate Tax Shelters.” Tax Notes Today 83
     (June 22), 1775-1795.

Barnea, A., J. Ronen and S. Sadan. 1975. ”The Implementation of Accounting
       Objectives-An Application to Extraordinary Items.” The Accounting Review 50,
       58-68.

Bear Stearns. 2000. “Employee Stock Options.” Accounting Issues (July 6).

Brenner, M., R. Sundaram, and D. Yermack. 2000. “Altering the Terms of Executive
      Stock Options.” Journal of Financial Economics 57, 103-128.

Burgstahler, D. and I. Dichev. 1997. “Earnings Management to Avoid Earnings
       Decreases and Losses.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 24 (1), 99-126.

Callihan, D. S. 1994. “Corporate Effective Tax Rates: A Synthesis of the Literature.”
       Journal of Accounting Literature 13, 1-43.

Core, J. and W. Guay. 2001. “Stock Option Plans for Non-Executive Employees.”
        Journal of Financial Economics 61 (2), 253-287.

Dechow, P. and D. Skinner. 2000. “Earnings Management: Reconciling the Views of
      Accounting Academics, Practitioners, and Regulators.” Accounting Horizons 14
      (2), 235-250.

Degeorge, F., J. Patel and R. Zeckhauser. 1998. “Earnings Management to Exceed
      Thresholds.” Journal of Business 72 (1), 1-33.

Dworin, L. 1985. “On Estimating Corporate Tax Liabilities from Financial Statements.”
      Tax Notes Today 85 (December 2), 965-971.

Dye, R. 1988. “Earnings Management in an Overlapping Generations Model.” Journal
       of Accounting Research 26 (2), 195-235.

Engel, E., M. Erickson and E. Maydew. 1999. “Debt-equity Hybrid Securities.” Journal
       of Accounting Research 37 (2), 249-274.
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole. 1995. “A Theory of Income and Dividend Smoothing
      Based on Incumbency Rents.” Journal of Political Economy 103 (1), 75-93.

Goel, A. and A. Thakor. 2001. “Why Do Firms Smooth Earnings?” Working paper
       (forthcoming in Journal of Business).

Goolsbee, A. 2000a. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from
      Executive Compensation.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (2), 352-378.

----. 2000b. “Taxes, High-Income Executives, and the Perils of Revenue Estimation in
        the New Economy.” The American Economic Review 90 (2), 271-275.

Hall, B. and J. Liebman. 2000. “The Taxation of Executive Compensation.” In Tax
       Policy and the Economy 14, J. Poterba, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1-44.

Hanlon, M. and T. Shevlin. 2001. “Accounting for Tax Benefits of Employee Stock
      Options and Implications for Research.” University of Washington Working
      Paper.

Healy, P. and J. Wahlen. 1999. “A Review of the Earnings Management Literature and
       Its Implications for Standard Setting.” Accounting Horizons 13 (4), 365-383.

Huddart, S. and M. Lang. 1996. “Employee Stock Option Exercises: An Empirical
      Analysis.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 21, 5-43.

Joint Committee on Taxation. 2000. “Testimony of the Staff of the Joint Committee on
       Taxation Concerning Interest and Penalties and Corporate Tax Shelters before the
       Senate Committee on Finance.” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Press),
       March 8.

Jones, J. 1991. “Earnings Management During Import Relief Investigations.” Journal
        of Accounting Research 29, 193-228.

Kies, K. 1999a. “Statement of Kenneth Kies: Testimony before the House Committee
       on Ways and Means Hearing on Penalty Provision in President’s Fiscal Year 2000
       Budget.” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Press), March 10.

----. 1999b. “A Critical Look at the Administration’s ‘Corporate Tax Shelter’
        Proposals.” Tax Notes Today 83 (June 7), 1463-1486.

----. 1999c. “Statement of Kenneth Kies: Testimony before the House Committee on
        Ways and Means Hearing on Corporate Tax Shelters.” (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
        Government Press), November 10.

----. 2000. “Statement of Kenneth Kies: Testimony before the Senate Finance
        Committee Hearing on Penalty and Interest Provisions in the Internal Revenue
       Code.” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Press), March 8.

Kinney, M. and E. Swanson. 1993. “The Accuracy and Adequacy of Tax Data in
      COMPUSTAT.” Journal of American Taxation Association 15, 121-135.

Mackie, J., III. 2000. “The Comeback of the Corporate Income Tax.” In Proceedings of
      the Ninety-Second Annual Conference on Taxation (Washington, D.C.: National
      Tax Association), 93-102.

Manzon, G., Jr. and G. Plesko. 2001. “The Relation Between Financial and Tax
     Reporting Measures of Income.” Working Paper.

McIntyre, R. 2000. “Corporate Income Taxes in the 1990s.” (Washington, D.C.:
      Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy), October.

Miller, G. and D. Skinner. 1998. “Determinants of the valuation allowances for
        Deferred Tax Assets under SFAS No. 109.” The Accounting Review 73 (2), 213-
        233.

Mills L. and K. Newberry. 2000. “The Influence of Tax and Non-Tax Costs on Book-
       Tax Reporting Differences: Public and Private Firms.” University of Arizona at
       Tucson Working Paper.

Murphy, K. J. 1999. “Executive Compensation” In Handbook of Labor Economics
      Volume III (eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card) (New York: North-Holland).

Myers, L. and D. Skinner. 2001. “Earnings Momentum and Earnings Management.”
       University of Michigan Working Paper.

Office of Management and Budget. 2002. Historical Tables: Fiscal Year 2003 Budget of
       the U.S. Government. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Press).

Omer, T., K. Molloy and D. Ziebart. 1991. “Measurement of Effective Corporate Tax
      Rates Using Financial Statement Information.” Journal of the American Taxation
      Association 13, 57-72.

Petrick, K. 2001. “Comparing NIPA Profits with S&P 500 Profits.” Survey of Current
        Business (April), 16-20.

Plesko, G. 1999. “An Evaluation of Alternative Measures of Corporate Tax Rates.”
       MIT Working Paper.

-----. 2000. “Book-Tax Differences and the Measurement of Corporate Income.” In
        Proceedings of the Ninety-Second Annual Conference on Taxation (Washington,
        D.C.: National Tax Association), 171-176.
Porcano, T. 1986. “Corporate Tax Rates: Progressive, Proportional, or Regressive.”
      Journal of the American Taxation Association 7, 17-31.

Schipper, K. 1989. ”Commentary: Earnings Management.” Accounting Horizons 3 (4),
       91-102.

Shevlin, T. 1987. “Taxes and Off-Balance Sheet Financing: Research and Development
       Limited Partnerships,” The Accounting Review, 62 (3), 480-509.

Stickney, C. and V. McGee. 1982. “Effective Corporate Tax Rates – The Effect of Size,
       Capital Intensity, Leverage, and Other Factors.” Journal of Accounting and
       Public Policy 1, 125-152.

Sullivan, M. 1999a. “Shelter Fallout? Corporate Taxes Down, Profits Up.” Tax Notes
       Today 84 (August 2), 653-657.

-----. 1999b. “A Revenue Estimate for Corporate Tax Shelters.” Tax Notes Today 85
        (November 22), 981-983.

-----. 2000a. “Lobbyist’s Figures Flawed, Data Indicate Corporate Shortfalls.” Tax
        Notes Today 86 (January 17), 309-313.

-----. 2000b. “Let the Good Times Roll: Options and Tax-Free Profits.” Tax Notes
        Today 87 (May 29), 1185-1191.

Talisman, J. 1999. “Statement of Jonathan Talisman: Testimony before the House
       Committee on Ways and Means Hearing on Corporate Tax Shelters.”
       (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Press), November 10.

Trueman, D. and S. Titman. 1988. “An Explanation for Accounting Income
      Smoothing.” Journal of Accounting Research 26, 127-139.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1999. “The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters:
       Discussion, Analysis and Legislative Proposals.” (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
       Government Press).

Zimmerman, J. 1983. “Taxes and Firm Size.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 5,
     119-149.
          Figure 1a: Corporate Tax Receipts as Percent of Total On-Budget Receipts, 1971-2001


          25%



          20%



          15%



          10%



           5%



           0%
                1971               1976                 1981             1986               1991               1996               2001




   Figure 1b: Actual Book and Tax Income, Firms with greater than $1 Billion in Assets, 1991-1996




                                                1991            1992            1993            1994            1995            1996
       Inferred Multiple of
          Book over Tax Income                  1.13x           0.94x           1.15x           1.39x           1.26x           1.40x
       Inferred Excess of
          Book over Tax Income                  20.0            (10.0)          30.0            85.0            70.0            120.0

Note: Figure 1a is the ratio of corporate tax receipts to all on-budget federal receipts as reported in OMB (2002). Figure 1b is extracted
from Talisman (1999). Book Income corresponds to after-tax book income from Schedule M-1 plus federal taxes less tax-exempt
interest. Tax Income is the difference between total receipts and total deductions. This is based on all corporations with assets greater
than $1 billion and excludes S Corporations, RICs, REITs and foreign corporations.
                                                                   Figure 2
                     Tax, Simulated Book and Actual Book Income for Firms with greater than $250 Million in Assets, 1982-2000

   700



   600



   500



   400



   300



   200



   100



     -
              1982      1983       1984       1985      1986       1987      1988       1989       1990        1991       1992         1993   1994     1995       1996       1997       1998      1999      2000
                                     (1) Tax Income                                                    (2) Excess Depreciation + (1)                               (3) Reinvested Earnings Abroad + (2)
                                     (4) Option Exercises + (3)                                        (5) Simulated Book Income = (4)                             (6) Actual Book Income


                                      1986           1987         1988          1989           1990           1991         1992           1993       1994          1995          1996          1997         1998
Actual BI / Actual TI                 1.60x          1.27x        1.18x        1.28x           1.16x         1.09x         0.83x          1.12x      1.33x        1.28x         1.40x          1.44x        1.63x
Actual BI - Actual TI                  105            70           65           80              39            21            (42)            37        111          111           172            197          247

Actual BI / Simulated BI              1.22x          1.03x        1.03x        1.12x           1.01x         0.98x         0.74x          0.97x      1.19x        1.09x         1.17x          1.18x        1.26x
Actual BI - Simulated BI               51              9           13           40               2             (5)          (75)            (9)        71           41            86             97          133

Note: Tax income corresponds to total receipts less total deductions for filers with more than $250 million in assets excluding RICs, REITs, and S-Corporations. Excess depreciation corresponds to the difference in
tax and economic depreciation as outlined in CCA adjustments. Reinvested earnings abroad is the difference between earnings abroad and repatriated earnings as reported by the BEA. Option exercises are estimated
from Execucomp data and are only available from 1992 onward. Simulated book income is the sum of those items. Black dots correspond to actual book income for those same companies and represent after-tax
book income from Schedule M-1 plus federal taxes less tax-exempt interest. Figures are in 1992 dollars. For 1989, IRS data is available only for all filers. The greater than $250 million category is interpolated by
assuming the ratio for this category relative to all filers is the average of those ratios in 1988 and 1990. The bottom four rows compare actual book income to actual tax income and actual book income to simulated
book income.
                                                                  Figure 3
                                   Calculated Book and Taxable Income for All Public Companies, 1982-2000


  800,000



  700,000



  600,000



  500,000



  400,000



  300,000



  200,000



  100,000



         -
               1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
               5,181 5,259 5,337 5,537 5,673 5,646 5,488 5,286 5,371 5,481 5,887 6,497 6,854 7,558 7,669 7,407 7,530 7,061 4,440

                 Taxable Income                   Excess Depreciation                  Reinvested Earnings Abroad                 Book Income

Note: Taxable Income and Book Income are drawn from Compustat as described in the text and are presented for an unbalanced panel from 1982 to 2000. The number of firms for
each year is presented below the year. Excess depreciation and reinvested earning abroad are the same as in Table 1 and Figure 2.
   Figure 4a: Book Income versus Taxable Income, Spline Estimates by Three-Year Intervals
                           with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-2000

                          12

                          10
        ln(Book Income)




                           8

                           6

                           4

                           2

                           0
                               0      1         2      3          4       5        6         7          8          9         10
                                                                  ln(Taxable Income)
                                           1992-1994                  1995-1997                   1998-2000

                               Figure 4b: Book Income versus Taxable Income, Spline Estimates by Year
                                                with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-2000

                          12

                          10
        ln(Book Income)




                           8

                           6

                           4

                           2

                           0
                               0       1        2      3          4       5        6         7          8          9          10
                                                                  ln(Taxable Income)
                                              1992         1993           1994           1995               1996
                                              1997         1998           1999           2000

Note: In Figure 4a, the three lines are constructed using the coefficients of spline regressions reported in Table 5 where industry fixed
effects are employed for the groups of years 1992-1994, 1995-1997, and 1998-2000. In Figure 4b, the lines are constructed using the
coefficients of spline regressions reported in Table 6 where industry fixed effects are employed for each year from 1992 to 2000.
                              Figure 5a: Book Income versus Taxable Income, Earnings-Smoothing Firms,
                            Spline Estimates by Three-Year Intervals with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-2000

                            12


                            10
   ln(Book Income)




                             8


                             6


                             4


                             2


                             0
                                 0    1        2       3      4        5          6           7          8           9          10

                                                             ln(Taxable Income)

                                      1992-1994                   1995-1997                          1998-2000

                      Figure 5b: Book Income versus Taxable Income, Non-Earnings-Smoothing Firms,
                      Spline Estimates by Three-Year Intervals with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-2000

                            12


                            10
          ln(Book Income)




                             8


                             6


                             4


                             2


                             0
                                 0     1           2   3      4         5         6           7           8          9          10
                                                              ln(Taxable Income)
                                       1992-1994                  1995-1997                           1998-2000


Note: In Figures 5a and 5b, the three lines are constructed using the coefficients of spline regressions reported in Table 7 for the
groups of years 1992-1994, 1995-1997, and 1998-2000. The figures employ regressions for two samples of firms that are
divided at the median ratio of the standard deviation of book income to the standard deviation of taxable income. Firms with
ratios above the median ratio are termed "non-earnings smoothing firms" and those below the median are termed "earnings
smoothing firms."
                                               Table 1
                     Tax Income and Components of Simulated Book Income, 1982-2000

                                             2                      3                      4                      5                      6
                                                                           Reinvested           Proceeds from             Simulated
                                  Tax                Excess                 Earnings               Option                   Book
          Year                  Income             Depreciation             Abroad                Exercises                Income
          1982                  85,223                  8,437                  4,574                   na                   98,234

          1983                 103,103                 19,340                 13,107                   na                  135,550

          1984                 130,569                 30,276                 16,803                   na                  177,649

          1985                 142,224                 43,557                 13,397                   na                  199,179

          1986                 136,194                 33,457                  9,247                   na                  178,899

          1987                 214,618                 31,915                 17,687                   na                  264,220

          1988                 306,665                 30,341                 13,447                   na                  350,453

          1989                 248,551                 23,759                 11,775                   na                  284,085

          1990                 227,723                 13,542                 20,488                   na                  261,753

          1991                 215,572                  7,031                 17,568                   na                  240,171

          1992                 251,587                  3,014                 15,733                 14,086                284,419

          1993                 307,302                  2,866                 29,212                 15,365                354,744

          1994                 357,936                  8,545                 23,342                 10,416                400,240

          1995                 436,533                 13,095                 45,708                 17,649                512,985

          1996                 485,645                 17,427                 46,035                 32,412                581,519

          1997                 513,332                 23,660                 47,728                 42,626                627,346

          1998                 457,575                 27,356                 31,620                 73,598                590,150

          1999                 457,575                 37,218                 58,806                 74,832                628,431

          2000                 457,575                 31,243                 84,111                106,265                679,195



Note: All dollar figures are in current dollars. Tax income is total receipts less total deductions for firms with greater than $250 million in
assets excluding RICs, REITs, and S-Corporations. The tax income figures for 1999 and 2000 are not available so the simulated book
income figure assumes that tax income stays at 1998 levels. Excess depreciation corresponds to the CCA adjustment scaled for the
relative use of depreciation by firms with greater than $250 million in assets. Reinvested earnings abroad are the difference between
foreign earnings and repatriations scaled for the relative levels of foreign income for firms with greater than $250 million in assets.
Option exercises are the proceeds from exercises as more fully reported in Table 2. Simulated Book Income is the sum of those figures.
                                                 Table 2
                     Estimates of Option Grants and Exercises, 1992-2000 (Execucomp)


                                                    To Top Five Executives                                 To All Employees

                      No. of             Grant                            Median Share                  Grant
    Year              Firms             Value ($)          Exercises ($) of All Exercises              Value ($)        Exercises ($)


     1992                 1,442                1,510                2,416               24.1%                8,713              14,086

     1993                 1,591                2,407                2,341               26.7%               12,915              15,365

     1994                 1,646                3,494                1,892               28.5%               17,892              10,416

     1995                 1,727                3,646                2,655               27.5%               20,280              17,649

     1996                 1,865                6,010                4,257               27.6%               32,286              32,412

     1997                 1,920                8,382                6,718               27.1%               47,015              42,626

     1998                 1,910                9,620                9,421               24.9%               79,555              73,598

     1999                 1,765              13,768               10,413                25.7%             123,113               74,832

     2000                 1,435              16,430               14,628                23.5%             199,085             106,265



Note: The data presented in this table is taken for the full universe of firms reported in the Execucomp database. Grant values represent
the dollar value using the Black-Scholes valuation model of option grants; exercises represent the excess of the market value of shares
under exercises options over the proceeds from exercised options; the median share of all of a company's options (based on shares
granted) accounted for by the top five executives is the ratio of grants to the top five employees to all grants. Grant values for all
employees are determined by grossing up the value of grants to the top five executives by a company's share of options granted to the top
five executives; exercises for all employees are estimated by grossing up exercises of the top five executives by the average across all
years of the median share of all exercises, excepting that if the average is less than 1%, then exercises are grossed up using 20%.
                                                    Table 3
                             Estimates of Option Exercises, 1996-2000 (SEC Filings)

                                                                                                                            Cumulative
Item                                                   2000           1999          1998           1997          1996       1996-2000


Number of Companies                                       145            142           139            113           109              145


Median Option Exercises ($MM)                             147            149           135             96             52             592


Mean Option Exercises ($MM)                               543            525           362            238           132           1,684


Aggregate Option Exercises ($MM)                      78,779         74,539        50,376         26,909        14,398         244,151

Median Ratio of Option Exercises to
Operating Cash Flow                                     7.9%           7.7%         10.0%           6.8%          4.8%             9.0%

Mean Ratio of Option Exercises to
Operating Cash Flow                                    29.1%         22.6%          19.6%         12.7%           9.8%           27.2%



Note: This table presents data compiled from SEC filings for the universe of companies with the largest market capitalization as detailed
in Appendix Table 1. Median, mean and aggregate values of option exercises are calculated as the excess of market value over the
average strike price where where the volume-weighted average price in a given year is used to establish market values. The median and
mean ratio of option exercises to operating cash flow scales estimated annual option exercises by operating cash flows or net income, in
the case of financial institutions. The underlying data for this table is provided in Appendix Table 1 and the methodology is more fully
described in the data appendix.
                                                     Table 4
                   Reported Tax Benefits and Estimated Option Exercises, 1998-2000 (SEC Filings)
                                                                         2000                          1999                            1998
                                                                    Tax                           Tax                            Tax
                                              2000 Option         Benefits                      Benefits                       Benefits
          MV                                   Exercises         From Opt.    Option           From Opt.    Option            From Opt.     Option
Rank      Rank        Company name               / OCF           Exercises Exercises           Exercises Exercises            Exercises Exercises
   1        97      Lucent Technologies               668%             1,064         2,030              394        1,542              287         1,143
   2        131     eBay                             272%                 37           273               11          229                 0          849
   3        145     Immunex                          254%                 na          437                na          135                na            16
   4        77      Genentech                        245%                226           475               83          310                17           na
   5        147     Forest Laboratories              160%                 80           289               24            44               17            53
   6        29      Oracle                           158%                 na        3,437                na          710                na          144
   7        128     Maxim Integrated                 138%                239           667              155          488              137           254
   8        12      AOL-Time Warner                  115%                 na        2,247                na        7,271                na        1,898
   9        15      Cisco Systems                     113%             1,397         6,940            2,495        4,478              837         2,340
  10        35      Amgen                              92%               377        1,505               152          725              108           372
  11        78      EMC                                81%               208        1,716                58          565                44          228
  12        109     Charles Schwab                     80%                na          578                na          713                na          198
  13        33      Dell Computer                      79%               929        3,314            1,040         3,093              444         2,407
  14        73      Applied Materials                  77%               387        1,272               161          610                28          106
  15        28      American Home Prod.                72%                na          398                na          307                na          557
  16        63      Sun Microsystems                   72%               816         2,684              708        1,134              222           418
  17        129     Compaq Computer                    69%               234          392               142          310              104           702
  18         4      Pfizer                             69%                na        4,288                na        2,286                na        2,292
  19        106     Kohl's                             69%                99          256                47          115                10            23
  20        133     Analog Devices                     66%                44          466                15          116                13            38
  21        42      Pharmacia                          57%                na          955                na          237                na          439
  22         2      Microsoft                          56%             3,107        7,795            5,535        15,325            2,066         7,438
  23        41      Texas Instruments                  45%                na          985                na          763                na          207
  24        103     UnitedHealth Group                 41%                na          304                na            45               na            84
  25        10      Intel                              41%               887        5,234               506        2,928              415         2,375
  26        53      Merrill Lynch                      38%                na        1,446                na          443                na          428
  27        67      Cardinal Health                    35%               159          303                47          161                65          192
  28        83      Marsh & McLennan                   33%                na          392                na          169                na          102
  29        62      Hewlett-Packard                    33%               495         1,446              289          768              157           371
  30        68      Automatic Data Proc.               28%                na          297                na          181                na          142
Tax Benefit From Option Exercises            Mean                         31.9%                          31.8%                          31.7%
Scaled by Option Exericses:                  Median                       30.4%                          30.4%                          30.3%

Note: This table reports reported tax benefits from option exercies and estimated option exercises in 1998, 1999 and 2000 for those thirty firms with the
highest ratios of option exercises to operating cash flow in 2000. The means and medians presented at the bottom of the table are for the ratio of
reported tax benefits by estimated by option exercises for each year.
               Table 5: Piecewise Linear Regression of Book Income on Taxable Income
               with and without Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-1994, 1995-1997, 1998-2000

                              1992-1994                             1995-1997                            1998-2000
                       No Fixed         Fixed                No Fixed         Fixed               No Fixed         Fixed
                        Effects        Effects                Effects        Effects               Effects        Effects

Constant                 1.3091             1.3175            2.5274             2.5313            2.9443             2.7976
                        (0.3728)           (0.3888)          (0.2885)           (0.2619)          (0.4228)           (0.3982)

Spline 1                 0.6101             0.6090            0.1719             0.1626            0.2209             0.2846
                        (0.1588)           (0.1646)          (0.1243)           (0.1137)          (0.1526)           (0.1466)

Spline 2                 0.6852             0.7562            0.8781             0.9478            0.6046             0.4861
                        (0.2032)           (0.2038)          (0.1436)           (0.1367)          (0.2360)           (0.2306)

Spline 3                 0.9361             0.8258            0.8224             0.7543            0.9907             1.1018
                        (0.2440)           (0.2321)          (0.1854)           (0.1799)          (0.2856)           (0.2909)

Spline 4                 0.9662             1.0494            1.0021             1.0285            1.1847             1.1239
                        (0.1726)           (0.1678)          (0.2379)           (0.2268)          (0.2906)           (0.2992)

Spline 5                 0.8916             0.8860            0.8546             0.8370            0.7383             0.8768
                        (0.1947)           (0.1919)          (0.2146)           (0.2020)          (0.2765)           (0.2755)

Spline 6                 0.9957             0.8900            0.8358             0.8139            1.1002             1.0636
                        (0.1520)           (0.1483)          (0.2018)           (0.1930)          (0.2643)           (0.2512)

Spline 7                 1.1361             1.1440            1.3056             1.3244            1.0382             0.8919
                        (0.1618)           (0.1544)          (0.1906)           (0.1939)          (0.2213)           (0.1958)

Spline 8                 0.8743             0.8135            0.8199             0.7767            0.8000             0.8953
                        (0.1133)           (0.1122)          (0.1302)           (0.1401)          (0.1474)           (0.1380)

Spline 9                 1.0190             1.0284            1.0207             0.9718            0.9592             0.8450
                        (0.0773)           (0.0792)          (0.0645)           (0.0775)          (0.1056)           (0.1131)

Spline 10                0.9946             0.9624            1.0076             1.0436            1.0701             1.1052
                        (0.0317)           (0.0367)          (0.0263)           (0.0342)          (0.0364)           (0.0447)

R2 / Adjusted R2         0.9096            0.9162             0.8923             0.9056            0.8626             0.8766

# of Obs                  1229               1229              1384               1384               942                942

Categories
Absorbed                    -                 62                 -                 62                  -                61


Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the logarithm of book income summed across relevant years. The percentile
splines create separate coefficients depending on the logarithm of taxable income summed across relevant years. Columns 2, 4 and
6 employ industry fixed effects.
                                        Table 6: Piecewise Linear Regression with Industry Fixed Effects
                                                 of Book Income on Taxable Income, 1992-2000
                         1                   2                   3                   4                  5                  6                 7                  8                 9
                       1992                1993                1994                1995               1996               1997              1998               1999              2000
Constant              0.9221              1.4416              1.0461              1.2975             1.4429             1.4224            1.9782             2.1532            2.6624
                     (0.2136)            (0.2089)            (0.1979)            (0.2029)           (0.2042)           (0.2518)          (0.1926)           (0.2844)          (0.2986)
Spline 1              0.4679              0.3460              0.6130              0.3568             0.4436             0.5504            0.1238             0.1810            0.0559
                     (0.1970)            (0.1747)            (0.1562)            (0.1630)           (0.1571)           (0.1487)          (0.1178)           (0.1629)          (0.1880)
Spline 2              0.6038              0.5475              0.8457              0.9292             0.5225             0.5824            1.1510             0.7601            0.6668
                     (0.2779)            (0.1636)            (0.1805)            (0.1911)           (0.1724)           (0.1832)          (0.1795)           (0.2308)          (0.1992)
Spline 3              1.3733              0.6738              0.4266              0.9815             1.1345             0.5570            0.6736             0.6069            0.9205
                     (0.2809)            (0.2161)            (0.2388)            (0.1795)           (0.1943)           (0.2734)          (0.1945)           (0.2687)          (0.2437)
Spline 4              0.5679              0.9569              0.9881              0.6111             0.6427             1.2264            0.6396             0.7847            0.7717
                     (0.2645)            (0.2432)            (0.2223)            (0.2175)           (0.2209)           (0.2425)          (0.2190)           (0.2498)          (0.2970)
Spline 5              0.9645              1.1064              1.2009              1.2016             0.9345             0.8375            0.9491             1.1460            0.6898
                     (0.2177)            (0.2316)            (0.1953)            (0.2131)           (0.2061)           (0.1833)          (0.2111)           (0.2718)          (0.2896)
Spline 6              1.3501              0.8847              0.5972              0.8626             1.1042             1.1791            1.0307             1.0769            1.2049
                     (0.2285)            (0.1905)            (0.1709)            (0.2129)           (0.1896)           (0.2034)          (0.1553)           (0.2352)          (0.2357)
Spline 7              0.7359              0.9375              1.1741              0.9514             1.0503             0.6881            0.9960             1.0145            0.9885
                     (0.1771)            (0.1539)            (0.1380)            (0.1768)           (0.1554)           (0.1543)          (0.1448)           (0.1929)          (0.2159)
Spline 8              0.8858              1.0153              0.9654              0.9487             0.8010             0.9800            1.0569             0.8993            0.6027
                     (0.1490)            (0.1167)            (0.1216)            (0.1079)           (0.1028)           (0.1259)          (0.1369)           (0.1662)          (0.2155)
Spline 9              1.0469              0.8999              0.8810              0.9833             0.9546             0.9367            0.7337             0.8318            0.8609
                     (0.0961)            (0.1129)            (0.0730)            (0.0849)           (0.0901)           (0.0853)          (0.0884)           (0.1113)          (0.1721)
Spline 10             0.9719              0.9724              1.0358              1.0439             1.0439             0.9955            1.0343             1.0151            1.1715
                     (0.0483)            (0.0618)            (0.0380)            (0.0433)           (0.0357)           (0.0338)          (0.0345)           (0.0583)          (0.0757)

Adjusted R2           0.8785              0.8776              0.8879             0.8893              0.8674             0.8682            0.8732             0.8173            0.8217
# of Obs.              1289                1429                1521                1542               1591               1529              1437               1370               991
Cat. Absorbed            62                 62                  62                  61                 62                 62                 63                 63                61
Note: The dependent variable in all specification is the logarithm of book income in a given year. The percentile splines create separate coefficients depending on the logarithm of
taxable income in a given year.
                 Table 7: Piecewise Linear Regression of Book Income on Taxable Income
                      with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-1994, 1995-1997, 1998-2000
                            1            2              3
                              Earnings-Smoothing Firms                                  Non-Earnings-Smoothing Firms
                       1992-1994     1995-1997      1998-2000                      1992-1994     1995-1997      1998-2000

Constant                 1.2383             2.0452             2.9492                1.3308             2.7289             2.4859
                        (0.6463)           (0.2573)           (0.5058)              (0.5457)           (0.4368)           (0.5010)

Spline 1                 0.5950             0.3673             0.1806                0.6395             0.0802             0.4503
                        (0.2472)           (0.0898)           (0.1430)              (0.2515)           (0.2096)           (0.2332)

Spline 2                 1.1182             1.1662             1.2951                0.6115             0.8189             0.2631
                        (0.2608)           (0.1845)           (0.2963)              (0.2432)           (0.1964)           (0.3181)

Spline 3                 0.5037             0.7375             0.5001                0.8447             0.7807             0.7671
                        (0.3286)           (0.2063)           (0.3719)              (0.2442)           (0.2901)           (0.3013)

Spline 4                 1.4327             1.0750             1.3600                0.9654             0.8755             1.4259
                        (0.2740)           (0.2999)           (0.4390)              (0.3519)           (0.3312)           (0.3657)

Spline 5                 0.6570             0.7543             0.4971                1.0318             1.0981             0.9210
                        (0.2250)           (0.2737)           (0.3181)              (0.3084)           (0.2787)           (0.3382)

Spline 6                 1.1333             1.0672             1.7572                0.7238             0.4744             0.5751
                        (0.2493)           (0.1892)           (0.3039)              (0.2155)           (0.3604)           (0.3955)

Spline 7                 1.0332             0.9333             0.4019                1.2591             1.5830             1.4016
                        (0.1946)           (0.1858)           (0.3154)              (0.2243)           (0.3078)           (0.2877)

Spline 8                 0.9188             0.9695             0.6261                0.7336             0.6411             0.8319
                        (0.1113)           (0.1464)           (0.2888)              (0.1787)           (0.2304)           (0.1804)

Spline 9                 0.9860             1.0733             1.1190                1.0461             0.9444             0.8093
                        (0.1422)           (0.1049)           (0.1636)              (0.1095)           (0.1095)           (0.1503)

Spline 10                1.0162             1.0260             1.0885                0.9285             1.0567             1.0879
                        (0.0570)           (0.0440)           (0.0672)              (0.0508)           (0.0528)           (0.0680)

Adjusted R2              0.9382             0.9432             0.8896                0.8990             0.8839             0.8817

# of Obs.                 535                 604                434                  694                 780                508

Categories
Absorbed                   55                 57                 57                    60                 62                 59


Note: The dependent variable in all specification is the logarithm of book income in given years. The percentile splines create
separate coefficients depending on the logarithm of taxable income in given years. Columns 1, 2, and 3 report specifications for those
firms with a below median ratio of standard deviation of book income to standard deviation of taxable income. Columns 4, 5, and 6
report specifications for those firms with an above median ratio of standard deviation of book income to standard deviation of taxable
income.
                       Data Appendix for Firm-by-Firm Estimates

        The sample is based on the 150 largest corporations by market value on November
6, 2001 and restricted to companies based in the 50 U.S. states in order to exclude foreign
corporations. For each company matching these criteria, Compustat data for net income,
cash flow from operations, and five-year annualized total return from January 1, 1996
through December 31, 2000 were compiled. Stock option exercise data was collected from
the tables in the footnotes to consolidated financial statements outlining annual stock
option activity found in public documents filed with the SEC and company annual reports.

        The following method was used to estimate non-qualified stock option exercises as
a fraction of a company’s operating cash flow. For each year from 1996 through 2000, the
total number of options exercised was multiplied by the difference between the volume-
weighted average daily closing stock price during the year and the weighted average
exercise price per share for these options to determine the total dollar value of stock option
exercises. No adjustment was made for companies that have fiscal years not ending on
December 31. In some cases public documents noted whether stock option plans were
entirely non-qualified, but this distinction was not always clarified. As a result, the stock
option exercise data include both qualified and non-qualified stock option exercises. They
exclude restricted stock awards, stock appreciation rights (SARs), and other non-stock
option stock-based compensation. This value was then divided by operating cash flow. In
the special case of financial institutions, where the meaning of operating cash flow is
obscured by the fact that it captures what other companies might consider investing and
financing activities, net income replaces operating cash flow as the denominator.
Companies were determined to be financial institutions if their primary SIC code was
listed as 6021, 6036, 6111, 6141, 6211, 6282, 6311, 6324, 6331, 6411, or 6712. Finally,
the ratio of cumulative stock option exercises to operating cash flow is the quotient of the
cumulated stock option exercises and operating cash flows over each year in which a given
company has available data for both of these figures.
        Many of the companies in the sample underwent significant merger or acquisition
transactions between 1996 and 2000. In order to assure consistency in calculations the
following adjustments were made. For transactions accounted for as a “pooling of
interest” the historical Compustat data was adjusted to reflect the combined operations or
the merged companies. Specifically, although companies are required to restate historical
accounting periods in their financial statements, Compustat reports in any given year
income statement figures as reported in those years. Accordingly, the Compustat figures
were replaced by income statement figures from the most recent available annual report.
For transactions treated under purchase accounting, companies recognize both income
statement results and stock option activity for the acquiring entity only. As such,
consistency is preserved and no adjustments were made. Several companies in the sample
have significant units that trade as tracking stocks (in fact, several of the tracking stocks
are independently in the sample). In these cases, parent company stock option activity is
treated separately from and ignores the implicit ownership interest in the stock option
activity of the tracked unit.
                                         Appendix Figure 1a
                   Calculated Book and Taxable Income for Balanced Panel, 1982-2000


  120,000


  100,000


   80,000


   60,000


   40,000


   20,000


        -
             1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
             524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 524 356

                               Taxable Income                                    Book Income



                                        Appendix Figure 1b
                 Calculated Book and Taxable Income for Unbalanced Panel, 1992-2000


  700,000


  600,000


  500,000


  400,000


  300,000


  200,000


  100,000


        -
                1992         1993         1994         1995          1996         1997         1998         1999         2000
                1,582        1,714        1,804        1,902         1,913        1,828        1,778        1,665        1,171

                               Taxable Income                                  Book Income



Note: Appendix Figure 1a reports taxable and book income as calculated from Compustat as reported in the text for a balanced panel of
firms from 1982 to 2000. Appendix Figure 1b reports taxable and book income as calculated from Compustat as reported in the text for
those firms with detailed compensation data from 1992 to 2000.
Appendix Figure 2a: Book Income versus Taxable Income, Firms Above Median Sales, Spline
        Estimates by Three-Year Intervals with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-2000

                         12


                         10
    ln(Book Income)




                             8


                             6


                             4


                             2


                             0
                                 0       1       2       3   4        5           6           7          8           9           10
                                                             ln(Taxable Income)

                                         1992-1994               1995-1997                           1998-2000




Appendix Figure 2b: Book Income versus Taxable Income, Firms Below Median Sales, Spline
        Estimates by Three-Year Intervals with Industry Fixed Effects, 1992-2000

                             12


                             10
           ln(Book Income)




                                 8


                                 6


                                 4


                                 2


                                 0
                                     0       1       2   3   4         5          6           7           8          9           10
                                                             ln(Taxable Income)
                                         1992-1994               1995-1997                            1998-2000


 Note: In Appendix Figures 2a and 2b, the three lines are constructed using the coefficients of spline regressions reported in
 Appendix Table 2 for the groups of years 1992-1994, 1995-1997, and 1998-2000. The figures employ regressions for two
 samples of firms that are divided at the median level of sales in the first year of every three year period.
                                                                      Appendix Table 1
                                              Firm-by-Firm Estimates of Option Exercises, 1996-2000 (SEC Filings)

                                                                              Estimated Proceeds from                    Ratio of Option Exercises to Operating
                    SUMMARY INFORMATION                                       Option Exercises ($mm)(1)                       Cash Flow or Net Income(2)                  Cumulative 96-00(3)
                                                        Annualized
                                           MV as of     Total Ret.
Rank                   Company (a)         11/6 ($bn)    (96-00)     2000     1999      1998       1997     1996     2000     1999       1998       1997          1996     Exer.      Ratio
    1   General Electric (5)                    386.3       33.92     1,887    1,903     1,512        937      458      8%       8%         8%         7%            3%     6,697        7%
    2   Microsoft (5)                           336.0       31.65     7,795   15,325     7,438      4,445    2,082     56%    153%        108%        95%           56%    37,086       94%
    3   Exxon Mobil (3) (b)                     282.1       19.77       127       92       107         na       na      1%       1%         1%         na            na       325        1%
    4   Pfizer (3) (b)                          269.6       35.81     4,288    2,286     2,292         na       na     69%      42%        44%         na            na     8,866       53%
    5   Citigroup (5) (c)                       244.4       38.89     2,693    1,407       766      1,615      642     20%      14%        13%        52%           28%     7,123       21%
    6   Wal-Mart Stores (5)                     238.6       37.54       308      302       175         44        0      3%       4%         2%         1%            0%       830        2%
    7   American Int'l Group (3) (b) (c)        219.7       35.41       378      270        79         na       na      7%       5%         2%         na            na       727        5%
    8   Int'l Business Machines (5)             193.0       30.98     1,358    1,762     1,175        875      431     15%      17%        13%        10%            4%     5,601       12%
    9   Johnson & Johnson (5)                   183.0       21.34       132      214       216        137       59      2%       4%         4%         3%            2%       758        3%
   10   Intel (5)                               174.0       33.70     5,234    2,928     2,375      1,689      856     41%      26%        26%        17%           10%    13,082       25%
   11   Merck & Co. (5)                         150.6       25.49     1,618    1,018     1,415        906      625     21%      17%        27%        14%           12%     5,581       18%
   12   AOL-Time Warner (3) (b)                 148.5       71.53     2,247    7,271     1,898         na       na   115%     443%       343%          na            na    11,416      275%
   13   Verizon Communications (5)              137.1       12.20       235      789       607        290       60      1%       7%         6%         3%            1%     1,980        4%
   14   SBC Communications (3) (b)              131.8       13.60       650      553       553         na       na      5%       3%         4%         na            na     1,756        4%
   15   Cisco Systems (5)                       126.8       55.96     6,940    4,478     2,340        725      685    113%     101%        81%        50%           64%    15,168       95%
   16   Coca-Cola (5)                           122.2       11.56       346      212       837        472      286     10%       5%        24%        12%            8%     2,153       12%
   17   Berkshire Hathaway (5) (c)              110.7       17.21         0        0         0          0        0       -        -          -          -             -          0        -
   18   Philip Morris (5)                       109.0       13.39        28       82       256        286      332      0%       1%         3%         3%            4%       984        2%
   19   Bristol-Myers Squibb (5)                108.4       30.65       558      961     1,365         99        0     12%      22%        33%         4%             -     2,984       16%
   20   Bank of America (5) (c)                  97.2         8.84       89      540       841      1,220      383      1%       7%        16%        40%           16%     3,074       12%
   21   ChevronTexaco (5)                        96.0       13.51        38       59        33         25       14      0%       1%         1%         1%            0%       169        1%
   22   Procter & Gamble (5)                     95.1       15.38       244      519       568        412      246      5%       9%        12%         7%            6%     1,989        8%
   23   Home Depot (5)                           94.1       34.36       545      465       205         58        0     20%      19%        11%         6%            0%     1,275       14%
   24   Eli Lilly & Co. (5)                      89.6       28.92       526      608       723        390      272     14%      23%        27%        16%           14%     2,519       19%
   25   PepsiCo (5)                              85.2       15.62       650      411       618        503      375     17%      14%        19%         5%            9%     2,557       11%
   26   Abbott Laboratories (5)                  84.2       20.46       227      244       308        296      124      7%       8%        11%        11%            5%     1,199        9%
   27   Fannie Mae (5) (c)                       81.0       25.12       156      112       163        108        0      4%       3%         5%         4%            0%       540        3%
   28   American Home Prod. (5)                  76.3       23.80       398      307       557        363      293     72%      14%        37%        21%           12%     1,918       23%
   29   Oracle (5)                               75.5       56.07     3,437      710       144        175      165   158%       24%         8%       11%            16%     4,632       48%
   30   J.P. Morgan Chase (3) (b) (c)            74.6       21.22       710      985       602         na       na     12%      13%        13%         na            na     2,297       13%
   31   BellSouth (5)                            70.4       16.26       203       55        56         34        9      2%       1%         1%         0%            0%       357        1%
   32   Wells Fargo (5) (c)                      70.1       30.36       280      294       273        334      116      7%       8%        14%       25%            10%     1,297       11%
   33   Dell Computer (5)                        66.6       74.36     3,314    3,093     2,407        543      103     79%      79%        99%        34%            8%     9,459       70%
   34   Viacom (5)                               65.8       14.57       441      118       147         10       31     19%      40%        17%         3%           43%       747       19%
   35   Amgen (5)                                62.2       33.92     1,505      725       372        261      281     92%      67%        36%        29%           34%     3,145       57%
   36   Kraft Foods (0)                          59.5           na       na       na        na         na       na      na       na         na         na            na        na        na
   37   United Parcel Service (2)                57.2           na      345      440        na         na       na     13%      20%         na         na            na       785       16%
   38   Morgan Stanley (5) (c)                   57.1       47.05     1,023      498       712        525      162     19%      10%        22%        20%           16%     2,921       17%
   39   AT&T (5)                                 56.6       -7.62       137      543       359        184      361      1%       5%         3%         2%            5%     1,585        3%
   40   Schering-Plough (5)                      55.0       34.76       253      292       345        127       83     10%      15%        17%         7%            6%     1,100       11%
   41   Texas Instruments (3) (b)                53.4       49.91       985      763       207         na       na     45%      32%        15%         na            na     1,955       33%
                                                                       Appendix Table 1
                                               Firm-by-Firm Estimates of Option Exercises, 1996-2000 (SEC Filings)

                                                                               Estimated Proceeds from                     Ratio of Option Exercises to Operating
                   SUMMARY INFORMATION                                         Option Exercises ($mm)(1)                        Cash Flow or Net Income(2)                   Cumulative 96-00(3)
                                                         Annualized
                                            MV as of     Total Ret.
Rank                 Company (a)            11/6 ($bn)    (96-00)     2000     1999      1998       1997     1996     2000      1999       1998       1997          1996      Exer.      Ratio
   42   Pharmacia (3) (b)                         51.2       23.30       955      237       439         na       na     57%       13%        31%          na            na     1,631       33%
   43   Medtronic (3)                             51.1       34.62        99       87        89         na       na      5%        8%        20%          na            na       274        8%
   44   Freddie Mac (3) (c)                       46.8       28.52        85       51        60         na       na      3%        2%         4%          na            na       197        3%
   45   Minnesota Mining & Mfg. (3) (b)           43.3       16.43       147      145       113         na       na      6%        5%         5%          na            na       405        5%
   46   E.I. DuPont de Nemours (5)                42.9         9.36       72      227       253        326      323      1%        2%         7%         5%            5%      1,201        4%
   47   QUALCOMM (5)                              42.0       73.34         1        1         0         38       31      0%        0%         nm         nm            nm         72        8%
   48   American Express (5) (c)                  40.7       33.29       456      445       255        296      148     16%       18%        12%        15%            8%      1,600       14%
   49   Bank One (4) (c)                          40.0         6.99       26      130       312        443       na      nm        4%        10%        34%             na       911       12%
   50   Goldman Sachs (1) (c)                     39.8           na        1       na        na         na       na      0%         na         na         na            na          1       0%
   51   WorldCom (5)                              39.6         3.66      600    2,392     1,065        592      174      8%       22%        26%        45%           22%      4,822       19%
   52   Walt Disney (5)                           39.2         8.78      496      237       905        233       95      8%        4%        18%         3%            2%      1,967        7%
   53   Merrill Lynch (5) (c)                     39.0       41.74     1,446      443       428        403      179     38%       17%        34%        21%           11%      2,899       26%
   54   FleetBoston Financial (3) (b) (c)         38.6       16.51        63       96       135         na       na      2%        5%         6%          na            na       294        4%
   55   Motorola (3) (b)                          37.8         2.00      423      669       145         na       na      nm       31%        11%          na            na     1,237       54%
   56   Anheuser-Busch (5)                        37.6       25.11       225      161       110         82       71     10%        8%         5%         4%            3%        649        6%
   57   McDonald's (5)                            37.3         9.20      211      535       427        209      233      8%       18%        15%         9%            9%      1,615       12%
   58   AT&T Wireless Services (0)                37.2           na       na       na        na         na       na       na        na         na         na            na        na        na
   59   U.S. Bancorp (5) (c)                      36.4       31.42         9       42        32          0        0      1%        5%         7%           -             -        82        3%
   60   Comcast (5)                               34.9       35.97       147      231        70         10        2     12%      18%          6%         1%            0%        459        9%
   61   Walgreen (5)                              34.8       42.21       138       79        99         43        7     14%      13%        17%          7%            2%        367       11%
   62   Hewlett-Packard (5)                       34.6       12.07     1,446      768       371        388      253     33%       25%         7%         9%            7%      3,227       16%
   63   Sun Microsystems (5)                      33.7       57.77     2,684    1,134       418        263      146     72%       45%        27%        24%           21%      4,646       48%
   64   Fifth Third Bancorp (5) (c)               33.4       34.71        61       89        64         33       15      7%       13%        13%         8%            4%        262       10%
   65   Gillette (5)                              33.2         8.06       34      154       179        283        0      2%       10%        14%        22%            0%        650        9%
   66   Colgate-Palmolive (5)                     32.5       31.75       207      324       284        181       61     13%       25%        24%        16%            7%      1,058       18%
   67   Cardinal Health (3) (b)                   32.3       32.78       303      161       192         na       na     35%       32%        65%          na            na       656       39%
   68   Automatic Data Proc. (3)                  31.9       28.85       297      181       142         na       na     28%       21%        17%          na            na       620       22%
   69   Dow Chemical (5)                          31.5       13.34        18       40        23         25       32      2%        1%         1%         1%            1%        138        1%
   70   Liberty Media (0)                         31.2       35.35        na       na        na         na       na       na        na         na         na            na        na        na
   71   Electronic Data Systems (5)               30.3         3.43       12       33         0          0        0      1%        2%           -          -             -        45        0%
   72   Ford Motor Company (5)                    30.2       21.58       142      324       437        134       63      0%        1%         2%         0%            0%      1,101        1%
   73   Applied Materials (5)                     30.1       31.15     1,272      610       106        217       41     77%       65%        13%        31%            6%      2,246       47%
   74   Boeing (5)                                30.1       12.38        98       43        53        137      205      2%        1%         2%         7%            9%        536        3%
   75   Duke Energy (5)                           29.8       17.03        27       14        37         25       23      1%        1%         2%         1%            2%        125        1%
   76   Wachovia (5) (c)                          29.7         4.01        0        0        23         24        4        -         -        1%         1%            0%         51        1%
   77   Genentech (2)                             29.6       43.90       475      310        na         na       na    245%        nm          na         na            na       785      422%
   78   EMC (5)                                   29.6      103.15     1,716      565       228         95       80     81%      41%        27%         19%           17%      2,684       50%
   79   Alcoa (5)                                 29.6       22.60       239      474        33        120       85      8%       21%         1%         6%            7%        951        9%
   80   Qwest Communications (4)                  29.5       20.48       664      349       266          0       na     18%        8%         7%           -            na     1,279        8%
   81   Kimberly-Clark (5)                        29.5       13.55        81       64        41         72      230      4%        3%         2%         5%           14%        487        5%
   82   Baxter International (5)                  29.4       21.43        97       51        49         50       65      8%        5%         5%         8%            8%        312        7%
                                                                     Appendix Table 1
                                             Firm-by-Firm Estimates of Option Exercises, 1996-2000 (SEC Filings)

                                                                             Estimated Proceeds from                       Ratio of Option Exercises to Operating
                    SUMMARY INFORMATION                                      Option Exercises ($mm)(1)                          Cash Flow or Net Income(2)                  Cumulative 96-00(3)
                                                       Annualized
                                          MV as of     Total Ret.
Rank                  Company (a)         11/6 ($bn)    (96-00)     2000     1999      1998       1997      1996      2000      1999       1998       1997          1996     Exer.      Ratio
   83   Marsh & McLennan (5) (c)                28.5       35.12       392      169       102        102        34      33%       23%        13%        23%            7%       798       22%
   84   Target (5)                              28.4       40.35       102       64        62         43        11       5%        3%         3%         2%            1%       282        3%
   85   First Data (5)                          27.5         9.74      125       98        24         56       148      11%        7%         2%         5%           14%       451        8%
   86   Washington Mutual (5) (c)               27.3       25.64         0       18        43        170        13         -       1%         3%        35%           12%       244        4%
   87   Lowe's Companies (5)                    26.9       22.08         2        4         0           0         0      0%        0%           -          -            -          6       0%
   88   United Technologies (5)                 26.7       29.04       349      306       198        111        70      14%        7%         8%         5%            3%     1,035        8%
   89   Bank of New York (5) (c)                26.5       38.04       173      124       116        115        44      12%        7%        10%        10%            4%       572        9%
   90   Household International (5)             26.5       24.59        63      200       198         74        56       2%        6%         8%         4%            3%       592        4%
   91   MBna (5) (c)                            25.6       40.17       200      119       166        101        38      15%       12%       21%         16%            8%       624       15%
   92   El Paso (5)                             25.5       41.15        96       38        20         22        10       nm        8%         4%         4%            3%       186       22%
   93   General Motors (5)                      25.0         7.40      255      236       187        164        85       1%        1%         1%         1%            0%       926        1%
   94   Clear Channel Communic. (5)             24.8       34.43        87      174        56         26          3     11%       27%        21%        16%            3%       347       18%
   95   Honeywell International (3) (b)         24.3       16.44       263      572       217          na        na     13%       24%        11%          na           na     1,052       17%
   96   Cox Communications (5)                  23.8       36.71        19       14        17           2         0      6%        3%         3%         0%            0%        52        2%
   97   Lucent Technologies (3) (b)             23.7           na    2,030    1,542     1,143         na        na     668%        nm        79%          na           na     4,715      594%
   98   Allstate (5) (c)                        23.4       18.25        44       20         0         66        14       2%        1%           -        2%            1%       144        1%
   99   Sprint PCS Group (3)                    22.5           na      520      220         0         na        na       nm        nm         nm          na           na       740        nm
  100   Emerson (5)                             22.3       16.58        33       32        43         25        16       2%        2%         3%         2%            1%       148        2%
  101   Lockheed Martin (5)                     21.8        -1.08        6        8        74         96       117       0%        1%         4%         8%            7%       301        4%
  102   Safeway (5)                             21.6       37.16       402      203       260        171       136      21%       14%       21%        14%            17%     1,173       18%
  103   UnitedHealth Group (5) (c)              21.1       13.49       304       45        84         95        38      41%        8%         nm        21%           11%       565       29%
  104   HCA (5)                                 20.5         6.86       60        6        14         70          0      4%        1%         1%         5%            0%       151        2%
  105   MetLife (1) (c)                         20.1           na        0       na        na         na        na         -        na         na         na           na          0         -
  106   Kohl's (5)                              19.7       56.19       256      115        23         15          3     69%      104%        10%         nm            3%       413       54%
  107   Sprint FON Group (5)                    19.4         8.62      169      482         4           0         0      4%       13%         0%           -            -       655        4%
  108   Kroger (3)                              19.4       23.70       107      111       335         na        na       5%        7%       29%           na           na       552       11%
  109   Charles Schwab (5) (c)                  19.2       57.53       578      713       198         85        40      80%      121%        57%        31%           17%     1,614       75%
  110   Computer Associates Int'l (0)           19.1        -4.88       na       na        na         na         na       na        na         na         na           na        na         na
  111   Tenet Healthcare (5)                    18.9       16.60        95        3        10         86        52       5%        0%         2%        21%           13%       245        6%
  112   Illinois Tool Works (3)                 18.6       16.27        72       91        78         na        na       6%        9%       11%           na           na       240        8%
  113   Alltel (5)                              18.6       19.20        30       81        40         12          7      2%        5%         3%         2%            1%       170        3%
  114   Costco Wholesale (5)                    18.3       39.26       109      210       113         59        20      10%       22%        15%        10%            5%       511       14%
  115   International Paper (3)                 18.2         3.97        0       88        34         na        na         -       5%         2%          na           na       122        2%
  116   SunTrust Banks (5) (c)                  17.9       15.23        15       50        65         76        74       1%        4%         7%        11%           12%       280        6%
  117   Waste Management (5)                    17.8         8.05        0       75       101        160        85         -       4%         7%        35%           42%       421        7%
  118   Sara Lee (5)                            17.3       11.39        10       35       139        137        41       1%        2%         7%         9%            3%       361        5%
  119   General Dynamics (3) (b)                17.3       24.12        93      105       168         na        na       9%       10%        30%          na           na       367       14%
  120   Gannett (1)                             17.2       17.18        26       na        na         na        na       5%         na         na         na           na        26        5%
  121   Conoco (2)                              17.0           na       20        5        na         na        na       1%        0%          na         na           na        25        0%
  122   Sysco (5)                               16.7       31.77         5        4         2           3         3      1%        1%         1%         1%            1%        16        1%
  123   Southern Company (4)                    16.7       11.96         5        0         4           0       na       0%        0%         0%         0%            na        10        0%
                                                                              Appendix Table 1
                                                      Firm-by-Firm Estimates of Option Exercises, 1996-2000 (SEC Filings)

                                                                                            Estimated Proceeds from                                Ratio of Option Exercises to Operating
                    SUMMARY INFORMATION                                                     Option Exercises ($mm)(1)                                   Cash Flow or Net Income(2)                       Cumulative 96-00(3)
                                                               Annualized
                                                  MV as of     Total Ret.
Rank                  Company (a)                 11/6 ($bn)    (96-00)        2000         1999        1998        1997         1996        2000        1999         1998        1997        1996           Exer.     Ratio
  124   Mellon Financial (5) (c)                        16.6       33.25          120          130         166         122           46        12%         14%          19%         16%          6%             584      13%
  125   National City (5) (c)                           16.5       16.03           18          102         166         116           59         1%          7%          16%         14%          8%             461       9%
  126   PNC Financial Services (5) (c)                  16.4       21.96           49           37          53          61           35         4%          3%           5%          6%          4%             234       4%
  127   Caterpillar (5)                                 16.2       12.73           11           79          33          61           42         1%          3%           2%          3%          2%             226       2%
  128   Maxim Integrated (5)                            16.2       37.79          667          488         254         167          114       138%        159%          86%         89%         95%           1,690     121%
  129   Compaq Computer (5)                             16.1         9.64         392          310         702         531          247        69%         27%         109%         14%          7%           2,182      23%
  130   Lehman Brothers (5) (c)                         15.8       45.68            0            0           0           0            0          -           -            -            -           -               0       -
  131   eBay (2)                                        15.6           na         273          229         849          na           na       272%        345%           nm           na          na            502     301%
  132   State Street (4) (c)                            15.4       42.00           49           15          16           3           na         8%          2%           4%          1%           na             84       4%
  133   Analog Devices (5)                              15.4       42.07          466          116          38          58           34        66%         27%          17%         19%         24%             712      40%
  134   Williams Companies (5)                          15.2       24.73           59           76          86          58           30        12%          5%          14%          6%          4%             307       7%
  135   Dominion Resources (5)                          15.2       17.25           17            0           0           0            0         1%          0%           0%          0%          0%              17       0%
  136   Anadarko Petroleum (5)                          15.0       21.91          131            9           8           4           12         9%          3%           3%          1%          4%             164       6%
  137   Omnicom Group (5)                               15.0       36.31           75          137          49          29           14        11%         15%          10%          6%          3%             305      10%
  138   Phillips Petroleum (5)                          14.8       14.13           27           21          15          24           24         1%          1%           1%          1%          1%             111       1%
  139   H.J. Heinz (5)                                  14.8       10.78           40           20          99         227           82         8%          4%          11%         21%          9%             468      12%
  140   Harley-Davidson (5)                             14.4       41.37           90           41          30          17           11        16%         10%           9%          5%          5%             188      10%
  141   Micron Technology (5)                           14.4       12.41          208          256          85          36           42        10%         30%          45%          6%          4%             628      13%
  142   BB&T (3) (b) (c)                                14.2       26.47           40           71          96          na           na         6%         10%          15%           na          na            207      10%
  143   American Electric Power (3) (b)                 13.8         9.04           0            0           2          na           na         0%          0%           0%           na          na               2      0%
  144   Concord EFS (3) (b)                             13.7       39.40           12           24           5          na           na         4%         12%           3%           na          na             40       6%
  145   Immunex (5)                                     13.6       96.83          437          135          16           2            0       254%        120%          70%         16%          nm             590     211%
  146   Cendant (5)                                     13.5      -15.81          193          124         176         268          243        14%          4%          29%         26%         93%           1,005      16%
  147   Forest Laboratories (5)                         13.5       42.49          289           44          53          14            2       160%         26%         180%         15%          2%             403      66%
  148   Hughes Electronics (5)                          13.4       21.94          136          115          39          64           24         nm         44%           4%          nm          2%             378      17%
  149   Nike (5)                                        13.3       10.91           61           44          73          96           77         9%          6%           8%         19%         21%             351      11%
  150   Hartford Financial Svcs. (5) (c)                13.3       26.47          103           38          59          30            8        11%          4%           6%          2%          nm             237       6%

(1)     Measured as the excess of the market value of shares under exercised options over the proceeds from exercised options
(2)     The ratio of Estimated Proceeds from Option Exercises to operating cash flow (or net income for financial institutions)
(3)     The ratio of cumulative Estimated Proceeds from Option Exercises to cumulative operating cash flow (or net income for financial institutions), subject to the restriction that only years in which
        both numerator and denominator are available and meaningful are cumulated
(a)     Company name is followed by the number of years for which data is available (n for the cumulative ratio) and other applicable notes
(b)     Data was adjusted for a pooling transaction
(c)     Company categorized as financial institution
"na"    Data no available
"nm"    Data negative or otherwise not meaningful
           Appendix Table 2: Piecewise Linear Regression of Book Income on Taxable Income
                         with Fixed Effects, 1992-1994, 1995-1997, 1998-2000
                         1               2                3
                                    Large Firms                                         Smaller Firms
                    1992-1994        1995-1997        1998-2000          1992-1994       1995-1997         1998-2000

Constant              2.8732           3.1591           4.9130             1.2284           2.5911           2.4912
                     (0.6393)         (0.3822)         (0.4793)           (0.5974)         (0.3028)         (0.5018)

Spline 1              0.3012           0.3522           0.0490             0.6011           0.0452           0.2870
                     (0.1824)         (0.0968)         (0.1158)           (0.3352)         (0.1698)         (0.2312)

Spline 2              0.9927           0.6141           1.5565             0.6959           0.4228           0.4171
                     (0.3081)         (0.2270)         (0.2954)           (0.3366)         (0.2852)         (0.3233)

Spline 3              0.6429           0.7281           0.0752             0.9292           1.0640           1.0159
                     (0.2836)         (0.2734)         (0.3658)           (0.4067)         (0.3225)         (0.6409)

Spline 4              1.4041           1.8022           1.6162             0.4234           0.5388           0.7951
                     (0.3710)         (0.4426)         (0.4097)           (0.3130)         (0.3913)         (0.4861)

Spline 5              0.7528           0.4482           0.1918             1.5900           1.1378           0.9159
                     (0.3151)         (0.2560)         (0.3287)           (0.5511)         (0.3559)         (0.5530)

Spline 6              0.7704           0.9410           1.4283             0.0218           0.5537           0.6787
                     (0.2200)         (0.2260)         (0.3753)           (0.4228)         (0.4730)         (0.5287)

Spline 7              1.1020           0.8861           0.9643             1.6818           0.8137           1.1237
                     (0.1968)         (0.1794)         (0.3438)           (0.3615)         (0.3774)         (0.6274)

Spline 8              1.0669           1.1465           0.5895             0.7891           1.0487           0.4403
                     (0.2379)         (0.1810)         (0.1782)           (0.2509)         (0.2929)         (0.4185)

Spline 9              0.9043           0.9443           1.3070             0.7526           0.7264           1.5851
                     (0.1074)         (0.0979)         (0.1176)           (0.1707)         (0.3218)         (0.3285)

Spline 10             1.0003           1.0504           0.9740             1.0203           1.0009           0.2469
                     (0.0600)         (0.0477)         (0.0625)           (0.1258)         (0.0841)         (0.2822)

Adjusted R2           0.8940           0.8900           0.8827             0.7626           0.7388           0.6694

# of Obs.              648              744              503                 581             640              439

Categories
Absorbed                57               56               55                 57               57               54

Note: The dependent variable in all specifications is the logarithm of book income summed across relevant years. The
percentile splines create separate coefficients depending on the logarithm of taxable income summed across relevant
years.
