NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPETITION IN OR FOR THE FIELD: WHICH IS BETTER?

Eduardo Engel
Ronald Fischer
Alexander Galetovic

Working Paper 8869
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8869

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002

Financial support from FONDE-CYT (Grant 1980658) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Eduardo Engel, Ronald Fischer and Alexander Galetovic. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Competition in or for the Field: Which is Better?
Eduardo Engel, Ronald Fischer and Alexander Galetovic
NBER Working Paper No. 8869
April 2002
JEL No. D44, L12, L92

ABSTRACT
In many circumstances, a principal, who wants prices to be as low as possible, must contract with
agents who would like to charge the monopoly price. This paper compares a Demsetz auction, which
awards an exclusive contract to the agent bidding the lowest price (competition for the field) with having
two agents provide the good under (imperfectly) competitive conditions (competition in the field). We
obtain a simple sufficient condition showing unambiguously which option is best. The condition depends
only on the shapes of the surplus function of the principal and the profit function of agents, and is
independent of the particular duopoly game played ex post. We apply this condition to three canonical
examples - procurement, royalty contracts and dealerships - and find that whenever marginal revenue for
the final good is decreasing in the quantity sold, a Demsetz auction is best. Moreover, a planner who
wants to maximize social surplus also prefers a Demsetz auction.

Eduardo Engel
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
eduardo.engel@yale.edu

Ronald Fischer
Center for Applied Economics
Dept. of Industrial Engineering
University of Chile
Av. República 701
Santiago, Chile
rfischer@dii.uchile.cl

Alexander Galetovic
Center for Applied Economics
Dept. of Industrial Engineering
University of Chile
Av. República 701
Santiago, Chile
agaleto@dii.uchile.cl

1

Introduction

Consider a principal that needs to buy a good or service and has two procurement alternatives. On the one
hand, it can award an exclusive contract to the agent offering the lowest price, as in a standard Demsetz
(1968) auction. In this case, there will be intense ex ante price competition (‘competition for the field’),
but in the aftermath, the agent will always charge the maximum price allowed by the contract. The other
option is to award two independent supply contracts and rely on ex post competition (‘competition in the
field’). Then agents will consider the probabilities of different ex post duopoly games when negotiating
their contracts. If they anticipate that with high probability there will be intense price competition, they will
participate only if they obtain high profits in the rare cases in which they collude. Thus, the prospect of
intense competition in the field softens competition for the field.2 This motivates the question we address in
this paper: Should the principal contract with one or two agents?
The answer does not seem straightforward. A basic difficulty is that the appropriate specification of the
ex post duopoly game depends on particular aspects of the situation.3 Moreover, many duopoly games have
multiple equilibria and there are no a priori compelling reasons to choose one over another. Nevertheless,
in this paper we obtain a simple sufficient condition that shows unambiguously which option is better. This
condition depends only on the shapes of the surplus function of the principal and the profit function of
each agent, and is independent of the duopoly game played ex post. We then apply this condition to study
three canonical examples—procurement, royalty contracts and dealerships. We find that whenever marginal
revenue is decreasing in the quantities, a Demsetz auction is unambiguously better. Moreover, a planner
who wants to maximize social surplus also prefers a Demsetz auction.
Our point of departure is a standard setting where a principal wants the final price of the good or service
to be as low as possible, but agents prefer the monopoly price. The principal can either run a Demsetz
auction for an exclusive contract, or auction two separate contracts to different agents who then produce
perfect substitutes and compete. With a Demsetz auction, the ex post equilibrium price equals the winning
bid. By contrast, when there are two contracts, the price depends on the outcome of ex post competition.
We do not specify the second stage game, but summarize its outcome as follows: ex ante the equilibrium
price is a random variable with an arbitrary distribution F whose support is bounded above by the maximum
price allowed by the contract. In some states of nature agents will succeed in colluding and prices will be
close to the winning bid; in other states agents will compete intensely and prices will be much lower.4
We assume that the principal and the agents are risk neutral. Nevertheless, the main result of the paper
exploits the fact that a Demsetz auction eliminates variability in the equilibrium price. To get the intuition
2 This

terminology is due to Chadwick (1859).
this paper we abstract from complications due to incomplete contracting and asymmetric information.
4 There are several interpretations for F. In one of them, it describes agents’ uncertainty about ex post market conditions and
potential collusive prices. In another, firms always collude at the price that maximizes joint profits, but there is a positive probability
of a successful antitrust case against them, leading to a price equal to marginal costs. Similarly, in the specific case of dealerships,
the upstream firm may try to prevent the double marginalization associated with collusion by penalizing those agreements between
franchisors that are detected.
3 In

2

in a simple setting, assume that the agents’ profits, π, are increasing and concave in the equilibrium price,
and that the principal’s surplus function, S , is decreasing and linear in the equilibrium price.5 Consider
next what happens if the principal substitutes two independent contracts by a Demsetz auction. Clearly,
this eliminates the price variability described by F. And since π is concave in price and the participation
constraint always binds, the price that results from a Demsetz auction must be lower than the average with
two agents and ex post competition, i.e., competition for the field leads to lower prices than competition in
the field. Thus, a Demsetz auction is better for the principal when her surplus function is linear. It is easily
seen, as well, that if the surplus function S is sufficiently convex, separate contracts may be better, because
then the principal likes price variability. Our main result generalizes this intuition and shows that a Demsetz
auction is unambiguously better when the composition of the principal’s surplus function and the inverse
profit function, S ◦ π−1 , is strictly concave. Conversely, when this composite function is strictly convex two
separate contracts are unambiguously better.
As in the theory of expected utility, we find that this general result is equivalent to a simple condition that
compares the curvatures of the surplus and profit functions. This condition is quite similar to the necessary
and sufficient condition for a utility function to be more risk averse than the other (Pratt’s [1964] theorem)
and makes it easier to compare competition in the field with competition for the field. The condition amounts
to checking a relation that involves only the first and second derivatives of S and π. We illustrate the
usefulness of this condition in the applications section, showing that a Demsetz auction is preferred by the
principal in all cases considered—procurement, royalty contracts, dealerships—whenever marginal profits
are decreasing in quantities.
Our paper is related to the literature of monopoly regulation via franchising which was pioneered by
Chadwick (1859) and Demsetz (1968) (see also Stigler [1968], Posner [1972], Williamson [1975], Riordan
and Sappington [1987], Spulber [1989, ch. 9], Laffont and Tirole [1993, chs. 7 and 8], Harstad and Crew
[1999] and Engel, Fischer and Galetovic [2001 a, b]). We extend this literature by studying Demsetz auctions
in contexts where imperfect competition “in the field” is feasible and is an alternative to a standard Demsetz
auction.
The applications we study suggest that our paper is also related to the literature on the “double marginalization” problem in monopoly pricing (see Spengler [1950] for the seminal contribution and Tirole [1988,
ch. 4] for a review of the literature). Our result implies that when marginal revenue is decreasing in the quantity sold and downstream competition is imperfect, auctioning an exclusive contract is better than relying on
ex post imperfect competition.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the general model and prove the main
result of the paper. In section 3 we apply this general result to study four applications. Section 4 concludes
5 While

we assume that profit and surplus functions are linear in money (that is, they are risk neutral in money terms), neither
the agents’ profit function nor the principal’s surplus function need, in general, be linear in the equilibrium price, i.e., they are risk
averse (or loving) in prices. For example, profit functions are typically quasiconcave in price. By contrast, when the agent is a
planner who wants to maximize consumer surplus, the principal’s objective function is convex in prices.

3

and is followed by a brief appendix.

2

General model and main result

A risk neutral principal wants to contract the production of a good at two plants or locations.6 Output from
one plant is a perfect substitute for the output of the other. If the equilibrium price is p, an agent producing
at one plant makes profits π(p), with π0 (p) > 0 for p ∈ [p, pm ), where π(p) = 0 and pm = arg max p π(p).
Furthermore, π0 (pm ) = 0 and π00 (pm ) < 0. On the other hand, the principal’s surplus is S (p) if agents charge
p, with S 0 (p) < 0. Hence there is a conflict of interest: while agents would like to increase prices up to pm ,
the principal wants the price to be as low as possible.
The principal may award both plants jointly (J), so that they are run by one agent; or separately (S), so
that two agents run one plant each and compete. The principal auctions both contracts. When both plants
are awarded jointly, the winning bid is denoted by pJ and per-plant profits for the agent are equal to π(pJ ).7
On the other hand, when plants are awarded to different agents, the minimum winning bid, common across
plants, is denoted by pS . In this case agents are uncertain both about whether they will be able to collude,8
and, if they do, about the price above p at which they will collude.9 We assume that each agent serves half
the demand at a common equilibrium price p, and denote by F(p) the cdf with support [p, pS ] that describes
their common beliefs about the realization of this price.10
We make the essential assumption that ex-ante expected gross profits per plant under a joint or a separate
auction are the same, that is
Condition 1
Z pS
p

π(p)dF(p) = π(pJ ) = u + I,

where u is the agent’s reservation utility and I stands for any sunk setup cost. There exist many agents that
could produce the good, all of them with the same value of (u + I).
Condition 1 implies that benefits for agents are independent of whether the principal auctions production
at both plants jointly or separately. Or, in the standard guise of principal-agent theory, Condition 1 is the
participation constraint that the principal must obey. Note also that if F(p) is degenerate, Condition 1
implies that under separate auctions the price will be pJ , so that joint and separate auctions are identical. We
rule out this possibility by assumption in what follows.
6 All

that follows extends trivially to the case of n locations.
assume pJ ≤ pm .
8 Caillaud and Tirole (2001) consider this possibility in the context of essential facilities.
9 That is, we assume that prices are such that agents do not lose money ex post, since π(p) = 0.
10 Competition in practice is generally neither static nor symmetric. We avoid complications by concentrating on stationary
equilibria and we use symmetry due to the lack of consensus on how to model collusion in asymmetric games.
7 We

4

When plants are awarded jointly, the principal’s benefit is denoted WJ ≡ S (pJ ). On the other hand, when
when they are awarded separately, the principal’s expected benefit depends on the distribution of collusive
prices F and equals
WS ≡

Z pS

S (p)dF(p).

p

From the assumptions we made on π, it follows that π−1 : [π(p), π(pm )] → [p, pm ] is well defined, increasing
and convex. We then have the following central result of the paper:
Proposition 1 If S ◦ π−1 is strictly concave, then WJ > WS . If S ◦ π−1 is strictly convex, then WS > WJ .
Proof: We consider the case where S ◦ π−1 is concave. The case where it is convex is analogous. We have:
WS ≡
=

Z pS

S (p)dF(p)

p

Z pS
p

S ◦ π−1 [π(p)]dF(p)
·Z

< S ◦π

pS

−1
p

¸
π(p)dF(p)

−1

= S ◦ π [π(pJ )]
= S (pJ )
≡ WJ ,
where the inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality and our assumption that F is not degenerate, and the
identity after the inequality from Condition 1.

A surprising feature of this result is that we have not imposed any condition on the distribution of
possible collusive outcomes F. Hence, in order to compare joint and separate auctions, it is sufficient to
examine the ‘primitive’ functions π, and S , and one can ignore the exact specification of the ex post game
between the agents.
This result depends crucially on Condition 1, which ensures that softer competition when the participation constraint becomes more demanding (that is, ū + I increases). In the case of joint production, this
means softer competition for the franchise, while in the case of separate production it means less competition
between both agents after they begin producing.
The following result provides a simple characterization for the concavity of S ◦ π−1 .
Proposition 2 A necessary and sufficient condition for S ◦ π−1 be concave is that
(1)

S 00 π00
> 0
S0
π
5

for all p ∈ [p, pm ). Since, by assumption, π0 > 0 and S 0 < 0 in the relevant range, equation (1) is equivalent
to

S 00 π0 < S 0 π00 .

(2)

Moreover, the converse of condition (1) is necessary and sufficient for S ◦ π−1 to be convex.
Proof: See the Appendix.

Corollary 1 If π is strictly concave, then the concavity of S is sufficient for a joint contract to be better than
two separate contracts.
We can use Proposition 2 and Figures 1 and 2 to examine the intuition underlying our main result.
Suppose that S is linear, π strictly concave, two separate contracts are auctioned, and in equilibrium p can
take only two values, p and pm , with equal probability. In this case each agent makes expected profits equal
to 12 π(p) + 12 π(pm ) = 12 π(pm ) and the principal’s surplus equals 12 S (p) + 12 S (pm ) (see Figure 1). Since S
is linear and π concave, Proposition 2 holds, and a joint auction is better than a separate auction. Why?
Condition 1 implies that 12 π(pm ) = π(pJ ). As is straightforward from Figure 1a, concavity of π implies that
pJ < 21 p + 12 pm . Hence the principal obtains a lower average price with a joint auction.11 Because in this
example S is linear, 12 S (p) + 12 S (pm ) = S ( 21 p + 12 pm ) < S (pJ ) (see Figure 1b). Note that the same reasoning
applies to any probability distribution F with support in the interval [p, pm ].
It can now easily be seen why strict concavity of S is sufficient for a joint auction to be better when
π is concave. Eliminating variability in p is an added bonus for the principal, since ES (p) < S (Ep) for
all distributions F. Conversely, when S is convex, a separate auction may (but need not) be better. Figure
2 depicts exactly the same case as Figure 1, except that S is convex, so that now the principal likes price
variability. For the particular distribution depicted in this figure, the principal is indifferent between a joint
and a separate auction. Essentially, the gain of a lower expected price p attained with a joint auction is
exactly offset by the fall in the expected surplus due to lower price variability. With S sufficiently convex
and for a given π, the gains from a lower expected price are outweighed by the utility loss which stems from
losing “high” surpluses.

3

Applications

In this section we use Proposition 2 to study three canonical applications: procurement (the principal buys
the production of the plants), dealerships (agents buy an input from the principal and incur some costs to
transform and resell it) and royalties (the principal receives a fixed fee per unit sold by the agent without
11 This can be put in the more standard terms of principal–agent theory. From Condition 1 it follows that the agent’s participation
constraint is 12 π(pm ) = π(pJ ). Since π is concave, the average price that the agent requires in order to participate is lower with a
joint contract, which eliminates risk.

6

π

6

π(pm )

π(pJ ) = 12 π(pm )
(a)

-

p

pJ

(p + pm )/2

pm

p

S 6
S(pm )
S(pJ )
(b)

S(p)

-

p

pJ

(p + pm )/2

pm

p

Figure 1: Intuition underlying the main result: When S is linear a joint auction is always better.

7

π

6

π(pm )

π(pJ ) = 21 π(pm )

(a)

-

p

pJ

(p + pm )/2

pm

p

S 6
S(pm )
S(pJ )
(b)

S(p)

-

p

pJ

(p + pm )/2

pm

p

Figure 2: Intuition underlying the main result: When S is convex, anything goes.

8

engaging in production). In these cases functions S and π can be derived from standard demand and cost
functions.
In all the cases that follow we assume that the value of the marginal unit at q is P(q), with P0 < 0. We also
assume that the inverse function of P, P−1 (p) ≡ D(p) is well defined in the appropriate range. Obviously
D0 < 0. Agent i incurs in total cost c(qi ) when producing qi units of output at a given plant, with c0 > 0 and
c00 ≥ 0.12
We find that in all three cases a sufficient condition for a joint contract to be better for the principal is
that marginal revenue be decreasing in quantities. In addition, we show that whenever this holds, a social
planner also prefers a joint auction. The following two lemmas, which are proven in the appendix, will be
useful when establishing this result:
Lemma 1 (i) P0 (q) =

1
D0 (P(q)) ;

00

(P(q))
0
(ii) P00 (q) = − {DD0 (P(q))}
3 ; (iii) D (p) =

1
P0 (D(p)) ;

00

(D(p))
(iv) D00 (p) = − {PP0 (D(p))}
3.

Lemma 2 2P0 (q) + qP00 (q) < 0 if and only if DD00 − 2(D0 )2 < 0.

3.1

Procurement

We first consider fixed-price procurement.13 The principal wants to buy an input as cheaply as possible,
and can choose between one or two suppliers. Clearly, the principal cares (directly) only about the price p
paid per unit, and not about production costs c (of course, as in any principal-agent problem, the principal
R

cares about the agents’ costs indirectly through the participation constraint). Hence S (p) ≡ p∞ D(s)ds is the
³
´
principal’s surplus, and π(p) = 12 pD(p) − c D(p)
is the surplus of each agent with a separate auction; with
2
n
³
´o
a joint auction the agent’s surplus is 2π(p). In this case pm = arg max 12 pD(p) − c D(p)
and p is such
2
´
³
D(p)
that 12 pD(p) − c 2
= 0. Therefore

S 0 = −D < 0,
S 00 = −D0 > 0
(i.e. S is convex and Corollary 1 does not apply). Also,
1
π0 = [D + (p − c0 )D0 ],
2
12 This condition implies no loss of generality. If c00 < 0, marginal and average costs are decreasing and auctioning jointly is
clearly better.
13 In fixed-price procurement contracts, the buyer and the seller agree on a price, and the seller assumes all cost risk. At the
other extreme, in a cost-plus contract the buyer reimburses the seller’s cost. As argued in Laffont and Tirole (1993, p. 662), only
fixed-price contracts are relevant when it is too costly for the buyer to audit the subcost of the supplier.

9

which we assume strictly positive for p ∈ [p, pm ), and
·
¸
1
1 0 2 00
0
00
0
π =
(p − c )D + 2D − (D ) c .
2
2
00

Applying Propositions 1 and 2 to this case, the following result follows:
Proposition 3 A sufficient condition for WJ > WS is that
2P0 + qP00 < 0,

(3)

that is, that marginal revenue be decreasing in q.
Proof: Since in the relevant range we have S 0 < 0 and π0 > 0, it follows from Proposition 2 that it suffices
to show that (3) ensures that

S 00 π0 < S 0 π00

(4)

for all p ∈ [p, pm ). Some straightforward calculations show that (4) is equivalent to:
1
(p − c0 )[D00 D − 2(D0 )2 ] < −2π0 D0 + (D0 )2 Dc00 .
2

(5)

Lemma 2 implies that the left hand side of (5) is negative for all p ∈ [p, pm ] if marginal revenue is decreasing
in q. On the other hand, the right hand side of (5) is positive, because c00 ≥ 0 and π0 > 0 for all p ∈ [p, pm ).

3.2

Royalties

Consider a licensing agreement where the licensee pays the principal a royalty t per unit produced and sold,
but no fixed fee.14 For example, this is the case when a patent holder licences the right to manufacture the
good, but does not participate in the product market.15 In this case the principal is worried about downstream
double marginalization, and, given t, would like the licensee to sell as much as possible. The principal’s surplus is S (p) = tD(p) (where now D is market demand for the good), and π(p) = 12 (p −t)D(p) − c(D(p)/2)
is the surplus of each licensee.
We then have that Proposition 3 also applies, i.e. 2P0 + qP00 < 0 is sufficient for WJ > WS . We postpone
the proof until the next subsection.
As is well known, a disadvantage of licensing through royalties is that any market power exercised
downstream reduces industry profits (this is the double marginalization problem). One solution is to auction
14 Calvert (1964) and Taylor and Silberston (1973) observe that about 50% of all licensing contracts specify royalties only. Also,
Lafontaine and Shaw (1999) show that, on average, franchise fees amount to no more than 8% of actual payouts from franchise
holders to franchisees.
15 See Tirole (1988, ch. 10.8) for a review of the literature on licensing.

10

off the monopoly for a fixed fee and charge no royalty.16 In that case, the principal does not want competition
downstream. When fixed lump-sum fees are not feasible, the patent holder must make her income through
royalties. But then the double marginalization problem bites, and controlling market power downstream
becomes an issue. Our result implies that decreasing marginal revenue is sufficient for a Demsetz auction
(ex ante competition) to be better than ex post competition when ex post market structure is uncertain.
One could argue that an exclusive contract with a two part tariff is enough to prevent the double marginalization problem. Note, however, that to choose the right fixed fee the principal must know the demand curve.
Our analysis implies that when marginal revenue is decreasing in quantities a joint franchise solves the problem.

3.3

Dealerships

Dealerships are similar to licensing, except for the fact that the principal’s cost increases with the number
of units sold. For example, consider the case of car dealerships. Cars are provided by the manufacturer at
a fixed price and the dealers are free (within limits set by list price of the manufacturer) to bargain their
markup with clients. The question for the manufacturer then is whether to have dealerships that are, say,
spatially close and thus compete with each other, or to have one dealer with a cap on the resale price.17
Assume that c̃(q) is the principal’s cost function, with c̃0 , c̃00 > 0. Then S (p) = tD(p) − c̃(D(p)), and, as
with licensing, π(p) = 12 (p − t)D(p) − c(D(p)/2). Then:18

S 0 = (t − c̃0 )D0 ,
S 00 = (t − c̃0 )D00 − (D0 )2 c̃00 ;
and
π0 =
π00 =

1
[D + (p − t − c0 )D0 ],
2
µ
¶
1 0
c00 D0
[D + 1 −
D0 + (p − t − c0 )D00 ].
2
2

We now show that 2P0 + qP00 < 0 is again sufficient for WJ > WS . As before, since π0 > 0 for all p ∈ [p, pm ),
it follows, after some straightforward but tedious algebra, that S 00 π0 < S 0 π00 for all p ∈ [p, pm ) is equivalent
to
(6)

DD00 − 2(D0 )2 < 2π0

(D0 )2 c̃00 1 0 3 00
− (D ) c ,
(t − c̃0 ) 2

which holds because the right hand side is (obviously) positive, while the left hand side is negative because
16 See

Gallini (1984) and Katz and Shapiro (1985).
abstract from other important considerations in these contracts, such as service quality.
18 Note that royalties corresponds to the case where c̃ ≡ 0.
17 We

11

of Lemma 2.

3.4

The social planner

Next, we consider the case of a social planner who wants to contract for the provision of a service. As an
example, consider highway franchises. In many developing countries roads are being franchised to private
firms. In exchange for toll revenue, the franchise holder finances, builds, operates and maintains the road.19
In some cases roads are natural monopolies, and are awarded to the firm offering to charge the lowest toll.
Nevertheless, when there is more than one way to get from one point to another, as is often the case in
large cities, different roads could be awarded to different franchise holders.20 Should the regulator award all
franchises to the same firm or award several highway franchises and let them compete? Another example is
the auction of the rights to provide local telephony in rural areas, where the auction is based on the price of a
standard local call. Is it better to have a single company provide the service or would it be better to allocate
two companies to the area?
R∞
p

In this case the principal
and producer surplus) so that S (p) =
´ about social surplus (i.e.
h consumer
i
³ cares
D(p)
D(p)
1
D(s)ds + pD(p) − 2c 2 ; and π(p) = 2 pD(p) − c 2 . Then

S 0 = (p − c0 )D0 ,
1
2

S 00 = (p − c0 )D00 + D0 − (D0 )2 c00 ,
and π0 , π00 are the same as in the case of dealerships (with t = 0). Condition (1) now leads to
(p − c0 )D00 + D0 − 12 (D0 )2 c00 (p − c0 )D00 + 2D0 − 12 (D0 )2 c00
>
,
(p − c0 )D0
D + (p − c0 )D0
which, after some algebra yields
£
¤
1
(p − c0 ) DD00 − 2(D0 )2 < −2π0 D0 + (D0 )2 Dc00 ,
2

(7)

which is the same condition as in the case of procurement. Hence, again decreasing marginal revenue is
sufficient for WJ > WS .
Finally, we present a concrete example which suggests that welfare gains may be important when using
a Demsetz auction instead of separate auctions.
Example

We use the notation and definitions from the preceding subsection and assume D(p) = 1 − p,

19 See

Engel, Fischer and Galetovic (2001b) for a discussion of highway franchising.
which would compete with Route 68, the highway that currently joins Chile’s
capital, Santiago, with the port of Valparaı́so. The Ministry of Public Works weighed the benefits of joint and separate auctions.
20 One example is the La Dormida project in Chile,

12

c(q) = c0 . We also assume that the separate and joint auction of both franchises dissipate all rents.21 Since

S 0 (p) = −D(p) = p − 1 and π(p) = p(1 − p) − c0 , we have that π00 /π0 < S 00 /S 0 if and only if −2/(1 − 2p) <
−1/(1 − p) for all p < pm = 1/2, which indeed holds. It follows that the sufficient condition for Proposition
2 is satisfied.
Assume that the ex-ante distribution of market structure outcomes in the case of separate franchises F
is a point distribution with weights of 1/2 on collusion at the bid price and 1/2 on price competition with
price equal to marginal cost (zero). Then pJ is the smallest solution to p(1 − p) = c0 while pS is the smallest
solution to 12 p(1 − p) = c0 . The existence of a solution in both cases requires c0 < 1/8. Then:
i
p
ª 1h p
1
1©
WJ −WS = (1 − pJ )2 −
(1 − pS )2 + 1 =
2 1 − 4c0 − 1 − 1 − 8c0 > 0,
2
4
8

∀c0 > 0,

Furthermore, in this example a joint auction can lead to a welfare increase of as much as 17%.

4

Conclusion

We have shown a simple condition for a principal to prefer to contract the provision of a good from a single
agent via a Demsetz auction, rather than by having multiple agents provide the good under (imperfectly)
competitive conditions. In the canonical cases of procurement, royalty contracts and dealerships, decreasing
marginal revenue ensures that a Demsetz auction (ex ante competition) is better for the principal than ex
post competition. This result is surprising, because it is independent of the expected intensity of ex post
competition.
The results in this paper do not necessarily imply an endorsement of monopolies, since many relevant
factors were left out of our analysis. First, we assumed a single service quality, which can be verified at no
cost, even though in most cases quality will be worse in the absence of competition. Second, we ignored
political economy and asymmetric information considerations, which may be worse when a regulator deals
with a monopoly. Third, we rule out incomplete contracting and the hold-up problem. For example, a
manufacturer might prefer to have competing dealers in order to avoid a bilateral monopoly. Finally, we
have not considered the possibility of technical change in the delivery of franchise services, a factor that if
present makes competition more desirable if it accelerates the introduction of new technologies.
On the other hand, there are some aspects we left out which strengthen the case for a joint auction. First,
if agents are risk averse, the preference for joint auctions increases. More importantly, we have assumed
that a joint contract does not lead to any cost savings; or, conversely, that ex post competition, which
implies more than one agent, does not lead to (fixed) cost duplication. A common concern when formerly
monopolistic markets are liberalized is that competition may lead to inefficient cost duplication through
“excessive” entry.22 With a Demsetz auction, however, cost duplication is no longer an issue. Our result
21 Thus
22 See,

the common value of both expressions in Condition 1 is zero.
for example, Armstrong (2000).

13

indicates that an exclusive contract may be preferable even when it does not prevent fixed-cost duplication.

14

Appendix
A Proof of Proposition 2
Differentiating both sides of π ◦ π−1 (p) = p leads to:
(π−1 )0 (p) =

(8)

1
.
π0 (π−1 (p))

Hence:
(9)

(S ◦ π−1 )0 (p) = S 0 (π−1 (p))(π−1 )0 (p) =

S 0 (π−1 (p))
π0 (π−1 (p))

.

Differentiating both sides of (8) with respect to p and using (9) leads to:
(S ◦ π−1 )00 (p) =

S 00 π0 − S 0 π00
(π0 )3

,

where all terms on the r.h.s. are evaluated at π−1 (p). Since π0 > 0 this implies that S ◦ π−1 is concave if
and only if S 00 π0 < S 0 π00 . And since S 0 < 0 and π0 > 0 we conclude that π00 /π0 < S 00 /S 0 is necessary and
sufficient for concavity of S ◦ π−1 . The result now follows.

B Proof of Lemma 2
To prove (i) and (ii) totally differentiate the identity q ≡ D[P(q)] with respect to q to obtain
1 = D0 P0 ,
from which (i) follows. Next, totally differentiate P0 (q) ≡
P00 = −
from which (ii) follows by substituting

1
D0

1
D0 [P(q)]

with respect to q to obtain

D00 0
P,
(D0 )2

for P0 . The proof of (iii) and (iv) is analogous and we omit it.

C Proof of Lemma 3
Proof: Sufficiency: use (i) and (ii) in Lemma 1 to substitute for P0 and P00 . Necessity: use (iii) and (iv) to
substitute for D, D0 and D00 .

15

References
[1] Armstrong, M., “Regulation and inefficient entry”, mimeo, Nuffield College, Oxford, 2000.
[2] Caillaud, B., and J. Tirole, “Essential Facility Financing and Market Structure,” Mimeo, IDEI, U. of
Toulouse, 2001
[3] Calvert, R., The Encyclopedia of Patent Practice and Invention Management. New York: Reinhold,
1964
[4] Chadwick, E., “Results of Different Principles of Regulation in Europe,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A22, 381–420, 1859
[5] Demsetzx, H., “Why Regulate Utilities,” Journal of Law and Economics, 11, 55–66, 1968
[6] Engel, E., R. Fischer and A. Galetovic, “How to Auction an Essential Facility when Underhand Agreements are Possible,” NBER Working Paper #8146, 2001a
[7] Engel, E., R. Fischer and A. Galetovic, “Least-Present-Value-of-Revenue Auctions and Highway Franchises,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 993–1020, 2001b
[8] Gallini, N. “Deterrence Through Market Sharing: A Strategic Incentive for Licencing,” American
Economic Review 74, 931–941, 1984
[9] Harstad, R. and M. Crew, “Franchise Bidding Without Holdups: Utility Regulation with Efficient
Pricing and Choice of Provider,” Journal of Regulatory Economics 15, 141-163, 1999
[10] Katz, M. and C. Shapiro, “On the Licencing of Innovations,” Rand Journal of Economics 16 504–520,
1985
[11] Laffont, J. y J. Tirole, A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation. Cambridge, MIT Press,
1993
[12] Lafontaine F. and K. Shaw, “The Dynamics of Franchise Contracting: Evidence from Panel Data”,
Journal of Political Economy 107, 1041-1080, 1999.
[13] Posner, R., “The Appropriate Scope for Regulation in Cable Television,” Bell Journal of Economics 3,
335-358, 1972
[14] Pratt, J., “Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large,” Econometrica 32, 122–136, 1964
[15] Riordan, M. and Sappington, D. “Awarding Monopoly Franchises,” American Economic Review 77,
375-387, 1987

16

[16] Spengler, J., “Vertical Integration and Anti-Trust Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 58, 347–352,
1950
[17] Spulber, D., Regulation and Markets. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989
[18] Stigler, G., The Organization of Industry. Homewood: Richard D. Irwin, 1968
[19] Taylor, C. and Z. Silberston, Economic Impact of Patents, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1973
[20] Tirole, J., The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988
[21] Williamson, O., Markets and Hierarchies. New York: Free Press, 1975

17

