NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHOOL CHOICE AND SCHOOL PRODUCTIVITY
(OR COULD SCHOOL CHOICE BE A TIDE THAT LIFTS ALL BOATS?)

Caroline M. Hoxby

Working Paper 8873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8873

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Caroline M. Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

School Choice and School Productivity
(or Could School Choice be a Tide that Lifts All Boats?)
Caroline M. Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 8873
April 2002
JEL No. I2, H0, J0

ABSTRACT
A school that is more productive is one that produces higher achievement in its pupils for each
dollar it spends. In this paper, I comprehensively review how school choice might affect productivity.
I begin by describing the importance of school productivity, then explain the economic logic that suggests
that choice will affect productivity, and finish by presenting much of the available evidence on school
choice and school productivity. The most intriguing evidence comes from three important, recent choice
reforms: vouchers in Milwaukee, charter schools in Michigan, and charter schools in Arizona. I show
that public school students' achievement rose significantly and rapidly in response to competition, under
each of the three reforms. Public school spending was unaffected, so the productivity of public schools
rose, dramatically in the case in Milwaukee.

Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
choxby@harvard.edu

1

A school that is more productive is one that produces higher achievement in its pupils for each
dollar it spends. Formally, a school’s productivity is defined as achievement per dollar spent, controlling
for incoming achievement differences of its students. In this chapter, I comprehensively review how
school choice might affect productivity. I begin by describing the importance of school productivity,
then explain the economic logic that suggests that choice will affect productivity, and finish by
presenting much of the available evidence on school choice and school productivity. Readers are likely
to be most intrigued by the final section of the paper, in which I examine the achievement and
productivity effects of three important, recent choice reforms: vouchers in Milwaukee, charter schools in
Michigan, and charter schools in Arizona. However, readers are much less likely to find the evidence to
be a “black box” if they read the earlier sections of the paper, which set up the relationship between
choice, school conduct, student achievement, and productivity. I encourage impatient readers who jump
to the final section to return to the earlier sections for answers to the questions that will naturally arise
once they have seen the evidence.

I. Why the Productivity Consequences of School Choice Matter A Lot
Although a great deal of research has dealt indirectly with school productivity (most famously,
the “Does Money Matter?” debate), productivity has been neglected by research on school choice.
School choice research has concentrated on allocation questions, which include: who exercises school
choice? who chooses which school? how does choice change the allocation of resources? how does
reallocation of students change peer effects? The allocation questions are largely questions of
redistribution. While it is theoretically possible that school choice could improve achievement for all
students through reallocation, such an outcome would require that, for every student, the benefits of
going to a school that was a better match exceeded the costs imposed upon him by school choice. The

2

costs might include a worsening peer group or declining resources.1
In general, then, allocation-oriented research presents a view of school choice that is rife with
tensions about redistribution (which students gain, which students lose?). One way to relieve these
tensions is to devise allocation-related remedies, such as controls on how resources and peers shift when
choice is introduced.2 However, when advocates of school choice argue that every child would benefit
from school choice, they are usually relying on the idea that school productivity would increase
sufficiently to swamp any negative allocation effects that some students might experience. The basic
logic is that choice would give schools greater incentives to be productive because less productive
schools would lose students to more productive schools. That is, if school that could raise a student’s
achievement while spending the same amount that current school, it would be expected to draw him away
from his current school. This process would shrink the less productive and expand the more productive
school, until one of two things happened: the more productive replaced the less productive school or the
less productive school raised its productivity and was thereby able to maintain its population students.
(This is the broad idea; I discuss specific mechanisms through which choice might raise productivity
later.) In other words, a general increase in school productivity could be a rising tide that lifted all boats,
and the gains and losses from reallocation might be nothing more than crests and valleys on the surface
of the much higher water level.
Thus, the first reason that the productivity consequences of school choice matter is that they
potentially determine whether choice will benefit all children. For the rising tide scenario to be a
realistic probability and not just a possibility, however, one must ask what productivity schools could
reasonably be expected to achieve. That is, what is the range of productivity over which choice could
cause productivity to vary? Recent history suggests that school productivity could be much higher than it
is now–60 to 70 percent higher. Consider the simplest productivity calculation, achievement per dollar.
Such a calculation (which I describe in detail below) suggests that average public school productivity

3

was about 65 percent higher in 1970-71 than in 1998-99. This means that, if choice were simply to
restore school productivity to its 1970-71 level, then the average student in the United States would be
scoring at an advanced level where fewer than ten percent of students now score. This improvement in
achievement would be so large that it would overwhelm any worst case scenario suggested by allocation
research on school choice.
How Much Higher School Productivity Plausibly Be?
How does one make such a calculation? We have one measure of student achievement in the
United States that reflects the achievement of the entire population of students, is nationally
representative, and is designed for comparison over a long period of time and across schools: the
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). Other measures of achievement tend to fail at
least one, usually a few, of these requirements.3 If one simply calculates NAEP points per thousand real
dollars spent per pupil, one generates the results shown in Table I.4 (All money amounts in this chapter
are adjusted into 1999 dollars using the Consumer Price Index, unless otherwise indicated.) They show
that, between the 1970-71 and 1998-99 school years, productivity fell by between 54.9 percent (based on
math tests for 9 year olds) and 73.4 percent (based on reading tests for 17 year olds). The bottom panel
of Table I shows actual NAEP scores in its upper row and, in its lower row, what NAEP scores would be
if schools returned to 1970-71 productivity (1972-73 productivity, in the case of math). For all of the
tests, the average American student would have a score that fewer than 10 percent of American students
currently attain. In fact, the average 17 year old would have a score that fewer than 5 percent of
American 17 year olds currently attain. The mean American student would be classified by the NAEP as
an “advanced” student.
One might wonder whether demographic changes in the United States account for the fall in
school productivity, as measured by the simple calculation described above. Perhaps schools were not
losing productivity; perhaps they were simply working with students from worse family backgrounds.

4

There is no definitive way to address this issue, but a standard approach is to:
(1) regress 1998-99 achievement on the characteristics of students who took the test in that year and
thereby determine the effect of each characteristic (African-American, Hispanic, single-parent family,
family income, and so on);
(2) predict what achievement would have been in 1998-99 if the student population were the same as the
1970-71 student population–that is, substitute 1970-71 characteristics into the prediction equation with
1998-99 coefficients;
(3) use predicted achievement to determine what 1998-99 productivity would have been if the student
population had remained what it was in 1970-71.5
If one uses this method to hold student characteristics constant, then one finds that the decline in
productivity from 1970 to 1999 is very slightly larger than the unadjusted estimates would suggest. See
the lightly shaded row of Table I. For instance, consider the measured decrease in productivity based on
the mathematics scores of 17 year olds. It is a 62.0 percent decrease if student characteristics are not
held constant, but it is a 65.1 percent decrease if student characteristics are held constant.6 The decline in
productivity is greater when one holds student characteristics constant mainly because a smaller share of
students had parents who had high school graduate or college graduate parents in 1971-72 than in 199899. Such students tend to score better on the NAEP exam than students whose parents are high school
drop outs. In addition, there were smaller shares of students in 1971-72 whose families had the incomes
typical of families today. The shares of students who are African-American and Hispanic have risen
since 1971-72 and these students do tend to score worse on NAEP exam than non-Hispanic white
students. However, the effect of changing racial composition is overwhelmed by the effect of changes in
parents’ education and income. Other changes in the composition of the student population, such as area
of the country, have little effect on the adjustment.
If demographic changes do not account for the fall in school productivity, perhaps changes in

5

career opportunities for women do. That is, over the 1970 to 1999 period, it may have cost schools an
increasing amount to hire a female with a given level of skills because non-teaching opportunities for
women were opening up. One can examine this hypothesis by inflating nominal spending using a wage
index for females rather the CPI. In order to give this hypothesis as much explanatory power as possible,
I used the wage index for females in the college-educated occupation that experienced the most wage
growth: professional specialty occupations (lawyers, physicians, etc.).7 Use of this index exaggerates
the degree to which females’ wages account for the measured decline in productivity for two reasons.
First, women in professional specialty occupations have always had higher quality educations and higher
ability than the average American school teacher, and highly skilled and able workers have experienced
rapid earnings growth relative to all other workers (including less skilled college graduates) since 1970.
Second, teachers are not the only input that schools require. They also need office equipment, buildings,
less skilled service workers (custodians, bus drivers, food preparers), and other inputs; the prices of such
inputs have not risen nearly as fast as the wages of female professional specialty workers. So long as we
recognize that inflating by female professional specialty workers' wages is likely to give us a smaller
decrease in productivity than has really occurred, the calculation is informative. The darkly shaded row
in Table I shows that the wage-adjusted decrease in productivity ranges from 39.1 to 57.6 percent, while
the CPI-based decrease in productivity ranges from 54.9 to 73.4 percent. In other words, while the wageadjusted productivity losses are smaller, they are still very substantial.
The facts suggest that school conduct, and not changing student characteristics or female career
opportunities, is the main source of the decline in productivity. Consequently, policies that improve
school conduct could potentially generate very large increases in productivity.8 Of course, it is not
enough to point out that school productivity could plausibly be much higher than it is. One must
investigate whether choice actually induces schools to raise productivity. Such investigations–both how
one conducts them and what they show–are the main content of this paper. Before taking up such

6

matters, however, one more vital point about school productivity must be made.
How School Productivity Affects American Industry and Growth
For as long as we have been able measure the factor content of American net exports and the
sources of American economic growth, they have been intensive in human capital. This was observed
early on by Leontief [1956] and confirmed by a series of other researchers [Keesing, 1966; Krueger,
1968; Jorgenson, 1984; and Jorgenson et al, 1989, 1992]. In other words, the United States has a
comparable advantage in producing goods and services that make intensive use of educated labor. This
comparative advantage has existed because America has always had a relative abundance of educated
labor. That is, the United States has always been able to produce education in its population relatively
cheaply. America’s “new economy” products (microprocessors, software, knowledge services) are some
of the most human capital intensive products in the world. Yet, we know from basic trade theory that the
human capital intensive economy is built on a foundation of American ability to produce education in its
population relatively cheaply. While it true that American can import some human capital (for instance,
software engineers), imported human capital cannot be a source of comparative advantage in the mid- to
long-run.9 Thus, if Americans wish to continue enjoying a growing economy that is centered around
human capital intensive products, they cannot be indifferent about rapidly falling productivity in their
schools. A school sector with falling productivity translates into America’s having relatively costly
human capital, which translates into a loss of comparative advantage in human capital intensive goods.
In short, the effect of choice on school productivity is not interesting simply because it could
overwhelm the allocation effects of choice on achievement, it is interesting because it also has broad
implications for the macroeconomy, for trade, and for Americans’ jobs.

II. How Productivity Fits into the School Choice Literature
The productivity implications of choice have been sadly neglected by the literature on school

7

choice. This neglect has nothing to do with the importance of productivity (which is great, as has been
discussed) and has everything to do with the roots of the theoretical literature. Models of school choice
have grown out of models of local public goods provision, which have traditionally focused exclusively
on allocation problems, such as who gets what local public good and how one person’s local public good
choice affects other people. This focus has been inherited by the school choice literature, and–while
allocation-focused models of choice are instructive–the intellectual history of the literature should not
dictate neglect of productivity. Indeed, it is worthwhile taking a step back to look at some related
research that demonstrates how important productivity effects can be when competition is introduced into
a market.
Health care is an obvious and recent example. Legislation passed in the late 1980s and early
1990s allowed managed care organizations to compete.10 The competition has affected the allocation of
health care, but a wealth of research also documents the dramatic effects of competition on productivity,
which far exceeded what supporters of managed care had hoped. From 1990 to 2000, health care costs
grew just one-half as quickly as in the previous decade, but key health indicators (such as lifespan) grew
just as rapidly in the 1990s as in the 1980s. These facts suggest that productivity surged in the more
competitive environment,11 in part because competition induced providers to adopt efficiency enhancing
technology (such as computers that reduce paperwork) and to discourage conduct that created rents (such
as doctors referring patients to their friends without regard to cost).
Trucking and parcel services are other examples. Many researchers have documented how,
following deregulation in the 1970s, competition in trucking grew dramatically. The result was a sharp
increase in productivity, as documented by Rose [1987], Michel and Shaked [1987], Traynor and
McCarthy [1991], and others. For the same money, a trucking customer could get obtain faster, more
specialized service after competition than before. In parcel services, the introduction of competition
improved productivity not only because the private firms (United Parcel Services, Federal Express, DHL,

8

et cetera) had higher productivity and productivity growth than the United States Postal Service did. The
competition also induced the United States Postal Service to substantially its own productivity. Many
commentators had doubted whether the United States Postal Service could rise to the occasion and
compete, but it has maintained a large market share in parcel delivery–largely through introducing
services (like Express Mail and priority parcel post) that are competitive on price and quality with
services offered by the private firms.
In fact, it is somewhat odd that school productivity should be so neglected in the school choice
literature because–although productivity was also neglected in the local public goods literature–there is
increasing interest among economists in the productivity of not-for-profit, semi-public, and regulated
enterprises. Economists are increasingly interested in giving market-like incentives to such enterprises in
order to keep workers from rent-seeking despite the fact that they lack conventional profit-maximizing
incentives. For instance, yardstick competition among not-for-profit providers of social services
(awarding contracts to training programs on the basis of their performance relative to other sites) is
increasingly used as a method of inducing productivity gains.
Finally, it is worth noting that one type of school-related research does implicitly contain
substantial evidence on productivity, though productivity is rarely mentioned and productivity
calculations are never made. I refer to research that compares students’ outcomes in public and private
schools and that attempts to eliminate selection bias. (Selection bias is the potential bias caused by the
fact that students who self-select into private schools might be unobservably different from students who
remain in public schools.) The body of research on this topic is well-established and even includes some
recent research comparing students who are assigned by lottery to a private school voucher or no voucher
(so that they remain in the public schools). Peterson’s chapter in this volume illustrates the best strain of
such research. The consensus in public-private achievement research appears to be that private schools
produce statistically significantly better achievement, at least among minority children and children from

9

lower to lower-middle income households.
This body of research could be reformulated as a comparison of public and private school
productivity, because there is always an attempt to compare achievement and hold constant the quality of
student inputs. Unfortunately, other inputs–especially spending–are not constant between private and
public schools, and this body of research is often silent about this fact (and almost never controls for it).
In particular, the typical private school in the United States spends only about 60 percent as much per
pupil as the typical public school, but private school spending is also much more variable than is public
school spending so that minimum private school spending is lower than minimum public school spending
and maximum private school spending is higher than maximum public school spending. Thus, even if
researchers were to find that public and private schools produced identical achievement, it would
probably be true that private schools were considerably more productive (because they spend less on
average). However, if one is to get an accurate comparison of public and private school productivity, one
really ought to make a productivity calculation for each school (thereby taking account of differences in
the distribution of spending) and compare these calculations for students with the same backgrounds.

III. Why Should Choice Affect School Productivity?
Why, logically, should choice be expected to affect productivity? That is, what mechanism
guarantees that low-productivity producers will be driven out by high-productivity producers?
Ultimately, this is a question about (1) what schooling producers maximize and (2) what the production
function for schooling is like. In fact, there are several answers to this question, and the answer is
different for different types of schooling producers: for-profit firms (like Edison Schools), not-for-profit
private schools, charter schools, and regular public schools. In this section, I describe the mechanism by
which choice might affect productivity for each of these types of schools. Across all the cases, I do
maintain one assumption: It is that, for any given cost to them, parents will choose the school that

10

produces the schooling that they value most. For convenience, I will hereafter call what parents value in
schools “school quality,” but I do not assert that parents’ notion of school quality necessarily matches
that of the reader. In other work [Hoxby, 1999a], I have presented empirical evidence that suggests that
parents tend to prefer schools that have better academic achievement, emphasize academic standards, and
promote a relatively structured (disciplined) school atmosphere.
A. A For-Profit School Producer that Takes Up Charter School Contracts
Let us start with a very straightforward case: a for-profit firm that opens a charter school. Such
a case is fairly typical of Edison Schools and might become a common model if charter school programs
were more widely enacted. The fee that the school could charge would be set by law and parents would
not be able to “top up” the fee. Also assume that the school must accept charter school applicants at
random (a typical charter school restriction) and is risk-neutral. In other words, a plan to include or
exclude students cannot be part of the school’s profit maximization strategy.
Then, the school would solve a problem such as:
(1)

.

This problem simply says that the school maximizes the difference between revenues (the fixed fee p
times the number of students who enroll x) and costs (per-pupil costs c times the number of students who
enroll x). The school chooses the quality q that it offers, the staff or labor l that it hires, and the other
inputs k that it employs (textbooks, equipment, and so on). The school accepts the going wage rate for
staff w and the going price for other school inputs r. Per-pupil costs c are assumed to be increasing in
quality, staff hired, and other inputs purchased. I have assumed that per-pupil costs are the same
regardless of the school’s scale. This is a good starting assumption, but is probably not true. I relax it
below.
Given that we have said that parents choose the school that offers the highest quality for a given
price, it is clear that enrollment x is increasing in quality q. Specifically, the school enrolls all of the

11

public school students in an area if it offers quality that is higher than that of any other area charter
school or regular public school (which would be equally free to parents). That is,

(2)

Assume that the school shares equally in enrollment if it offers exactly the same quality as another
school.
In these circumstances, the best that the school can do is maximize quality subject to the
constraint that its per-pupil cost must not exceed the charter school fee. Put another way, the school must
maximize its productivity for a given cost or another school will enroll all of the students in the area.
Unproductive schools will be driven from the market. Note that the firm earns just enough profit on each
student to repay its shareholders a market rate of return for the use of their capital, so the best it can do is
maximize the number of students on whom it earns this slim profit. It does this by offering the highest
possible quality that the charter school fee can sustain.
Managers of for-profit schooling firms believe that there are economies of scale in schooling
because a firm can pay lower prices for its inputs if it pools purchasing, curricular research and
development, and information processing across multiple schools.12 If there are economies of scale, then
large firms may be able to earn economic profits (profits that exceed the profits necessary to pay the cost
of capital) in local markets where they compete with other schools that, for one reason or another, remain
too small to take advantage of economies of scale.
B. A For-Profit School that Takes Up Vouchers
The case of a for-profit school producer that takes voucher students is quite similar to the case
just examined, except that parents are assumed to be allowed to “top up” a voucher with extra tuition

12

payments from their own funds. Otherwise, assume that the case is the same: the school must accept
voucher applicants on a random bias conditional upon their being willing to pay the school’s fees with a
combination of the voucher and extra tuition payments. Because the school can now set its fees, its
problem is slightly more complicated:
(3)

.

That is, when a school sets its fees, it takes into account that a higher fee means–on the one hand–greater
revenue per student who enrolls but–on the other hand–lower enrollment (because a higher fee
discourages enrollment for any given level of quality offered by the school. It can easily be seen that, for
any given fee p, the school must maximize the quality it produces subject to the constraint that costs are
less than or equal to p. In other words, the school must still maximize productivity if it is not to lose all
its enrollment to another school that offers higher quality for the same price.
Note that, in the equation above, I have allowed for economies of scale. Thus, when a school
considers aiming for a “better” but smaller niche of parents, who are willing to be charged higher fees for
better quality, it must take into account the loss of economies of scale (and the consequent increase in its
costs).
C. A Non-Profit School that Takes Up Charter School Contracts
The for-profit case is a nice place to begin because the firm’s incentives to maximize
productivity are obvious. The vast majority of school producers that take up charter school contracts or
voucher students are, however, not-for-profits. At first glance, it might seem difficult to say what notfor-profits maximize, but–in fact–relatively simple modifications of the for-profit case capture not-forprofit behavior. The key difference between a non-profit and a for-profit organization is the distribution
of surplus.13 A for-profit school distributes profits to its owners (private owners or shareholders). Thus,
in the problem above, it was reasonable to assume straightforward profit maximization because owners
benefit directly from profits. If a not-for-profit school has surplus (a difference between revenues and

13

costs), it cannot pay them in a straightforward way to anyone. It can, however, use surplus in a variety of
ways that make surplus a valuable thing to have. Surplus can be used to make working conditions
pleasant for the school’s staff (staff lunches, smaller classes, more classroom supplies, and so on) even if
these conditions do not contribute to productivity. Surplus also allows a school to pursue social goals
that its staff value: experiments with teaching methods, development of new curricula, a diverse student
body, exposing students to nature. There are a few things to note about such distributions of surplus.
First, they are nearly always inefficient compared to distribution of cash (which is fungible). That is,
some of the surplus is lost in the process of being transformed in goods or services that the staff values.
As a result, the school staff faces weaker incentives than they would face if they could be given cash
incentives. Second, while it is relatively simple to distribute a non-profit school’s surplus to its staff in
the forms mentioned, it is difficult to distribute it (legally) to a single owner or even a concentrated
subset of the staff. Thus, a school has less incentive to expand simply to increase the absolute size of the
surplus: the surplus will increase as it expands, but so will the number of staff over whom the surplus
must be divided. This is unlike the for-profit situation where owners have an incentive to expand their
schooling production so long as they can earn some positive surplus on each additional enrollee.
One can incorporate these features of the distribution of surplus into a non-profit charter school’s
maximization problem:
(4)

where enrollment is given by:

(5)

,

14

just as before.
This problem simply says that a staff member at a non-profit charter school wants the school to
maximize (%)/l, where % is total surplus (what the for-profit school would call profit),  is a factor that
is less than 1 (the share of surplus that remains after it has been transformed into goods for the staff), and
l is the number of staff. Under this maximization problem, the school’s incentives to expand enrollment
are weaker (than those of a for-profit school), but its incentives to maximize productivity are strong. The
school will still be driven out by competitors if it does not produce the maximum quality q attainable
given the constraint that its costs must not exceed the fixed charter school fee.
Two comments about the non-profit school’s maximization problem are in order. First, if there
are economies of scale, the school will have stronger incentives to expand enrollment than suggested just
above. Second, one’s measure of the productivity of a non-profit school may slightly understate its true
productivity if the school earns surplus and buys staff rewards with it that appear to be inputs (although
they really make no contribution to outcomes that parents value). The understatement will be slight
because competition among non-profit schools will drive the surplus towards zero (even as each seeks to
maximize its surplus).
D. A Non-Profit School that Takes Up Vouchers
The case of a non-profit school that takes voucher students is just like the case of a for-profit
school that takes voucher students except that its surplus can be distributed only in the indirect way
described above. That is, the voucher school’s maximization problem is:
(6)

.

The non-profit voucher school must maximize productivity if it is not to lose its enrollment to a similar
school that offers higher quality for the same fee p. The only complication is that the school needs to
choose its fee and quality simultaneously, and the only caveat is that the school has weaker incentives to

15

expand enrollment than a for-profit voucher school.
E. A Summary for Fee-Based Schools (For-Profit and Non-Profit)
In all of the cases above, the school’s revenues are derived from student fees. It is this fee basis
that is crucial because it means that parents’ choices determine whether a school is viable or not. If a
school’s students are attracted away by a competing school that charges the same fees, the school
naturally has to increase its productivity (either by raising its quality for the given fee or lowering the fee
it charges for its quality). As shown, the for-profit or non-profit basis of the school is somewhat less
crucial. A for-profit schooling firm will have stronger incentives to enter new markets and gain new
enrollment, but both non-profits and for-profits have incentives to maximize productivity.
People often wonder whether there will be an elastic supply of charter or voucher schools. This
is an important question, especially for non-profits, which do not have clear incentives to expand when
they hope to earn only a slim surplus on additional students. If there are economies of scale, then the
charter school fee or voucher that makes a school viable with a small number of students should
guarantee that it is more than viable with higher enrollment. Thus, economies of scale suggest that both
for-profits or non-profits should have elastic supply once they are in business. On the other hand, there
are some factors that might function like diseconomies of scale. For instance, an charismatic principal
might become uninspiring if she managed a large school and therefore had little direct contact with
students.
Buildings are often discussed as a possible factor that would limit the elasticity of supply of
charter or voucher schools. This, however, would seem to be a short-run phenomenon that mainly
plagues the start-up of new charter or voucher programs. The total number of students to be taught does
not increase simply because a new school has entered, so the introduction of charter or voucher school
competition does not require much of a net increase in school building. As enrollment shifts from less
productive to more productive schools, buildings should be sold by the shrinking or exiting schools and

16

purchased by the expanding or entering schools. In fact, there is an active market for school buildings
and similar institutional buildings. If small fractions of school buildings could be sold easily,
competition would require no net increase in school buildings. Schools are, however, somewhat
indivisible–while parts of school buildings are often sold or leased to separate schools, only certain
fractions of a building will generally make a viable school. (For instance, most schools require an
entrance area, a set of bathrooms, and so on.) Realistically, then, competition requires a small increase in
the total stock of school buildings, simply to allow more flexibility as parents’ ability to choose makes
enrollment more variable.
In any case, it is clear that some factors (economies of scale) suggest that school supply will be
very elastic, while other factors (that function like diseconomies of scale) suggest that school supply will
be less elastic. The elastic response of charter and voucher schools is, thus, an empirical question and
will depend on features of the reform, such as funds for the refurbishment of buildings.
F. Competition and the Productivity of Regular Public Schools
Does competition give regular public schools incentives to be productive? We have seen that
fee-based schools face straightforward incentives, but what about regular public schools that are funded
mainly by taxes?
If a regular public school faces competition from a charter or voucher school, and the charter
school fee or voucher comes directly from its budget, then the regular public school is fee-based at the
margin and will have marginal incentives to be productive. Whether these marginal incentives work well
or not depends on the size of the fee or voucher. Some vouchers or fees are so small relative to regular
per-pupil spending that they give public school perverse incentives to drive students away. That is, a
voucher or charter school fee that is small relative to per pupil spending (or that is not financed from the
public school’s revenues) raises per pupil spending non-negligibly for each student who is driven away
from the public schools. Public school staff may be able to enjoy greater surplus if they drive students

17

away than if they try to attract them. Such perverse scenarios can be easily avoided by setting a
sufficiently high voucher or charter school fee.
What if, however, a regular public school does not face competition from a charter or voucher
school? If it is not fee-based at the margin, does it have any incentives to be productive? The answer is
yes if the public school is financed by local property taxes and faces a high degree of traditional choice
among public school districts.
Traditional choice among public school districts is what occurs when parents choose a school
district by choosing a residence. This traditional form of choice is by far the most pervasive and
important form of choice in American elementary and secondary schooling today. In order that this form
of choice give schools incentives to be productive, it is essential that parents choose among districts that
are fiscally independent. The mechanism that I am about to describe does not work with intra-district
choice.
Conventionally, public school districts in the United States have revenues that depend largely on
local property taxes. If parents in a metropolitan area can choose among a large number of districts, they
will tend to favor districts that produce higher achievement for a given local property tax liability or,
equivalently, have lower local tax liability for a given level of achievement. That is, parents will tend to
favor districts with high productivity. If a school district’s productivity falls, it will be avoided by
parents who happen to be moving. The resulting decrease in the demand for its houses will drive down
the district’s property prices. The falling property tax base will, in turn, drive down the school’s budget,
which depends on property tax revenues. The administrator will be encouraged to raise productivity,
either through maintaining achievement in the face of a falling budget or through raising achievement
sufficiently to make the district attractive to homebuyers again.
Notice that, although only a fraction of households are moving at any given time, their
observations of achievement and tax liabilities are “universalized” through the housing market so that

18

every family’s house price changes in such a way as to give schools incentives to be productive. Notice
also that this productivity-inducing mechanism is sustainable over the long-term because it depends on
decentralized choices.14 This is in contrast to centralized reward systems--for example, financial or other
"merit" awards for successful school districts that are distributed by the state. Centralized rewards tend
to be unsustainable because state governments cannot, ex post, credibly adhere to systems that reduce the
amount of money going to failing school districts.

IV. Finding Evidence on How Choice Affects School Productivity
In the next two sections of this paper, I show evidence on how choice affects school productivity.
The next section focuses on traditional forms of choice (parents choosing among independent school
districts and parents choosing private schools). Section VI focuses on recent choice reforms: vouchers
and charter schools. There are, however, some problems that arise in any analysis of how choice affects
productivity, and the purpose of this section is to explain them.
The Endogenous Availability of Choice Options
One problem that plagues analysis is the fact that choice options do not arise randomly, but are
frequently a response to school conduct. In particular, when people are dissatisfied with a particular
school’s conduct, they try to create alternative schools for themselves or maintain their access to existing
alternative schools.
It is easy to see this phenomena with respect to the creation (or maintenance) of private schools,
charter schools, and voucher programs. In an area where the public schools are bad, parents are
frustrated and are willing to make some effort or devote some money to obtaining alternative schooling.
A collapse in the quality of local public schools (as sometimes occurs when an administrator leaves or
school finance laws change) tends to send families scurrying toward local private schools. The result is
an area in which private schooling is common because the public schools are bad. A recent illustration

19

of this phenomena is the substantial increase in private schooling that followed California’s school
finance equalization [Downes and Schoeman, 1998].
Recent voucher and charter initiatives also illustrate this phenomenon. It is no accident that
Washington D.C. has both a voucher program and a rapidly growing population of charter schools. The
Washington D.C. district has historically had low productivity: its per pupil spending is in the 99th
(highest) percentile for the United States, yet its average student scores between the 10th and 20th
percentiles on the National Assessment of Educational Progress. Reports of malfeasance in the D.C.
public schools, including the theft of school supplies and payrolls padded with non-workers, are
common.15
Although the mechanism is less obvious, choice options existing because the public schools are
bad is a problem that also plagues traditional choice among public school districts. It turns out that
voters resist district consolidation in areas where one or more districts (usually the largest central city
district) has bad productivity. In areas where all the districts have good productivity, voters elect to
consolidate them in order to enjoy economies of scale. In districts with bad productivity, sub-areas are
keen to secede and form another district; while, in districts with good productivity, no such secessions
occur. The end result of such phenomena is that areas with many districts often contain one or more
districts with bad productivity.
Endogenous school choice in areas with bad public schools generates bias if a researcher naively
estimates the effect of choice on productivity. Because schools with poor productivity induce the
creation of choice, it can appear as though choice causes low productivity (instead of the other way
around). Researchers can avoid this bias only by (1) comparing the same school district before and after
a choice reform if panel data are available or (2) finding a source of variation in the availability of choice
that is not correlated with the underlying causes of bad school productivity. The first solution typically
generates differences-in-differences strategies, in which schools that are “treated” with choice reforms

20

are compared, before and after the reform, to similar control schools (that did not experience the reform).
The second solution typically generates instrumental variables strategies, two of which are illustrated in
Section V.
Unobserved Differences in Student Inputs that Appear to be Differences in Productivity
Some families provide many learning opportunities and resources for their children at home;
other families provide few. Children also differ in motivation and innate ability. When measuring a
school’s productivity, one should fully account for differences in student inputs so that one avoids
describing a mediocre school as highly productive simply because it has such good student inputs that
achievement is high even if it adds very little learning (beyond what its students learn at home and pick
up for themselves). It is not possible, however, to measure all student inputs. In particular, motivation
and innate ability are usually not observed and cannot be controlled for.
For finding the effect of choice on productivity, there are three ways that researchers can deal
with this problem. Suppose a researcher wants to compare productivity across schools that face strong
choice-based incentives (such as voucher or charter schools) and schools that face weak choice-based
incentives (such as a large public school district that dominates a metropolitan area). Then, the
researcher must ensure that a random mechanism (such as a lottery) that is not correlated with
unobserved motivation/ability assigns students to schools. If such a mechanism is at work, schools will
have an equal allocation of unobserved motivation/ability, and the difference in achievement per dollar
spent will accurately reflect true differences in productivity. This approach is illustrated by Peterson’s
chapter in this volume.
Another alternative is for a researcher to compare the achievement of all students from an
environment in which there is little or no choice to that of all students from an environment in which
there is a lot of choice. So long as the students cannot choose the environment to which they belong, this
method generates good estimates. One example is comparing all students in a metropolitan area with

21

little choice to all students in a metropolitan area with a great deal of choice. (Families are assumed to
move among metropolitan areas for reasons other than the availability of choice.)
A final alternative is for a researcher to examine the achievement of students who are unlikely to
benefit from choice unless it benefits all students. An example will illustrate this method. Suppose that
a researcher wishes to compare school productivity before and after a private school becomes available,
and the researcher sees that the private school draws students who were previously high achievers in the
public schools. Then, the research can compare measured productivity at the public schools before and
after the private school’s introduction, knowing that public schools’ measured productivity is likely to
rise only if the availability of private school choice benefits all students. That is, if the researcher may
be reasonably confident that a measured increase in public school productivity is not generated by
unobserved motivation and ability rising at the public school.
Measuring Productivity
Productivity is achievement per dollar spent in a school, and measuring productivity raises a few
measurement issues, mostly related to measuring achievement. It goes almost without saying that one
should avoid using measures of achievement, such as grades, that have different meanings in different
schools and times. One should also avoid using scores on standardized tests that are taken by only a
small, self-selected share of students, such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT1) or American College
Test (ACT). Use of such tests generates self-selection bias that is impossible to solve without the use of
other standardized tests that are given to the entire population of students. If one has such a populationwide standardized test, however, one should use it instead of the SAT1 or ACT.
Supposing that one has a standardized test administered to the entire population of students, there
remains the question of whether to measure productivity with reading scores, math scores, science scores,
elementary school scores, secondary scores, and so on. These are all valid measures of productivity, and
the researcher is best off presenting several (especially math and reading). It perfectly normal to find that

22

a school has better productivity in some subjects or grades than in others. One may use scale scores,
national percentile scores, or any other score designed by the test-maker to be comparable across schools
and time.16
Measuring per pupil spending presents few problems so long as the same definition is used for all
schools. One may use either current spending or (preferably) total spending with smoothed capital
expenditures.

V. The Effect of Traditional Forms of School Choice on Productivity
Parents' ability to choose among public school districts (through residential decisions) and to
choose private schools are such established features of American education that they are taken for
granted. Yet, through these mechanisms, American parents have traditionally exercised some choice
over their children's schooling. These traditional forms of choice are useful for predicting the effects of
choice on productivity, especially because the availability of traditional choice mechanisms varies greatly
across metropolitan areas in the United States. Some metropolitan areas contain many independent
school districts and a large number of affordable private schools. Other metropolitan areas are
completely monopolized by one school district or have almost no private schooling.
In previous work, I have drawn upon traditional forms of choice to generate evidence about how
choice affects productivity. I review this evidence here. In addition, I explain how traditional forms of
choice generate important evidence on productivity that is otherwise unobtainable and illustrate empirical
strategies for determining the effects of traditional forms of choice. For detail on the empirical work
described here, see Hoxby [2000a] and Hoxby [2000b]. Rather than provide such detail here, I reserve
space for evidence on the productivity effects of recent choice reforms (Section VI).
Traditional Inter-District Choice
The first traditional form of choice occurs when parents choose among independent public

23

school districts by choosing a residence. The degree to which parents can exercise this form of choice
depends on the number, size, and housing patterns of districts in the area of the parents’ jobs. There are
some metropolitan areas in the United States that have many small school districts with reasonably
comparable characteristics. Boston, for instance, has 70 school districts within a 30-minute commute of
the downtown area and many more in the metropolitan area. Miami, on the other hand, has only one
school district (Dade County) that covers the entire metropolitan area. Most metropolitan areas are, of
course, somewhere between these two extremes. A typical metropolitan area has an amount of choice
that corresponds to having four equal-sized school districts (or a greater number of less equally sized
districts).
People with jobs in rural areas typically have only one or two school districts among which to
choose. To avoid a much-choice/little-choice comparison that mainly reflects urban/rural differences in
school productivity, it useful to focus on metropolitan areas when analyzing traditional inter-district
choice.
It is essential that parents choose among districts that are fiscally and legally independent if this
traditional form of choice is to be useful guide to the productivity effects of choice. This is because the
mechanism described above, by which parents’ housing choices translate into incentives for a school to
be productive, does not operate if, say, a district relies entirely on state revenue or is otherwise held
harmless from repercussions associated with an inability to attract parents. Intra-district choice among
schools does not provide useful evidence about productivity effects because the schools in a district are
fiscally dependent on one another, by definition.
How does one measure the degree of traditional inter-district choice in a metropolitan area? A
particularly good index of inter-district choice is the probability that, in a random encounter, two students
in the metropolitan area would be enrolled in different school districts. If there were only one district, as
in Miami, this probability would be equal to zero. If there were many districts, as in Boston, this

24

probability would be very close to one (greater than 0.95). We can calculate this choice index, Cm, using
the following equation:
(7)
where sjm2 is the square of district j’s share of enrollment in metropolitan area m. Table II lists the names
and choice indices of metropolitan areas in the United States that have very high or low degrees of interdistrict choice. It is interesting to note that metropolitan areas as disparate as Saint Louis and Seattle
have comparably high degrees of inter-district choice. Metropolitan areas as disparate as Las Vegas and
Wilmington equal have zero inter-district choice.
Traditional Choice of Private Schools
The second way in which parents have traditionally been able to exercise choice in the United
States is by enrolling their children in private schools. Traditionally, private school tuition in America is
not subsidized by public funds (as it is in Canada and many European countries), so parents can only
afford private school if they can pay tuition and also pay taxes to support local public schools. Partly as
a result, private schools enroll only 12 percent of American students.
In the United States, 85 percent of private school students attend a school with religious
affiliation, but such schools include a variety of Christian and non-Christian schools and have tuition that
ranges from a token amount to over 10,000 dollars. The remaining 15 percent of private school students
attend schools with no religious affiliation; these include most of the independent, college-preparatory
schools that charge tuition of 5,000 dollars or more. The modal private school student in the United
States attends a Catholic school that charges between 1,200 and 2,700 dollars.
A key feature of American private schools is that they typically subsidize tuition with revenues
from donations or an endowment (or implicit revenues from an in-kind endowment such as buildings and
land). The share of schooling cost that is covered by subsidies is larger in schools that serve low-income
students, but even relatively expensive private schools charge subsidized tuition. For instance, Catholic

25

elementary schools, on average, cover 50 percent of their costs with non-tuition revenues.
The number of private school places (of a given quality) that are available at a given tuition
varies greatly among metropolitan area in the United States.17 For instance, in some metropolitan areas,
15 percent of the elementary student population is enrolled in private schools where tuition is about twothirds of the schools’ per-pupil expenditure. (Typical amounts would be tuition of 1,800 dollars and
expenditure of about 2,700 dollars). In other metropolitan areas, fewer than 1 percent of the elementary
school population is enrolled in such schools, although places might be available in schools where tuition
is higher because there are no tuition subsidies. In short, the supply of private schooling varies among
metropolitan areas, and–thus–the degree to which parents have choice between public and private
schools varies among metropolitan areas.
It is reasonable to use the actual share of students who attend private school in a metropolitan
area as a measure of private school availability if the measure is properly instrumented. The instruments
must be variables that cause the non-tuition revenue of private schools to vary but are otherwise
unrelated to local public school achievement. That is, one wants to use only the variation in private
school availability that is generated by factors that affect the supply of private schooling, not by factors
that affect the demand for private schooling (such as the local public schools being bad). I describe the
best available instruments below.
Why Evidence from the Traditional Forms of Choice is Necessary
Evidence from the traditional forms of choice is necessary because it can reveal the long-term,
general equilibrium effects of choice. Evidence based on recent reforms cannot.
In the short term, an administrator who is attempting to raise his school’s productivity to respond
to competition has only certain options. He can induce his staff to work harder; he can get rid of
unproductive staff and programs; he can allocate resources away from non-achievement oriented
activities (building self esteem) and toward achievement oriented ones (math, reading, and so on). In the

26

slightly longer term, he can renegotiate the teacher contract to make the school more efficient. If an
administrator actually pursues all of these options, he may be able to raise productivity substantially.
Nevertheless, choice can affect productivity through a variety of long-term, general equilibrium
mechanisms that are not immediately available to an administrator. The financial pressures of choice
may bid up the wages of teachers whose teaching raises achievement and attracts parents. It may thus
draw people into teaching (or keep people in teaching) who would otherwise pursue other careers.
Indeed, it may change the entire structure of rewards in teaching and thereby transform the profession.18
The need to attract parents may force schools to issue more information about their achievement and may
thus gradually make parents into better “consumers.” Because parents’ decisions are more meaningful
when schools are financed by fees they control, choice may make schools more receptive to parent
participation. The need to produce results that are competitive with those of other schools may force
schools to recognize and abandon pedagogical techniques and curricula that are unsuccessful in practice
though philosophically appealing. Finally, in the long-term, choice can affect the size and very existence
of schools. Choice makes districts’ enrollment expand and contract; it makes private schools enter and
exit. In the short term, we mainly observe how the existing stock of schools changes its behavior.
Both traditional forms of choice potentially create the long-term, general equilibrium effects that
interest us.
The Effect of Traditional Inter-District Choice on School Productivity
We have a good measure of the degree of inter-district choice in a metropolitan area: Cm, defined
above. We are concerned, however, that the inter-district choice available is endogenous to the conduct
of local public schools–in particular, districts consolidate with productive districts but secede from
unproductive districts. To obtain unbiased estimates, we need geographic or historical factors that
increase a metropolitan area's tendency to contain many independent districts but that have no direct
effect on contemporary public school conduct. As explained in Hoxby [2000a], streams and rivers

27

provide good instruments because, early in American history, they were natural barriers that influenced
the drawing of district boundaries. They increased students' travel time to school, causing school
districts to be drawn smaller initially.19 They probably have no direct effect on how schools conduct
themselves now.
Formally, the set of instruments for Cm is a vector of variables that measure the number of larger
and smaller streams in a metropolitan area. I estimate the effects of inter-district choice using regressions
in which the dependent variable is either achievement (the numerator of productivity) or per pupil
spending (the denominator of productivity).20 The key independent variable is the choice index
(instrumented). The key variation in the regression is at the metropolitan area level, but I am able to
control for a wide range of background variables that might also influence schools or students. For
instance, I control for the effect of household income, parents' educational attainment, family size, singleparent households, race, region, metropolitan area size, and the local population's income, racial
composition, poverty, educational attainment, and urbanness. Because I have good measures of racial,
ethnic, and income segregation by school and school district, I can even control for segregation that may
be affected by inter-district choice.
The principal results of these regressions are shown in Table III, which displays only the
coefficients of interest, not the coefficients on control variables. The estimates show that inter-district
choice has a positive, statistically significant effect on productivity.21 We can see this by looking at the
two components of productivity: achievement (the numerator of productivity), which is shown in the top
panel of the table; and per pupil spending (the denominator of productivity), which is shown in the
bottom panel.
The top panel shows that a metropolitan area with maximum inter-district choice (index
approximately equal to one) has eighth grade reading scores that are 3.8 national percentile points higher,
tenth grade math scores that 3.1 national percentile points higher, and twelfth grade reading scores that

28

are 5.8 national percentile points higher. All of these effects are statistically significant with at least 95
percent confidence. The bottom panel of Table III shows that this better achievement is attained with
lower per pupil spending. Per pupil spending is 7.6 percent lower in metropolitan areas where interdistrict choice is at its maximum level (choice index equal to one), as opposed to its minimum level
(choice index equal to 0). The combination of the top and bottom panels is striking: schools can
simultaneously have significantly higher achievement and significantly lower spending only if their
productivity is substantially higher.
The Effect of Traditional Private School Choice on School Productivity
Recall that availability of private schooling varies among metropolitan areas in the United States.
To estimate the effects of varying private school competition for public schools, we need factors that
affect the supply of private schooling, but have no direct effect on achievement. Such factors include
historical differences in metropolitan areas’ religious composition because religious groups left
endowments that today generates differences in the amount of non-tuition revenue enjoyed by private
schools. A private school presented by history with a generous endowment can provide a given quality
of schooling at a lower tuition (and can thus be more competitive with public schools) than a private
school with little or no endowment.
Formally, the set of instruments for the share of enrollment in private schools is a vector of
variables that measure the population densities of nine major religious denominations in 1950. So long
as I control for current religious composition of metropolitan areas (which might affect the demand for
private schooling), these historical religious population densities should mainly affect the supply of
schooling and should have little or no direct effect on the achievement of public school students.22 I
estimate the effects of private school choice using regressions in which the dependent variable is either
achievement (the numerator of productivity) or per pupil spending (the denominator of productivity).
The key independent variable is the percentage of metropolitan area students in private schools

29

(instrumented). I control for the same background variables that I used for inter-district choice (see
above).
The key estimates from these regressions are shown in Table IV, which displays only the
coefficients of interest, not the coefficients on control variables. The table shows that private school
choice has a positive, statistically significant effect on public schools’ productivity. For instance,
compare two metropolitan areas, one with a moderately high degree of private school supply (about 17
percent of students in private schools) and the other with a moderately low degree of private school
supply (about 7 percent of students in private schools). The difference between moderately high and low
private school choice is, thus, a 10 percentage point difference in the share of students in private schools.
This means that we can interpret the coefficient shown in the top panel of Table IV as follows. A public
school in the metropolitan area with moderately high private school choice (as opposed to moderately
low private school choice) has eighth grade reading scores that are 2.7 national percentile points higher,
eighth math scores that are 2.5 national percentile points higher, twelfth grade reading scores that are 3.4
national percentile points higher, and twelfth grade math scores that are 3.7 national percentile points
higher.
Of course, in order to see whether these effects on achievement are generated by higher
productivity or just higher spending, we need to examine the effect of private school choice on per pupil
spending in the public schools. This result is shown in the bottom panel of Table IV. Compared to
public schools in metropolitan areas with moderately low private school choice, public schools in areas
with moderately high private school choice have per pupil spending that is 0.53 percent (approximately
half of 1 percent) higher. Not only is this change very small, it is not statistically significantly different
from zero. In other words, traditional private school choice has no effect on public school spending.
This is probably because of offsetting effects. Increased availability of private school choice draws some
students away from the public schools, raising per pupil spending through the reduction in the number of

30

pupils served but lowering per pupil spending through the reduction in voters who will support higher
public school spending.
In summary, the effect of private school choice on productivity is substantial and occurs purely
through an effect on achievement: per pupil spending in the public schools does not change, but their
achievement is higher.
Discussion of the Effects of Traditional Forms of School Choice
Are the effects of traditional choice on productivity large or small? One way to answer this
question is to ask how much higher American school productivity would be if every school were to
experience a high level of inter-district choice and private school choice, as opposed to zero inter-district
choice and moderately low private school choice. There would be a 28 percent improvement in
American school productivity, based on the estimates described above. 28 percent is close to half of the
decline in American school productivity since 1970.
One should keep in mind, however, that both traditional forms of choice provide rather weak
incentives compared to choice reforms like vouchers and charter schools. Moreover, many poor families
cannot exercise either traditional forms of choice: a family can only choose among districts if it can
afford to live in a variety of areas and a family can only exercise traditional private school choice if it can
pay tuition. Thus, even if every metropolitan area in the United States had the maximum degree of the
traditional forms of choice, poor families would probably be left with relatively unproductive schools.

VI. The Effect of Recent Choice Reforms on School Productivity
As mentioned above, recent choice reforms can only partially answer our questions about how
competition affects productivity. The recent vintage of most reforms means that we are unlikely to
witness major changes in the supply of schools. Also, short-term reactions to choice can differ from
long-term reactions. For instance, consider a regular public school that has had low productivity for

31

years and that has become the target of voucher or charter school competition. Under pressure, the
school might make dramatic productivity gains in the short run. The principal might quickly eliminate
unsuccessful instructional programs or personnel. She might quickly reallocate resources towards core
instructional programs in reading, language, math, history, and science. The rate of productivity
increase might, however, slow after the first few years as good policy changes become less obvious. On
the other hand, even a school that is raising its productivity might appear to have productivity losses in
the short-run if it faces adjustment costs when it makes changes. For instance, a school that puts an
academic monitoring system in place may face short-run costs for computers and training.
Can we learn much, then, from recent choice reforms? The answer is “yes” if we follow a few
principles. First, although it is interesting to examine the productivity of the choice schools themselves
(as Peterson implicitly does in this volume), it is even more important to study the productivity reactions
of regular public schools that are newly facing competition. This is because the productivity reactions of
regular public schools are in much more doubt than the productivity of choice schools. An unproductive
choice school is unlikely to enter and even less likely to survive, but critics of school choice doubt
whether regular public schools even have the knowledge or tools to raise their productivity. Second, we
should focus on the productivity reactions of regular public schools that face non-negligible incentives
due to a choice reform. This immediately limits our investigation to a few choice reforms that meet the
following requirements: (1) there is a realistic possibility that at least five percent of regular public
enrollment could go to choice schools, (2) the regular public schools lose at least some money (not
necessarily the entire per-pupil cost) when a student goes to a choice school, and (3) the reform has been
in place for a few years. Three reforms that satisfy these basic requirements are school vouchers in
Milwaukee, charter schools in Michigan, and charter schools in Arizona. I describe each of these
reforms below in the course of examining the reaction to it. Apart from these three reforms, most choice
reforms fail to meet at least one of these requirements. In fact, choice reforms are typically characterized

32

by constraints on enrollment (for instance, no more than one percent of local students can attend choice
schools) or perverse financial incentives (for instance, the local district loses no money when it loses a
student to a choice school).23
The Effect of Vouchers on Achievement in Milwaukee Public Schools
Vouchers for poor students in Milwaukee were enacted in 1990 and were first used in the 199091 school year. Currently, a family is eligible for a voucher if its income is at or below 175 percent of
the federal poverty level (at or below 17,463 dollars for a family of four).24 For the 1999-00 school year,
the voucher amount was 5,106 dollars per student or the private school’s cost per student, whichever was
less. For every student who leaves the Milwaukee public schools with a voucher, the Milwaukee public
schools lose state aid equal to half the voucher amount (up to 2553 dollars per voucher student in 199900). Milwaukee’s per pupil spending in 1999-00 was 8,752 dollars per pupil, so the district was losing
29 percent of the per pupil revenue associated with a voucher student. Currently, the vouchers may be
used at secular and non-secular private schools.25
The voucher program had a difficult start. While approximately 67,000 students were initially
eligible for vouchers, participation was initially limited to only 1 percent of Milwaukee enrollment. In
1993, the limit was raised to 1.5 percent and, in 1998, to 15 percent of enrollment. The 1998 changes
followed a prolonged legal dispute in which most voucher students had to use privately donated, not
publicly funded, vouchers. For instance, in 1997-98, only 1,500 students (about 1.4 percent of
Milwaukee students) were able to use publicly funded vouchers. Also, until 1998, the future of the
program was very much in doubt.26 Overall, while the voucher program began in 1990 and might have
been expected to have had a small impact on the Milwaukee Public Schools beginning with the 1990-91
school year, the program generated very little potential competition until the 1998-99 school year.
However, because the program was already somewhat established and familiar to Milwaukee residents
by 1998, one would expect a quicker response to the program than one would expect for a completely

33

new program. In short, it is plausible to look for a productivity impact, if any, over the few most recent
school years. The 1996-97 school year effectively predates serious competition.
Not all schools in Milwaukee experienced the same increase in competition as the result of the
voucher program. The greater was a school’s share of poor children, the greater was the potential
competition because the greater was the potential loss of students (after 1998). Some Milwaukee schools
had as few as 25 percent of their schools eligible for vouchers, while other Milwaukee schools had as
many as 96 percent eligible. Also, because private elementary schools cost significantly less than private
high schools, more than 90 percent of vouchers were used by students in grades one through seven in
1999-00. Thus, only elementary schools in Milwaukee faced significant potential competition.
These facts about the voucher program suggest that the following type of evaluation is most
appropriate for examining the productivity response of Milwaukee public schools. First, one should
focus on the productivity of Milwaukee schools in grades one through seven. Second, schools’
productivity should be compared from 1996-97 (before significant competition) to 1999-00 (after
significant competition). Third, schools in Milwaukee can be separated into those that were “more
treated” by competition because a large number of students were eligible and those that were “less
treated.” More treated schools are likely to have responded more strongly to the program. We can think
of the less treated schools in Milwaukee as partial control group. but all schools in Milwaukee were
eligible for non-negligible treatment. Therefore, it is desirable to have a control group of schools from
Wisconsin that were truly unaffected by the voucher program. It turns out that it is not easy to find such
schools in Wisconsin because Milwaukee’s schools are much poorer and have much larger shares of
black and Hispanic students than most other schools in the state. I chose the most similar schools
available for the evaluation, but it is likely that the results will understate the productivity effects of
school competition. We expect understatement because schools that have fewer poor and minority
students typically enjoy greater productivity and higher productivity growth than schools with more poor

34

and minority students. Thus, the control schools, which are richer than the treated schools, would
probably have higher productivity growth (all else equal) than the treated group of schools. Also, the less
treated schools in Milwaukee would probably have higher productivity growth (all else equal) than the
more treated schools.27
Because my evaluation compares treated and control schools before and after 1998, it is what is
sometimes called a difference-in-differences evaluation. It has a fairly obvious analog in scientific
experiments.
Table V shows some demographic indicators for the three groups of elementary schools: most
treated (Milwaukee schools where at least two-thirds of students were eligible for vouchers), somewhat
treated (Milwaukee schools where less than two-thirds of students were eligible for vouchers, and
untreated comparison schools. Note that 30 percent was the minimum share of students eligible for
vouchers among the somewhat treated Milwaukee elementary schools. There are 32 most treated and 66
somewhat treated elementary schools. All of the Milwaukee elementary schools have enrollment of
about 71-72 students in a grade.
In the most treated schools, an average of 81.3 percent of students were eligible for free or
reduced-price lunches (and thus eligible for vouchers), 65.4 percent of students were black, and 2.9
percent of students were Hispanic. In the somewhat treated schools, an average of 44.5 percent of
students were eligible for vouchers, 49.1 percent of students were black, and 13.7 percent of students
were Hispanic.28
I included a Wisconsin elementary in the untreated comparison group if it (1) was not in
Milwaukee, (2) was urban, (3) had at least 25 percent of its students eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch, and (4) had black students compose at least 15 percent of its students. There were only 12 schools
in Wisconsin that met these criteria. It was not possible to choose a group of untreated schools that were
more closely matched to Milwaukee schools. In the untreated comparison schools, average enrollment in

35

a grade was 51 students, 30.4 percent of students were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch (and, thus,
would have been eligible for vouchers had they lived in Milwaukee), 30.3 percent of the students were
black, and 3.0 percent of students were Hispanic.
Students in Wisconsin take state-wide examinations in grades 4, 8, and 10. Because I am
necessarily focusing on the productivity reactions of elementary schools, I measure productivity by
dividing a school’s fourth grade score (expressed in national percentile points) by its per pupil spending
in thousands of real (1999) dollars. Achievement is measured on five tests: mathematics, science, social
studies, language, and reading. It is worth noting that, during the period in question, Wisconsin enacted a
controversial new reading curriculum that emphasized whole-language methods, as opposed to phonics.
Table VI shows productivity growth rates in most treated, somewhat treated, and untreated
comparison schools in Wisconsin between 1996-97 and 1999-00. The statistics in the table are based on
regressions in which the dependent variable is productivity and the independent variables are an indicator
for each school, a time trend for most treated schools, a time trend for somewhat treated schools, and a
time trend for untreated comparison schools. This regression incorporates the best differences-indifferences method, given the application, because it allows each school to have its own starting point for
productivity. Intuitively, the regression is based on the idea that productivity growth rates might look
like the following figure.
Figure 1 shows what productivity might look like in three schools, one of which is most treated,
one of which is somewhat treated, and one of which is untreated. It would be fairly typical to find that
the most treated schools had the lowest initial productivity if we did not correct for differences in student
demographics, for the simple reason that poorer students tend to have lower achievement and the most
treated schools have more poor students. Thus, the figure shows the most treated school having the
lowest initial productivity, somewhat treated schools having medium initial productivity, and untreated
schools having the highest initial productivity. If competition has little or no effect on productivity, then

36

the time trends for productivity might all be flat, as indicated by the dashed lines. On the other hand, if
competition makes schools raise their productivity, then the time trends might look the solid lines, in
which the most treated schools raise their productivity the most, somewhat treated schools raise their
productivity somewhat, and untreated schools raise their productivity the least (or perhaps not at all).29
Formally, the regression equation can be written as follows:
(8)

where Achit is a national percentile rank score for students at school i in year t, PPExpit is the per pupil
expenditure at school i in year t, I1 through IN are indicator variables for schools, 1 through N are initial
productivity levels at individual schools, Imost treated is an indicator variable for the school being most
treated, Isomewhat treated is an indicator variable for the school being somewhat treated, Iuntreated is an indicator
variable for the school being untreated, and timet is the school year. The coefficients most treated, somewhat
treated

, and untreated pick up the different productivity growth rates for most treated, somewhat treated, and

untreated schools, respectively.
The left-hand column of Table VI shows that, based on mathematics achievement, productivity
grew annually by about 0.7 national percentile points per thousand dollars between 1996-97 and 1999-00
in the most treated schools. It grew more slowly in somewhat treated schools (about 0.5 national
percentile points per thousand dollars) and yet more slowly in untreated schools (about 0.3 national
percentile points per thousands dollars). Productivity growth based on science, social studies, and
language (grammar) is shown in the next three columns, all of which show patterns that are similar to the
mathematics-based pattern. In all these columns, productivity growth in the most treated schools is

37

statistically significantly different than that in the untreated schools with a 95 percent confidence level.
Reading-based measures of productivity are falling in all the schools over the period in question, perhaps
because of whole language methods. However, reading-based productivity is falling least quickly in
schools that were most treated to voucher school competition.
Table VII shows statistics that are very similar to those in Table VI. They are easier to interpret
for those unfamiliar with regression analysis, but they are less ideal because each school does not have its
own initial level of productivity. For instance, examine the top panel, which shows productivity
calculations based on the mathematics exam. In 1996-97, the most treated schools earned 4.18 national
percentile points for every thousand dollars of per pupil spending. In the same year, the somewhat
treated and untreated schools earned 4.08 and 5.65 national percentile points (respectively) for every
thousand dollars. Over the next few years, however, productivity growth was the highest in the most
treated schools, second highest in the somewhat treated schools, and lowest in the untreated schools (see
right-hand column). In fact, by 1999-00, productivity in the most treated schools was closer to that of the
untreated schools than it was to that of the somewhat treated schools! The productivity growth rates
shown in Table VII are dramatic for the most treated schools. The basic pattern (highest productivity
growth in the most treated schools) is repeated in the other panels of the table, for the science, social
studies, language, and reading examinations.
Tables VIII and IX are very much like Tables VI and VII, except that they show achievement
growth instead of productivity growth. That is, they leave out the changes in productivity that come
about as a result of changes in per pupil spending. An examination of them shows that achievement
growth displays patterns like that of productivity growth, which suggests that the improvements in
productivity in the most treated and somewhat treated schools occurred because achievement was rising
in those schools, not because achievement was holding steady while per pupil spending fell. (Indeed, use
of the vouchers causes per pupil spending to rise in the Milwaukee public schools, so if achievement

38

were to hold steady, productivity would fall if schools did not respond to competition by raising it.)
Look, for example, at Table VIII. It shows that math scores rose by about 7 percentile points per
year in the most treated schools, by about 5 percentile points per year in somewhat treated schools, and
by about 4 percentile point in untreated schools. Alternatively, examine Table IX. It shows that social
studies scores in the most treated schools rose by 4.2 percentile points per year, while social studies
scores in untreated schools rose by only 1.5 percentile points per year.
Overall, an evaluation of Milwaukee suggests that public schools have a strong, positive
productivity response to competition from vouchers. The schools that faced the most potential
competition from vouchers had the best productivity response. In fact, the schools that were most treated
to competition had dramatic productivity improvements. On the one hand, such bursts of productivity
growth may slow down after a few more years of competition. On the other hand, the productivity
effects of competition may be understated because the control group of schools was a slightly unfair
comparison group with fewer poor and minority students.
The Effect of Charter Schools on Achievement in Michigan Public Schools
In 1994, Michigan enacted a charter school law as part of a series of changes in its method of
financing schools. Michigan charter schools receive a per pupil fee that is essentially the same as the
state’s foundation level of per pupil spending (the state’s minimum level of per pupil spending, given the
characteristics of the school’s student population). For instance, in 1999-00, the average charter school
student in Michigan had 6,600 dollars spent on his education, while the average regular public school
student had about 7,440 dollars spent on his education. Detroit public schools spent 8,325 dollars per
pupil and the average charter school student in Detroit had about 6,590 dollars spent on his education. A
district that loses a student to a charter school loses approximately the foundation level of per pupil
revenue. Charter competition tends to be most substantial in the elementary grades because the charter
fees more adequately cover costs for the lower grades. By the 1999-00 school year, approximately 3.5

39

percent of all non-private elementary students in Michigan were enrolled in charter schools. The
corresponding number for secondary students was 0.7 percent. Charter schools can receive their charters
from state-wide organizations, such as universities, so they can compete with local public schools, unlike
charter schools in many other states that have their charters granted and renewed by their local district.30
A difference-in-differences strategy, analogous to the strategy used on Milwaukee, is appropriate
for evaluating the effect of charter school competition on Michigan public schools. There are two
additional issues, however, that did not arise with Milwaukee. First, it was easy to define ex ante the
treatment and control schools in Wisconsin: no school outside of Milwaukee received any voucher
treatment and the scale of treatment within Milwaukee schools varied with students’ poverty, a variable
that we observe. In Michigan, “treatment” and “control” and “before” and “after” must be defined on a
district-by-district basis, where a district is being “treated” and is in the “after” period once it is forced to
recognize that it is losing a critical share of students to charter schools.” Of course, we do not know what
this critical share might be, but it is useful to know that the mean year-to-year change in a Michigan
school’s enrollment prior to 1994 was 5.1 percent. Therefore, a small drawing away of enrollment by a
local charter school would be hard to differentiate from normal year-to-year variation in enrollment.
However, a persistent drawing away of enrollment of more than 5 percent, say, would be likely to be
noticed and attributed to charter schools. I initially looked for a critical level of 6 percent and, because it
worked well, I kept it. A critical level of 7 or 8 percent works very similarly.31
The left-hand side of Table X list the Michigan districts in which charter schools account for at
least 6 percent of total enrollment inside the district’s boundaries.32 There are 597 districts in Michigan
and only 34 listed in the table, so a non-negligible charter school presence is still the exception and not
the rule. Michigan’s large city districts are well represented among the districts that face charter school
competition: Detroit, Lansing, and Kalamazoo all have at least six percent of enrollment in charter
schools.

40

Second, the Michigan districts that had to face competition from charter schools were not
selected randomly or according to a simple rule. Instead, charter schools probably formed as a response
to local circumstances. In some cases, charter schools may have formed where parents were unusually
concerned about education and active (good circumstances for public school productivity and
achievement). In other cases, charter schools may have formed where parents and teachers were
frustrated because the district was run poorly (bad circumstances for public school productivity and
achievement). Thus, it is important that the difference-in-differences strategy looks within a school–that
is, how a given school changes when it is faced with new competition. I present differences-indifferences results that control for school fixed effects, which pick up all the unobserved characteristics
of a school that are stable over the several year period that I analyze.
The difference-in-differences strategy might not be convincing, however, if the districts that
were eventually forced to complete with charter schools had preexisting productivity trends that were
different than other public schools in Michigan. Different preexisting trends would not be unlikely
because charter schools chose where to locate–a charter school would expect to find little demand for its
services in a district that was improving rapidly on its own. In cases where different trends are possible,
a more sophisticated, detrended differences-in-differences strategy is appropriate. Therefore, I also
present estimates of how schools’ productivity trends changed when they began to face charter
competition.
Figures 2a through 2c illustrate why a detrended differences-in-differences strategy can be a
useful complement to a typical differences-in-differences strategy. In Figure 2a, the solid line represents
the productivity of district A, which initially enjoys strong positive productivity growth. The dashed line
represents that productivity of district B, which initially has very low productivity growth. Suppose that
charter schools are deterred from entering district A because it is already improving rapidly and parents
are pleased with the current course of events. Suppose that charter schools do enter district B, however,

41

and are able to claim a critical share of local parents (who were not pleased with the course that the
public school was on) by 1996. Finally, suppose that the district B does not respond to the charter school
competition: it remains on its initial path after 1996. A simple differences-in-differences strategy would
compare the change in district A’s level of productivity to the change in district B’s level of productivity.
(Notice the indications on the figure of possible “before” and “after” points that could be used for
comparison). In such a comparison, charter school competition would seem to have a negative effect
(although it truly has no effect), simply because charter schools enter where districts’ productivity trends
are already worse. On the other hand, if we compared the change in district A’s trend in productivity to
the change in district’ B trend in productivity, we would correctly see that district B did not respond to
competition.
Figures 2b and 2c illustrate situations in which district B responds positively when it begins to
face charter school competition (Figure 2b) and responds negatively when it begins to face competition
(Figure 2c). Observe that the difference between district A’s change in trend and district B’s change in
trend is an accurate indicator of the response to charter school competition. In short, the advantage of
detrended difference-in-differences is that it generates consistent estimates even when schools that
eventually face charter competition have different preexisting trends than schools that never face
competition. The disadvantage of detrended difference-in-differences is that it demands a lot of
information from the data because each school’s preexisting trend in achievement (not just its level of
achievement) must be identified. Because it is so demanding statistically, detrended difference-indifferences will not generate statistically significant estimates of effects that are small. Thus, we can
foresee that the estimated effects for higher grades (which are likely to be small because charter
competition affected them relatively little) are likely to be hard to identify using detrended difference-indifferences.
To summarize, it is important that difference-in-differences strategies control for each school’s

42

initial conditions (levels or trends). We need to control for schools’ unobservable characteristics,
especially characteristics that might attract charter competition. Difference-in-differences strategies also
control for what was happening to Michigan schools in general over the period. This is important as well
because Michigan enacted a major school finance reform in 1994 that affected all schools in the state.
The strategies will identify changes that occurred in schools facing competition, above and beyond
whatever occurred in other schools in the state (which were presumably responding to the finance
reform.
I use regression to carry out both the simple difference-in-differences analysis and the detrended
difference-in-differences analysis. The top panel of Table XI presents the estimated effect of charter
school competition on productivity, using the simple differences-in-differences analysis. The bottom
panel presents the estimated effect on productivity, using the detrended analysis. Formally, the
regression used in the top panel is:
(9)

where Achit is the scale score for school i in district j in year t, PPExpit is the per pupil expenditure for the
same school, I school is a vector of school indicator variables,
effects, I year is a vector of year indicator variables,

year

school fixed effects

is the vector of school fixed

is the vector of year fixed effects, Icharter6% is an

indicator variable for the district’s having at least 6 percent of enrollment in charter schools, and
charter competition

critical

picks up the effect of facing a critical level of charter competition. Note that the year fixed

effects pick up changes over time in the test or in the pressure to perform well on the test. The school
fixed effects pick up unobserved characteristics of each school that are stable.
The regression used in the bottom panel of Table XI is identical, except for the dependent
variable, which is the difference between this year’s and last year’s productivity:

43

(10)

The estimates in the top panel of Table XI indicate that Michigan public schools raised their
productivity in response to competition from charter schools. Productivity rose by 1.60 (scale points per
thousand dollars spent) based on the fourth grade reading exam, by 1.37 based on the fourth grade
mathematics exam, by 1.87 based on the seventh grade reading exam, and by 1.53 based on the seventh
grade mathematics exam. All of these estimates are statistically significantly different from zero with a
high level of confidence.
Moreover, the bottom panel of Table XI shows that charter school competition made Michigan
public schools improve their productivity relative to their own initial trends. Productivity trends based
on fourth grade tests improve to a degree that is statistically significant. Not surprisingly, given the
greater impact of charter competition on lower grades, the seventh grade results are statistically
insignificant.
It is difficult to interpret productivity improvements until we know whether they arise as a result
of achievement improving or per pupil spending falling or both phenomena occurring simultaneously.
Therefore, Table XII examines the effects of charter competition on achievement. Its structure is
identical to that of Table XI, except that it shows results for achievement instead of productivity. That is,
it leaves out the changes in productivity that come about as a result of changes in per pupil spending.
Table XII shows that the effect of charter school competition on achievement looks much like the effect
on productivity, which suggests that Michigan’s regular public schools raised their productivity mainly
by raising their achievement for a given level of per pupil spending, rather than by maintaining a steady

44

level of achievement and cutting their per pupil spending. For instance, the top panel of Table XII shows
that fourth grade reading and mathematics scores were, respectively, 1.21 and 1.11 scale points higher in
schools that faced charter competition after they began to face competition. Seventh grade reading and
mathematics scores were, respectively, 1.37 and 0.96 scale points higher. Recall that these improvements
in scores are not only relative to the schools’ own initial performance (the first difference), but also
relative to the gains made over the same by schools that did not face charter competition (the differencein-differences).
The bottom panel of Table XII, which shows detrended difference-in-differences results, shows
how the schools facing charter competition accomplished these achievement gains. For instance,
examine the fourth grade reading and mathematics coefficients, which are statistically significant. (The
seventh grade detrended difference-in-differences coefficients are, as in Table XI, statistically
insignificant.) Schools that faced charter competition raised their annual improvement in achievement by
2.40 scale points a year in fourth grade reading and 2.50 scale points in mathematics. Recall that this is a
change relative to their previous rate of change in achievement, which was actually about 0.4 scale points
lower on average than that of schools that were never faced with charter competition. In fact, the results
give us a picture much like that shown in Figure 3b: the achievement trend of schools that eventually
face charter competition is initially lower than that of other schools; but, once charter competition
commences, schools that face competition have a higher rate of growth.
The change in achievement for schools subjected to charter competition is statistically significant
and positive, but it is not unrealistically large, particularly when one considers that such schools were
making up for years of slower achievement growth. Even with mathematics and reading achievement
growth that is about 2.5 scale points per year better than that of other schools, a district like Detroit
would take approximately two decades catch up with the achievement of one of its affluent suburbs, like
Grosse Point. (Of course, it is possible that, as Detroit caught up, a suburb like Grosse Point would feel

45

competitive pressure to increase its own rate of achievement growth. This would lengthen the catch up
period but further raise Michigan students’ scores.)
Overall, the picture that one draws from Michigan is the following. Public schools that were
subjected to charter competition raised their productivity and achievement in response, exceeding not
only their own previous performance but also improving relative to other Michigan schools not subjected
to charter competition. The improvements in productivity and achievement appear to occur once charter
competition reaches a critical level that coincides with the enrollment at which charter schools’ taking
students would be easily discernible (not confused with regular fluctuations in enrollment). The increase
in productivity and achievement is larger and more precisely estimated in fourth grade, probably because
elementary schools faced more competition from charter schools than middle schools did.
The Effect of Charter Schools on Achievement in Arizona Public Schools
Like Michigan, Arizona enacted a charter school law in 1994. Arizona’s charter school law is
widely regarded as the most favorable to charter schools in the United States, as it allows charter schools
to have considerable fiscal and legal autonomy. There are also few constraints on the growth of charter
schools in Arizona. As a result, 5.3 percent of Arizona’s non-private enrollment was in charter schools
in 1999-00. This percentage is the highest of any American state.
In Arizona, state sponsored charter schools get a fee equal to the state’s share of revenue (45
percent of total revenue for a regular public school). District sponsored charter schools get a fee equal to
local per pupil revenue, but are less able to compete with the regular public schools because they must
seek renewal of their charters from the very districts with which they compete.
My evaluation of Arizona follows the same strategy as I employ for Michigan, so I will merely
highlight a few differences between the Michigan and Arizona situations here. In Arizona, a
municipality may contain multiple districts: for instance, a few elementary districts, a middle school
district, and a high school district. A local charter school may therefore be competing with multiple

46

districts. Therefore, I associate regular public schools and charter schools with a municipality, not a
district. All Arizona fourth and seventh graders were required to take the Iowa Test of Basic Skills
(ITBS) through 1995-96 and have been required to take the Stanford 9 test since then. The shift in the
test does not pose problems for the analysis because both tests offer national percentile rank scores
(which have a 0.97 correlation at the school level). Moreover, all of the schools switched tests in the
same year, so it is simple to establish each school’s pre-reform trend and post-reform trend allowing for a
state-wide shift in the intercept. 33 I use national percentile rank scores at the school level for the school
years from 1992-93 to 1999-00. I again use 6 percent of enrollment as the critical level at which charter
schools are held to be a non-negligible competitive threat. I use the same critical level as I use for
Michigan in order that the two states’ results be as comparable as possible. However, a variety of critical
levels between 6 percent and 11 percent produce similar results for Arizona.34
The right hand panel of Table X lists the Arizona municipalities that had at least six percent of
local enrollment in charter schools. Municipalities of all sizes are represented. The list includes some of
Arizona largest cities (Phoenix, Tempe, Scottsdale), some medium-sized cities (Avondale, Flagstaff,
Gilbert, Kingman), and 30 smaller municipalities.
As in Michigan, it is important that the Arizona difference-in-differences strategies control for
each school’s initial conditions. We need to control for schools unobservable characteristics, particularly
because some of those characteristics may actually attract charter competition. Also, it is important that
the difference-in-differences strategy generates estimates that control for what was happening to Arizona
schools in general over the period. While Arizona did not experience a major school finance reform, it
did have a very activist state department of education that enacted numerous programs (including a
school report card program so that parents would be better informed about performance).
Table XIII has the same structure as Table XI: the effect of charter competition on productivity
is estimated using difference-in-differences in the top panel and using detrended difference-in-differences

47

in the bottom panel. The equations estimated are (9) and (10), shown above.
The estimates in the top panel of Table XIII suggest that Arizona public schools raised their
productivity in response to competition from charter schools. Productivity rose by 0.55 (national
percentile points per thousand dollars spent) based on the fourth grade reading exam, by 0.70 based on
the fourth grade mathematics exam, by 0.38 based on the seventh grade reading exam, and by 0.53 based
on the seventh grade mathematics exam. All of these estimates are statistically significantly different
from zero with a high level of confidence.
The bottom panel of Table XIII shows that charter school competition made Arizona public
schools improve their productivity relative to their own initial trends. Productivity trends based on
fourth grade tests improve to a degree that is statistically significant. The seventh grade results are
statistically insignificant, but this is not surprisingly because charter competition had a greater impact on
lower grades.
As noted previously, interpreting productivity gains is hard until we look at one of the
components of productivity separately. Table XIV shows the effect of charter competition on
achievement–that is, it leaves out the changes in productivity that come about as a result of changes in
per pupil spending. The table has the same structure as the previous two tables. It shows that the effect
of charter school competition on achievement looks much like the effect on productivity, which suggests
that Arizona’s regular public schools raised their productivity mainly by raising their achievement for a
given level of per pupil spending, rather than by maintaining a steady level of achievement and cutting
their per pupil spending. The top panel of Table XIV shows that fourth grade reading and mathematics
scores were, respectively, 2.31 and 2.68 national percentile points higher in schools that faced charter
competition after they began to face competition. Seventh grade mathematics scores were 1.59 national
percentile points higher. (The estimate for seventh grade reading is statistically insignificant.) These are
important gains, especially when one recalls that these gains are not only relative to the schools’ own

48

initial performance (the first difference), but also relative to the gains made over the same by schools that
did not face charter competition (the difference-in-differences).
The bottom panel of Table XIV shows the detrended difference-in-differences results, which
suggest that schools facing charter competition raised achievement relative to their own previous trends.
Such schools raised their annual improvement in achievement by 1.40 national percentile points a year in
fourth grade reading and 1.39 national percentile points in mathematics. Recall that this is a change
relative to their previous rate of change in achievement, which was actually about 0.6 national percentile
points lower on average than that of schools that were never faced with charter competition. Again, the
results give us a picture much like that shown in Figure 3b: schools that eventually face charter
competition start with lower rate of growth in achievement, but begin to catch up with higher growth
rates, once charter competition commences.
The improvements in achievement among schools subjected to charter competition are
significant, but not unrealistically large. Even if its scores rise about 1.4 national percentile points more
each year than do the scores of schools that do not attract competition, the typical Phoenix area school
that is now competing with charter schools will take ten years to catch up with top performing Phoenix
area schools.
Overall, the evaluation of Arizona suggests conclusions that broadly similar to those one draws
from the Michigan evaluation. Charter competition focused on public schools that initially had
achievement and productivity growth that was below average, but charter competition induced public
schools to improve their productivity and achievement. The improvements are relative to the schools’
own past performance and also relative to gains made, over the same period, by schools that were not
subjected to charter competition.
Discussion of the Effects of Recent School Choice Reform
Are the productivity effects of the Milwaukee vouchers, Michigan charter schools, and Arizona

49

charter schools sufficient to make us think that choice could remedy the American school productivity
problem? All three forms of choice did boost productivity. If all schools in the United States were to
enjoy productivity growth rates like those in Milwaukee’s most treated schools, American schools could
return to their 1970-71 productivity levels in under a decade. Of course, we should be cautious about
extrapolating from the short voucher and charter school experiences described in this section. On the one
hand, the bursts of productivity growth seen in Milwaukee may settle down to a lower level of growth.
On the other hand, many of the long-term, general equilibrium effects of choice are not yet in operation.
In order to get a sense of the magnitude of the productivity effects, without having to extrapolate
so much, consider the following alternative question. Is it likely that the productivity effects of
Milwaukee’s voucher program (the “rising tide”) are likely to overwhelm the allocation effects for
students who experience the worst possible allocation changes in Milwaukee? We can get a sense of the
students who are available in Milwaukee to be reallocated if we examine the very high scoring (top
decile) and very low scoring (bottom decile) elementary schools in the city. Such schools score about 32
national percentile points apart on the math exam. Thus, a Milwaukee student’s worst case scenario
would be to experience a fall of about 32 national percentile points in his peer group. Moreover, let us
make the extreme assumption that the student is very influenced by his peers so that his scores fall by 32
points. This scenario is truly pessimistic! It is not strictly impossible, but it is so pessimistic that is
barely plausible. Nevertheless, if the student enjoys the achievement growth rates that Milwaukee
students in the most treated schools are enjoying now, he will “grow out of” the bad allocation effects
within 4.5 years. That is, he will be better off for having experienced vouchers within 5 years of the
voucher program affecting his schooling.

VII. Conclusions
In this paper, I have presented evidence that suggests that we should care deeply about the

50

productivity effects of school choice, not only because they potentially relieve that tensions generated by
the allocation effects of choice but also because American schools are in a productivity crisis. Policies
that boost American schools’ productivity are sorely needed, if only to return the schools to their 1970
productivity levels.
I have also explained how schools that face choice-driven incentives can be induced to raise their
productivity. I presented models of for-profit choice schools, non-profit choice schools, and even regular
public schools that just face inter-district choice.
In section V of the paper, I show evidence that traditional forms of choice raise school
productivity. I present results for traditional forms of choice because they can have long-term, general
equilibrium effects of productivity, such as may arise when schools enter or exit or when a different
reward system draws better individuals in teaching. If all schools in the United States experienced high
levels of the traditional forms of choice, school productivity might be as much as 28 percent higher than
it is today.
In section VI of the paper, I present evidence on three recent choice reforms: vouchers in
Milwaukee, charter schools in Michigan, and charter schools in Arizona. In each case, I find that regular
public schools boosted their productivity when exposed to competition. In fact, the regular public
schools responded to competitive threats that were surprisingly small. In each case, the regular public
schools increased productivity by raising achievement, not by lowering spending by while maintaining
achievement. This achievement-oriented response may, of course, be related to the nature of the actual
reforms. One can summarize the productivity effects of a reform like Milwaukee’s voucher program by
noting that a student would have better achievement in five years under the voucher program even if his
peer group plunged by the maximum amount possible in Milwaukee and his achievement fell one-for-one
with that of his peer group.
Of course, one must be cautious about extrapolating unduly from recent reforms or from

51

traditional school of choice that only partially mimic choice reforms. Nevertheless, it seems safe to
conclude that analyses that ignore the productivity effects of choice are likely to be misleading.
Improvements in productivity may be the key effects of choice.

52

References
Arizona Department of Education. Arizona Educational Directory. Electronic files. Phoenix, AZ:
Arizona Department of Education, 2000.
Arizona Department of Education. Arizona Pupil Achievement Testing, Statewide Report. 1988 through
1995 editions. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Department of Education, 2000.
Arizona Department of Education. Average Daily Membership and Average Daily Attendance Reports,
1988 through 2000 editions. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Department of Education, 2000.
Arizona Department of Education. School Report Card Program, 1996 through 2000 editions.
Electronic PDF files and spreadsheet files. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Department of Education,
2000.
Cutler, David M., and Louise Sheiner, “Managed Care and the Growth of Medical Expenditures,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6140, August 1997.
Downes, Thomas and David Schoeman, “School Finance Reform and Private School Enrollment:
Evidence from California,” Journal of Urban Economics, XLIII (1998), 418-43.
Economic Report of the President, 2000. Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office,
2000.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?”
American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 5 (December 2000), 1209-1238.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?” revision of
NBER Working Paper no. 4978, August 2000.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “The Effects of School Choice on Curriculum and Atmosphere," in Susan Mayer
and Paul Peterson, eds. Earning and Learning: How Schools Matter. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press,1999.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “The Productivity of Schools and Other Local Public Goods Producers,” Journal of
Public Economics, Vol. 74, No. 1 (November 1999), 1-30.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Would School Choice Change the Teaching Profession?” Journal of Human
Resources, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7866, August 2000.
Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer. “Not-for-Profit Entrepreneurs,” Journal of Public Economics,
forthcoming.
Jorgenson, Dale W. “The Contribution of Education to U.S. Economic Growth, 1948-73,” in Education
and Economic Productivity, Edwin Dean, ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harper & Row, Ballinger,
1984. pp. 95-162.
Jorgenson, Dale W, and Barbara M. Fraumeni, “The Accumulation of Human and Nonhuman Capital,

53

1948-84,” in The Measurement of Saving, Investment, and Wealth, Robert E. Lipsey, Helen
Stone Tice, eds., National Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 52.
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1989. pp. 227-82.
Jorgenson, Dale W, and Barbara M. Fraumeni, “Investment in Education and U.S. Economic Growth,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 94 (0), 1992. pp. S51-70.
Keesing, Donald B. “Labor Skills and Comparative Advantage,” American Economic Review, May
1966, pp. 249-58.
Krueger, Anne O. “Factor Endowments and Per Capita Income Differences among Countries,” The
Economic Journal, September 1968, pp. 641-59.
Leontief, Wassily. “Factor Proportions and the Structure of American Trade: Further Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November 1956, pp. 386-99.
Michel, Allen, and Israel Shaked. “Trucking Deregulation and Motor-Carrier Performance: The
Shareholders’ Perspective, Financial Review, Vol. 22 (2), May 1987. pp. 295-311.
Michigan Department of Education. Directory of Michigan Public School Academies. Lansing, MI:
Michigan Department of Education, 2000.
Michigan Department of Education. K-12 Database. Electronic file. Lansing, MI: Michigan
Department of Education, 2000.
Michigan Department of Education. Michigan Educational Assessment Program and High School Test
Results. Electronic file. Lansing, MI: Michigan Department of Education, 2000.
Michigan Department of Education. School Code Master. Electronic file. Lansing, MI: Michigan
Department of Education, 2000.
Moulton, Brent R. "Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates." Journal of
Econometrics, August 1986, 32(3), pp. 385-97.
Rees, Nina Shokraii. School Choice 2000: What’s Happening in the States. Washington, D.C.: The
Heritage Foundation, 2000.
Rose, Nancy L. “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking Industry,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 95 (6), December 1987. pp. 1146-78.
Traynor, Thomas L, and Patrick S. McCarthy. “Trucking Deregulation and Highway Safety: The Effect
of the 1980 Motor Carrier Act,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, Vol. 3 (4), December 1991.
pp. 339-48.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United States.
1976, 1983, 1995 and 1999 editions. Washington, DC: United States Government Printing
Office, 1976, 1983, 1995, and 1999.

54

United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Common Core of
Data: School Years 1987-88 through 1992-93. Computer file. Washington, D.C.: National
Center for Education Statistics, 1995.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Education
Statistics. 1979 through 1999 annual editions. Washington, DC: United States Government
Printing Office, 1980 through 2000.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. National Assessment of
Educational Progress Restricted Use Database. 1990 through 1999 editions. Electronic files.
Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, 1999.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. National Assessment of
Educational Progress 1999 Long-Term Trend Summary Data Tables. Electronic files.
Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, 2000.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. National Education
Longitudinal Study, 1988 : Third Follow-up. Restricted access computer file. Washington,
D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, 1994.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. School District Data
Book: 1990 Census School District Special Tabulation. Computer file. Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Statistics, 1994.
Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. Knowledge and Concepts Examinations: Test Results.
Electronic file. Madison, WI: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, 2000.
Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. Milwaukee Parental School Choice Program: Facts and
Figures. Madison, WI: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, 2000.
Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. Reading Comprehension Test Results. Electronic file.
Madison, WI: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, 2000.
Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. School Finance Data. Electronic file. Madison, WI:
Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, 2000.
Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. School Performance Report. Electronic file. Madison,
WI: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, 2000.

55

Figure 1
Productivity

Untreated

Somewhat
Treated

Most Treated

Time
1996-97

1998-99

1997-98

1999-00

Figure 2
Productivity

Trend is the Same,
Before and After

School that Does
Not Attract
Charter
Competition
School that
Attracts Charter
Competition
Trend is the Same,
Before and After

Time
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

56

Figure 3
Productivity

Trend is the Same,
Before and After

School that Does
Not Attract
Charter
Competition
School that
Attracts Charter
Competition
Trend is the Same,
Before and After

Time
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Figure 4
Productivity
Trend is the Same,
Before and After

School that Does
Not Attract Charter
Competition
School that
Attracts Charter
Competition
Trend is Worse After,
than it is Before

Time
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

57

Table I
School Productivity in the United States, 1971 to 1999
Productivity (NAEP Points Per Thousand Dollars of Per Pupil
Spending) is Based on the Test of
Reading
Math
Reading
Math
Reading
Math
for 9
for 9
for 13
for 13
for 17
for 17
Year Olds Year Olds Year Olds Year Olds Year Olds Year Olds
46.0
56.6
63.3
45.5
55.3
63.2
41.7
50.8
56.7
41.3
49.7
56.5
41.3
49.6
54.8
40.8
50.1
55.7
36.4
44.4
49.9
34.8
42.2
47.4
30.5
37.1
41.8
28.9
31.8
35.5
37.3
40.1
42.2
29.0
31.7
35.8
37.7
40.0
42.3
28.7
31.4
35.1
37.2
39.2
41.6
28.1
30.6
34.3
36.3
38.0
40.6
26.8
29.4
32.8
35.0
36.5
39.0

School Year
1970-71
1972-73
1974-75
1977-78
1979-80
1981-82
1983-84
1985-86
1987-88
1989-90
1991-92
1993-94
1995-96
1998-99
Productivity
was this
Percent
Higher in
Earliest Year
Shown

Actual Mean
NAEP Score
in 1998-99
What NAEP
Score would
Have Been in
1998-99 at
Productivity
of Earliest
Year Shown

no adjustments
adjust for
demographics
adjust for wages
of females with
adv. degrees

71.5%

54.9%

72.5%

58.1%

73.4%

62.0%

74.3%

58.2%

75.6%

62.3%

78.0%

65.1%

55.9%

39.1%

56.8%

42.1%

57.6%

45.5%

212

232

259

276

288

308

363

359

447

437

500

499

The source for this table is United States Department of Education Digest of Education Statistics 1999
and United States Department of Education, National Assessment of Educational Progress Long-Term
Trend Summary Data Tables [2000]

58

Table II
Metropolitan Areas with the Most Choice Among
Public School Districts

      
     

Metropolitan Area

Metropolitan Area

Choice Index

Choice Index

Albany, NY

0.97

Honolulu, HI*

0

Bergen-Pasaic, NJ

0.97

Miami, FL

0

Boston, MA

0.97

Las Vegas, NV

0

Pittsburgh, PA

0.96

Fort Lauderdale, FL

0

Riverside-San Barnardino, CA*

0.96

Daytona Beach, FL

0

Monmouth-Ocean, NJ

0.96

Fort Myers, FL

0

Minneapolis, MN

0.96

Albuquerque, NM

0

Atlantic City, NJ

0.95

Hagerstown, MD

0

San Francisco, CA*

0.95

Jacksonville, NC

0

St. Louis, MO

0.95

Sarasota, FL

0

Binghamton, NY

0.94

Odessa, TX

0

York, PA

0.94

Cheyenne, WY

0

Scranton, PA

0.94

Lakeland/Winter Haven, FL

0

Johnstown, PA

0.94

Reno, NV

0

San Jose, CA*

0.94

Boca Raton, FL

0

Dayton, OH

0.94

Wilmington, NC

0

Allentown, PA

0.94

Ocala, FL

0

Anaheim-Santa Ana, CA*

0.94

Melbourne/Palm Bay, FL

0

Seattle, WA

0.94

Panama City, FL

0

Rochester, NY

0.94

Bradenton, FL

0

Phoenix, AR

0.94

Portland, OR

0.07

Youngstown, OH

0.94

Midland, TX

0.11

*Hawaii is one school district, so that the school district is larger than the metropolitan area of Honolulu.
California have school districts that have almost no fiscal independence, so it is somewhat deceptive to
describe metropolitan areas like Riverside-San Bernardino, San Francisco, San Jose, and Anaheim-Santa
Ana as having significant choice among school districts. The source for this table is United States
Department of Education, School District Data Book.

59

Table III
Effect of Traditional Inter-District Choice on Productivity of Public Schools
Effect on Achievement
(numerator of productivity)
An Increase of 1 in the Index of Inter-District Choice
(no choice to maximum choice) Changes Achievement
by this many National Percentile Points

8th grade
reading
score

10th grade
math
score

12th grade
reading
score

3.818**
(1.591)

3.061**
(1.494)

5.770**
(2.208)

Effect on Per Pupil Spending
(denominator of productivity)
An Increase of 1 in the Index of Inter-District Choice
(no choice to maximum choice) Changes Per Pupil
Spending by this Percentage

-7.63 %**
(3.41)

Test scores are measured in national percentile points. Per pupil spending is measured in natural log
points so that the effect of choice is recorded in percentage terms. The coefficients shown come from
instrumental variables estimation of regressions in which the dependent variable is one of the
achievement measures shown or per pupil spending. The independent variables in the regression include
the index of choice (instrumented by a vector of streams variables, see text), several family background
variables (household income, gender, race, parents’ education), several neighborhood variables (mean
household income in district, income inequality in district, racial composition of district, racial and ethnic
homogeneity of district, educational attainment of adults in district), and several characteristics of the
metropolitan area (population, land area, mean household income, income inequality, racial composition,
racial homogeneity, ethnic homogeneity, educational attainment of adults, homogeneity of educational
attainment, region of the country). The regressions are weighted by school enrollment. Standard errors
are in parentheses and use formulas (Moulton 1986) for data grouped by districts and metropolitan areas.
The main source for this table is Hoxby [2000a]. Observations are metropolitan area students from the
National Education Longitudinal Study. The number of observations in each column are: 10,790 (from
211 metropolitan areas), 7,776 (from 211 metropolitan areas), and 6,119 (from 209 metropolitan areas).
The number of observations varies due to the availability of the dependent variable. Other data sources
are the School District Data Book, Common Core of Data, City and County Data Book, Geographic
Names Information System, and United States Geographic Survey.
**

indicates that the effect is statistically significantly different from zero at the 95 percent level of
confidence.

60

Table IV
Effect of Traditional Private School Choice on Productivity of Public Schools

Effect on Achievement
(numerator of productivity)

8th
grade
reading
score

8th
grade
math
score

12th
grade
reading
score

12th
grade
math
score

An Increase of 1 in the Index of Inter-District Choice
(no choice to maximum choice) Changes Achievement
by this many National Percentile Points

0.271**
(0.090)

0.249**
(0.090)

0.342**
(0.172)

0.371**
(0.171)

Effect on Per Pupil Spending
(denominator of productivity)
An Increase of 1 in the Index of Inter-District Choice
(no choice to maximum choice) Changes Per Pupil
Spending by this Percentage

0.85 %
(0.68)

Test scores are measured in national percentile points. The coefficients shown come from instrumental
variables estimation of regressions in which the dependent variable is one of the achievement measures
shown. The independent variables in the regression include the percentage of metropolitan area student
enrolled in private schools (instrumented by a vector of religious composition variables from 1950, see
text), several family background variables (household income, gender, race, parents’ education), several
neighborhood variables (mean household income in district, income inequality in district, racial
composition of district, racial and ethnic homogeneity of district, educational attainment of adults in
district), and several characteristics of the metropolitan area (population, land area, mean household
income, income inequality, racial composition, racial homogeneity, ethnic homogeneity, educational
attainment of adults, homogeneity of educational attainment, region of the country). The regressions are
weighted by school enrollment. Standard errors are in parentheses and use formulas (Moulton 1986) for
data grouped by districts and metropolitan areas.
The main source for this table is Hoxby [2000b]. Observations are metropolitan area students from the
National Education Longitudinal Study. Other data sources are the School District Data Book, Common
Core of Data, and City and County Data Book.
**

indicates that the effect is statistically significantly different from zero at the 95 percent level of
confidence.

61

Table V
Demographics of Wisconsin’s Most Treated, Somewhat Treated, and Untreated Comparison Schools
Percentage of
Students Eligible
for Free/
Reduced-Price
Lunch

Percentage of
Students who are
Black

Percentage of
Students who are
Hispanic

most treated schools

81.3

65.4

2.9

somewhat treated schools

44.5

49.1

13.7

untreated comparison schools

30.4

30.3

3.0

“Most Treated” schools were Milwaukee elementary schools where at least two-thirds of students are
eligible for free or reduced price lunches (and thus eligible for vouchers). There are 32 “Most Treated”
elementary schools, each of which has an average fourth grade enrollment of 72 students.
“Somewhat Treated” schools were Milwaukee elementary schools where fewer than two-thirds of
students are eligible for free or reduced price lunch (and thus eligible for vouchers). In all of these
schools, at least 30 percent of students are eligible for free lunch. There are 66 “Somewhat Treated”
elementary schools, each of which has an average fourth grade enrollment of 71 students.
The untreated comparison schools are all the Wisconsin elementary schools that:
(1) are urban;
(2) have at least 25 percent of their students eligible for free lunch;
(3) have at least 15 percent of their students being black.
There are 12 untreated comparison elementary schools, each of which has an average fourth grade
enrollment of 51 students.
The sources for this table are Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction [various 2000] and United
States Department of Education, School District Data Book.

62

Table VI
Productivity Time Trends in Wisconsin Most Treated, Somewhat Treated, and Untreated Comparison
Schools, from Regressions with School Fixed Effects
Productivity Calculation is Based on Exam in:
Math

Science

Social
Studies

Language

Reading

Annual Change in
Productivity for Most Treated
Schools

0.732**††
(0.071)

0.889**††
(0.072)

0.475*††
(0.070)

0.248**†
(0.066)

-0.035*†
(0.066)

Annual Change in
Productivity for Somewhat
Treated Schools

0.527
(0.056)

0.729**
(0.057)

0.327
(0.055)

0.123*
(0.052)

-0.141
(0.052)

Annual Change in
Productivity for Untreated
Comparison Schools

0.342
(0.172)

0.255
(0.176)

0.188
(0.170)

-0.081
(0.160)

-0.235
(0.162)

**

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” or “Somewhat Treated” schools is statistically
significantly different from the time trend for untreated comparison schools at the 95 percent level of
confidence.
*

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” or “Somewhat Treated” schools is statistically
significantly different from the time trend for untreated comparison schools at the 85 to 95 percent level
of confidence.
††

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” is statistically significantly different from the time
trend for “Somewhat Treated” schools at the 95 percent level of confidence.
†

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” is statistically significantly different from the time trend
for “Somewhat Treated” schools at the 85 to 95 percent level of confidence.
Productivity is measured in national percentile points per thousand dollars of per pupil spending, where
per pupil spending is measured in 1999 dollars. The deflator used is the Consumer Price Index. Each
regression includes a fixed effect for each school, a time trend for “most treated” schools, a time trend for
“somewhat treated” schools, and a time trend for untreated comparison schools. The observations are
school level averages based on fourth graders scores, and the regressions are therefore weighted by the
schools’ fourth grade enrollment.
The sources for this table are Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction [various 2000] and United
States Department of Education, School District Data Book.

63

Table VII
Productivity in Wisconsin’s Most Treated, Somewhat Treated, and Untreated Comparison Schools
1996-97

1999-00

annual
change

Productivity
Calculation is
Based on
Math Exam

most treated schools

4.18

6.09

0.64

somewhat treated schools

4.08

5.50

0.47

untreated comparison schools

5.65

6.65

0.33

Productivity
Calculation is
Based on
Science Exam

most treated schools

3.87

6.04

0.72

somewhat treated schools

3.91

5.67

0.59

untreated comparison schools

6.33

6.92

0.20

Productivity
Calculation is
Based on
Soc Stud Exam

most treated schools

5.05

6.19

0.41

somewhat treated schools

5.26

5.80

0.18

untreated comparison schools

6.90

7.21

0.10

Productivity
Calculation is
Based on
Language Exam

most treated schools

5.07

5.64

0.19

somewhat treated schools

5.07

5.28

0.07

untreated comparison schools

6.04

5.85

-0.06

Productivity
Calculation is
Based on
Reading Exam

most treated schools

5.35

5.31

-0.01

somewhat treated schools

5.46

4.98

-0.16

untreated comparison schools

6.68

6.04

-0.21

Productivity is measured in national percentile points per thousand dollars of per pupil spending, where
per pupil spending is measured in 1999 dollars. The deflator used is the Consumer Price Index. Statistics
are based on weighted averages over schools in the relevant group, where each school is weighted by its
enrollment.
The sources for this table are Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction [various 2000] and United
States Department of Education, School District Data Book.

64

Table VIII
Achievement Growth in Wisconsin’s Most Treated, Somewhat Treated, and Untreated Comparison
Schools, from Regressions with School Fixed Effects
Math

Science

Social
Studies

Language

Reading

Annual Change in Test Scores
for Most Treated Schools

7.06**††
(0.61)

8.39**††
(0.62)

4.97*††
(0.59)

2.98**†
(0.56)

0.57*†
(0.57)

Annual Change in Test Scores
for Somewhat Treated
Schools

5.27
(0.48)

6.99**
(0.49)

3.68
(0.46)

1.88*
(0.44)

-0.37
(0.45)

Annual Change in Test Scores
for Untreated Comparison
Schools

3.71
(1.48)

2.96
(1.50)

2.40
(1.43)

-0.10
(1.37)

-1.42
(1.38)

**

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” or “Somewhat Treated” schools is statistically
significantly different from the time trend for untreated comparison schools at the 95 percent level of
confidence.
*

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” or “Somewhat Treated” schools is statistically
significantly different from the time trend for untreated comparison schools at the 85 to 95 percent level
of confidence.
††

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” is statistically significantly different from the time
trend for “Somewhat Treated” schools at the 95 percent level of confidence.
†

indicates that the time trend for “Most Treated” is statistically significantly different from the time trend
for “Somewhat Treated” schools at the 85 to 95 percent level of confidence.
Test scores are measured in national percentile points. Each regression includes a fixed effect for each
school, a time trend for “most treated” schools, a time trend for “somewhat treated” schools, and a time
trend for untreated comparison schools. The observations are school level averages for fourth graders,
and the regressions are therefore weighted by the schools’ fourth grade enrollment.
The sources for this table are Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction [various 2000] and United
States Department of Education, School District Data Book.

65

Table IX
Fourth Grade Test Scores in Wisconsin’s Most Treated, Somewhat Treated,
and Untreated Comparison Schools

Math

Science

Social Studies

Language

Reading

1996-97

1999-00

annual
change

most treated schools

34.5

53.3

6.3

somewhat treated schools

33.7

48.2

4.8

untreated comparison schools

50.0

60.6

3.5

most treated schools

31.9

52.8

7.0

somewhat treated schools

32.3

49.7

5.8

untreated comparison schools

56.0

62.9

2.3

most treated schools

41.6

54.2

4.2

somewhat treated schools

43.4

50.7

2.4

untreated comparison schools

61.0

65.6

1.5

most treated schools

41.8

49.4

2.5

somewhat treated schools

41.8

46.2

1.5

untreated comparison schools

53.4

53.2

-0.1

most treated schools

44.2

46.5

0.8

somewhat treated schools

45.1

43.6

-0.5

untreated comparison schools

59.0

55.0

-1.3

Test scores are measured in national percentile points. Statistics are based on weighted averages over
schools in the relevant group, where each school is weighted by its enrollment.
The sources for this table are Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction [various 2000] and United
States Department of Education, School District Data Book.

66

Table X
Michigan School Districts and Arizona Municipalities
where at least 6% of Enrollment Entered Charter Schools
Michigan School Districts
Alba
Bark River-Harris
Big Rapids
Boyne Falls
Buena Vista
Caledonia
Charlevoix
Coldwater
Detroit**
Elk Rapids
Flat Rock
Forest Hills*
Godwin Heights
Grand Blanc*
Hartland
Hillsdale
Holland*

**

*

Huron
Inkster-Edison
Jackson*
Kalamazoo**
Kenowa Hills
Kentwood*
Lansing**
Mount Pleasant
Oak Park
Onekama
Pentwater
Petoskey
Sault Sainte Marie
Southfield*
Wayne-Westland**
Westwood
Wyoming*

Arizona Municipalities
*

Avondale
Benson
Bisbee
Camp Verde
Cave Creek
Chinle
Chino Valley
Clarkdale
Concho
Coolidge
Cottonwood
Enrenberg
Flagstaff*
Fountain Hills
Gilbert*
Globe
Golden Valley
Green Valley
Higley

Keams Canyon
Kingman*
Mayer
Page
Phoenix**
Pima
Prescott
Queen Creek
Safford
Saint Johns
Scottsdale**
Sedona
Show Low
Sierra Vista
Tempe**
Tuba City
Vail
Winslow

indicates a very large city district (enrollment in one grade typically exceeds 1,000).

indicates a large city district (enrollment in one grade is typically between 500 and 1,000).

The share of students who live in a district and attend charter schools is difficult to calculate because
students can attend charter schools located outside of their districts (Michigan) or municipality
(Arizona). The above statistics are calculated under the assumption that students attend a charter school
located in their district (Michigan) or municipality (Arizona).
The sources for this table are The sources for this table are Michigan Department of Education [2000
various] and Arizona Department of Education [2000 various].

67

Table XI
Effects of Charter School Competition on Michigan Public Schools' Productivity
Difference-in-Differences (Levels)

Dependent Var: Productivity based on:
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

1.60**
(0.45)

1.37**
(0.39)

1.87**
(0.86)

1.53**
(0.73)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Productivity Level After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

Detrended Difference-in-Differences

Dependent Var: Change in Productivity
(this year’s productivity minus last year’s) based on
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

0.31*
(0.17)

0.27*
(0.14)

0.15
(0.46)

0.06
(0.54)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Productivity Trend After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

The table is based on regressions of school level data from 1992-93 to 1999-2000. In the top panel, the
dependent variable is a school's productivity–specifically, a school’s scale scores divided by its per pupil
spending in thousands of 1999 dollars. In the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the trend (annual
change) in a school's productivity. The regression includes school indicator variables to pick up
characteristics of schools that are constant over the period (location, neighborhood, organization) and
year indicator variables that allow for state-wide changes from year to year in the test itself or in the
pressure to perform on the test. The inflator for per-pupil spending is the Consumer Price Index.
The numerator for productivity is the school’s scale score on the Michigan Assessment of Educational
Progress (MEAP) tests, which are administered to fourth and seventh graders. See the text for details on
the tests.
**

indicates that the change in productivity is statistically significantly different from zero with 95 percent
confidence, * indicates the same thing, but at the 90 percent level.
The sources for this table are Michigan Department of Education [2000 various].

68

Table XII
Effects of Charter School Competition on Michigan Public Schools' Achievement
Difference-in-Differences (Levels)

Dependent Var: Achievement Based on:
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

1.21**
(0.65)

1.11*
(0.62)

1.37**
(0.60)

0.96*
(0.48)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Achievement Level After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

Detrended Difference-in-Differences

Dependent Var: Change in Achievement
(this year’s achievement minus last year’s) based
on
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

2.40*
(1.37)

2.50**
(1.04)

0.25
(0.58)

0.77
(0.69)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Achievement Trend After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

The table is based on regressions of school level data from 1992-93 to 1999-2000. In the top panel, the
dependent variable is a school's achievement–specifically, a school’s scale scores on the Michigan
Assessment of Educational Progress (MEAP) tests, which are administered to fourth and seventh graders.
In the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the trend (annual change) in a school's scale scores. The
regression includes school indicator variables to pick up characteristics of schools that are constant over
the period (location, neighborhood, organization) and year indicator variables that allow for state-wide
changes from year to year in the test itself or in the pressure to perform on the test. From 1992 to 2000,
the means and standard deviation of schools’ average scores (weighted by the number of test takers)
were: mean of 611, standard deviation of 19 on fourth grade reading; mean of 528, standard deviation of
16 on fourth grade math; mean of 600, standard deviation of 17 on fourth grade reading; mean of 521,
standard deviation of 14 on fourth grade math.
**

indicates that the change in achievement is statistically significantly different from zero with 95
percent confidence, * indicates the same thing, but at the 90 percent level.

69

The sources for this table are Michigan Department of Education [2000 various].

70

Table XIII
Effects of Charter School Competition on Arizona Public Schools' Productivity
Difference-in-Differences (Levels)

Dependent Var: Productivity Based on:
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

0.55**
(0.16)

0.70**
(0.19)

0.38*
(0.21)

0.53**
(0.17)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Productivity Level After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

Detrended Difference-in-Differences

Dependent Var: Change in Productivity
(this year’s productivity minus last year’s) based on
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

0.31*
(0.17)

0.28**
(0.13)

0.33
(0.22)

0.35
(0.26)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Productivity Trend After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

The table is based on regressions of school level data from 1992-93 to 1999-2000. In the top panel, the
dependent variable is a school's productivity–specifically, a school’s national percentile rank (NPR)
score divided by its per-pupil spending in thousands of 1999 dollars. In the bottom panel, the dependent
variable is the trend (annual change) in a school's productivity. The regression includes school indicator
variables to pick up characteristics of schools that are constant over the period (location, neighborhood,
organization) and year indicator variables that allow for state-wide changes from year to year in the test
itself or in the pressure to perform on the test. The inflator for per-pupil spending is the Consumer Price
Index.
The numerator for productivity is the school’s national percentile rank on a nationally normed
standardized test (the Iowa Test of Basic Skills or the Stanford 9). See the text for details on the tests.
**

indicates that the change in productivity is statistically significantly different from zero with 95 percent
confidence, * indicates the same thing, but at the 90 percent level.
The sources for this table are Arizona Department of Education [1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 various].

71

Table XIV
Effects of Charter School Competition on Arizona Public Schools' Achievement
Difference-in-Differences (Levels)

Dependent Var: Achievement Based on:
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

2.31**
(0.69)

2.68**
(0.79)

1.11
(0.95)

1.59*
(0.89)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Achievement Level After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

Detrended Difference-in-Differences

Dependent Var: Change in Achievement
(this year’s productivity minus last year’s) based on
Fourth
Grade
Reading
Exam

Fourth
Grade
Math
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Reading
Exam

Seventh
Grade
Math
Exam

1.40*
(0.79)

1.39*
(0.81)

1.48
(1.13)

1.29
(1.10)

regression includes school fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

regression includes year fixed effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

Change in Achievement Trend After District is
Faced with Charter School Competition
(charter schools represent at least 6% of
enrollment in district)

The table is based on regressions of school level data from 1992-93 to 1999-2000. In the top panel, the
dependent variable is a school's achievement–specifically, a school’s national percentile rank (NPR)
score on a nationally normed standardized test (the Iowa Test of Basic Skills or the Stanford 9). See the
text for details on the tests.. In the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the trend (annual change) in a
school's achievement. The regression includes school indicator variables to pick up characteristics of
schools that are constant over the period (location, neighborhood, organization) and year indicator
variables that allow for state-wide changes from year to year in the test itself or in the pressure to perform
on the test.
**

indicates that the change in achievement is statistically significantly different from zero with 95
percent confidence, * indicates the same thing, but at the 90 percent level.
The sources for this table are Arizona Department of Education [1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000 various].

72

1. Strictly speaking, what is required is that (1) the current distribution of peers or teaching methods is
inoptimal and (2) that school choice would cause people to redistribute themselves in such a way that a
Pareto improvement in the distribution of peers or teaching methods would occur. It is reasonable to
think that families might redistribute themselves so as to achieve better alignment between teaching
methods and their children’s learning styles. It is less reasonable to think that families, acting
independently, could implement a Pareto improvement in peer effects.
2. See, for instance, Hoxby [2001].
3. The high school drop-out rate, for instance, only reflects variation in the outcomes of low achieving
students. Students’ self-selecting into the tests generates incurable biases when the SAT or ACT are
used for comparisons over time or across schools. The SAT and ACT also only reflect variation in the
outcomes of high achieving students. High school grades have been shown to be relative measures that
cannot be compared successfully across schools.
4. The sources for the table is United States Department of Education [2000].
5. The calculation is
,
of characteristics of the 1971-72 student population, pps1998 is
where ' is productivity, X1973 is the vector

per-pupil spending in 1998-99, and ˆ is the vector of estimated coefficients from the regression:
.
NAEP1998 is a 1998-99 NAEP score (in reading, math, or science) and X1998 is the vector of characteristics
of the 1998-99 student population.
6. The source of data for the calculations described is United States Department of Education [1999].
7. Earnings of full-time, full-year females working in professional specialty occupations are taken from
the Statistical Abstract of the United States [1976, 1983, 1995, 1999].
8. One could criticize the constant-student productivity by saying that some student characteristics mean
different things in 1998 than in 1971. For instance, coming from a single-parent family is more common
in 1998 than in 1971, and–thus–it may be a different experience now than it was in 1971. On the whole,
however, such criticisms work in the wrong direction. Most of the student characteristics that are more
common now than in the past are also less stigmatized–being a minority, from a single-parent family,
from the South or Southwest, et cetera. The decline in productivity would be larger if one were to take
account of the fact that having a single-parent, say, is not as bad for achievement as it was in 1971.
9. Other countries can import human capital too, so imported human capital cannot be cheap relative to
its cost in the rest of the world. Moreover, under a logical extension of current trends, countries that are
currently net exporters of human capital would become the world’s net exporters of human capital
intensive products.
10. Managed care organizations include health maintenance organizations, primary provider networks,
and certain other physician and hospital networks.
11. See Economic Report of the President 2000. The literature on the productivity effects of managed
care is voluminous but Cutler [1997] may serve as a good introduction to it. .

73

12. Pooling may occur even if the schools are in different areas and offer somewhat different levels of
quality.
13. This point has been discussed by numerous researchers. See Glaeser and Shleifer [forthcoming] for
a recent model of non-profit entrepreneurs and for a review of the literature.
14. The mechanism described is the subject of Hoxby [1999b], where it is described in much more
detail.
15. The sources are United States Department of Education, Digest of Educational Statistics, 2000 and
United States Department of Education, National Assessment of Educational Progress Long Term Trend
Summary Data Tables.
16. Wages and income later in life are additional measures of achievement that are useful complements
to measures based on standardized tests. They are useful because they are meaningful to people in
concrete way and because they are measured in dollars, as is the denominator of productivity. There are,
however, several problems with using wages and income to measure achievement, including a paucity of
data linked to schools, questionable validity for women, and the impossibility of analyzing a reform until
at least 20 years after its occurrence. I do not present wage-based measures of productivity here, but see
Hoxby [2000a] for some wage-based estimates.
17. The quality of a private school can be measured in various ways, the simplest of which is simply the
amount of money the private school spends on educating a student. Because private schools face strong
incentives to be productive, their costs are a good guide to their quality. Private school expenditure
sometimes understates the true cost of educating a private school student because, especially in schools
with religious affiliation, labor is donated by volunteers and church buildings are used for educational
purposes.
18. See Hoxby [2000c] for more on this point.
19. This typically took place about the time of Anglo-American settlement, which varies with the area of
the country. Many of the original petitions for district boundaries cite streams as a reason for not
extending the district lines further. Streams are by far the most common natural boundary for school
districts. Note, however, that many of the streams that are preserved in boundaries are small and have
never had industrial importance. Today, many of the boundary streams are of negligible importance in
travel.
20. Per-pupil spending is the denominator in the measure of productivity. Because I compare
productivity across metropolitan areas with widely varying costs of living, I adjust per-pupil spending
using the Bureau of Labor Statistics metropolitan cost-of-living indices.
21. I consistently use the words “statistically significant” to mean “statistically significantly different
from zero (for a two sided test) with at least 90 percent confidence.”
22. See Hoxby [2000b] for further comment on this point.
23. See Rees [2000] for a thorough review of current school choice reforms. In most cases where I have
not used materials directly obtained from the relevant state’s department of education, I have relied upon
Rees for a description of reforms.

74

24. As a rule, any child who is eligible for free or reduced-price lunch is also eligible for a voucher. The
actual cut-off for reduced-price lunch is 185 percent of the federal poverty level, but the difference
between 175 percent (the cut-off for the vouchers) and 185 percent is not rigorously enforced (and would
be difficult to enforce).
25. The information on the Milwaukee program and Wisconsin schools is obtained from several
publications of the Wisconsin Department of Instruction [all 2000].
26. The future of the program is still somewhat in doubt for two reasons. First, state Supreme Courts’
opinions conflict on the question of whether it is constitutional to have vouchers that can be used at
schools with religious affiliation. Therefore, it is likely that the United States Supreme Court will
eventually rule on such vouchers. Second, the Wisconsin legislature has threatened to fund the vouchers
at such a low level that they are unusable.
27. It is fairly obvious that better-off schools will have better productivity if one does not control for
demographic differences among students. It is less obvious that better-off schools will also have better
productivity growth, but they do in fact. For instance, prior to 1996, Wisconsin elementary students took
statewide tests in reading (only). In the pre-voucher period, productivity growth was negative (based on
these reading tests) in the schools that were later to become most treated and somewhat treated. In
contrast, productivity growth (based on reading tests) was positive in the schools that form the untreated
comparison group.
28. Note that all of these demographic numbers reflect what the schools looked like in 1990, before the
voucher program was enacted. This is the correct method for choosing treated and control schools. One
does not want to measure the extent of treatment using measures of student composition that potentially
reflect how students reacted to the voucher program.
29. Actually, we expect the untreated schools to have higher initial productivity growth because richer
schools tend to have better productivity growth, all else equal. This tendency (richer schools, higher
productivity growth) will make the difference-in-difference estimates understate the effect of
competition on productivity.
30. The information on Michigan charter schools and all the data on Michigan schools are taken from
publications of the Michigan Department of Educaton [all 2000].
31. Results for a critical level of 7 or 8 percent are available from the author. If one chooses a critical
level much higher than 8 percent, the results depend unduly on just a few districts–simply because only a
few districts ever face more than an 8 percent drawing away of their students. Descriptive statistics for
the Michigan data set are also available from the author.
32. Note that the charter schools’ share of local enrollment is based, in Table X, on the assumption that
students attend charter schools in the district in which they reside. Because students who are in
particularly unappealing districts are disproportionately likely to attend a charter school outside their
district if they do attend a charter school, the statistics on which the table is based slightly understate the
enrollment losses of bad districts. It is possible to construct estimates of the share of a district’s students
who attend charter schools, but such estimates are somewhat noisy and (in any case) generate results that
are qualitatively similar to the results shown in Tables XI and XII. The alternative set of results may be
found in the working paper version of this paper, available from the author.
33. More precisely, a separate statewide shift is estimated for each percentile rank. The information on
Arizona charter schools and all the data on Arizona schools are taken from publications of the Arizona

75

Department of Education [1988 through 1995, various 2000].
34. These results and descriptive statistics for the Arizona data set are available from the author.
Choosing a level much higher than 11 percent makes the results depend unduly on just a few
districts–simply because only a few districts ever face more than an 11 percent drawing away of their
students.

