                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MIDDLEMEN VERSUS MARKET MAKERS:
                            A THEORY OF COMPETITIVE EXCHANGE


                                                 John Rust
                                                George Hall


                                           Working Paper 8883
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w8883


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2002


We received helpful feedback from Ian Domowitz, Bruno Jullien, Deborah Minehart, Daniel Spulber, the
editor John Cochrane, three anonymous referees, participants at the 2001 Summer Meetings of the
Econometric Society, and seminar participants at Harvard Business School, the University of Maryland,
CEMFI, U.S. Justice Department, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Universidad Torcuato di Tella, Victoria University, and Yale University. We are
especially grateful to an anonymous contact at a U.S. steel service center (i.e., a steel “middleman”) who
gave us access to confidential data on steel prices and inventories that initiated our inquiry into this topic.
We are grateful for financial support from National Science Foundation grant 9905145. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by John Rust and George Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Middlemen versus Market Makers: A Theory of Competitive Exchange
John Rust and George Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 8883
April 2002
JEL No. D4, D5, D6, D8



                                              ABSTRACT


        We present a model in which the microstructure of trade in a commodity or asset is endogenously
determined. Producers and consumers of a commodity (or buyers and sellers of an asset) who wish to
trade can choose between two competing types of intermediaries: “middlemen” (dealer/brokers) and
“market makers” (specialists). Market makers post publicly observable bid and ask prices, whereas the
prices quoted by different middlemen are private information that can only be obtained through a costly
search process. We consider an initial equilibrium where there are no market makers but there is free
entry of middlemen with heterogeneous transactions costs. We characterize conditions under which entry
of a single market maker can be profitable even though it is common knowledge that all surviving
middlemen will undercut the market maker’s publicly posted bid and ask prices in the post-entry
equilibrium. The market maker’s entry induces the surviving middlemen to reduce their bid-ask spreads,
and as a result, all producers and consumers who choose to participate in the market enjoy a strict increase
in their expected gains from trade. We show that strict Pareto improvements occur even in cases where
the market maker’s entry drives all middlemen out of business, monopolizing the intermediation of trade
in the market.



John Rust                                                 George Hall
Department of Economics                                   Department of Economics
University of Maryland                                    Yale University
College Park, MD 20742                                    P.O. Box 208268
and NBER                                                  New Haven, CT 06520-8268
Tel: 301-405-3489                                         and NBER
Fax: 301-405-3542                                         Tel: 203-432-3566
Email: jrust@gemini.econ.umd.edu                          Fax: 203-432-6248
Web: http://gemini.econ.umd.edu/jrust                     Email: george.hall@yale.edu
                                                          Web: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~gjh9
      In the early 1970s, the firm [ Cantor Fitzgerald ] vaulted to nearly monopolistic pre-eminence
      in the bond market by doing something no one else had done before: Cantor began posting
      government bond prices on computer screens for clients, mainly Wall Street bond dealers,
      bringing transparency to a market where opacity and rumor had been the norm.1

      Why would I want to post my prices on the web? If I did that, my competitors could see what
      I am charging and would undercut my prices by a few pennies, and I would lose most of my
      business.2


1 Introduction

We observe significant differences in the microstructure of trade in various commodities and assets. A
significant share of trade in commodities such as wheat and pork bellies and in financial assets such as
common stocks and Treasury securities is intermediated by market makers (also known as specialists), at
publicly posted bid and ask prices. Market makers typically either own or are members of an exchange
such as the New York Stock Exchange or the Chicago Board of Trade. However for other commodities
such as steel, virtually all trade is conducted by middlemen (also known as dealerbrokers in financial
markets or “steel service centers” in the steel market), at individually negotiated prices. In the steel market
there are no market makers or exchanges where valid current bid and ask prices are publicly posted.
Instead, transaction prices are private information, forcing traders in the steel market to engage in search
and bargaining to find a good price.
    It is commonly believed that market makers and exchanges are appropriate for trading highly stan-
dardized commodities and assets for which the volume is sufficiently large to produce “thick” and “active”
markets. However, most types of steel coil and plate are at least as standardized as wheat or pork bellies,
and the volume of trade in these particular steel products is at least as large. A number of potential market
makers such as MetalSite, e-STEEL, and Enron have recently attempted to enter the steel market, but so
far without success. Enron went bankrupt in December 2001, MetalSite’s website was closed in June 2001
(although it was reopened in November 2001), and e-STEEL changed its name to NewView Technologies
in November 2001, reflecting a new focus away from steel. Thus, at present no market makers handle
a significant share of trade in steel. So the first puzzle is to explain why market makers such as Cantor
Fitzgerald have been successful in entering and transforming the trade in bonds, but not in steel.
   1 Zuckerman, Gregory, Ann Davis, and Suzanne McGee, “Before and After: Why Cantor Fitzgerald Can Never Re-Create
What It Once Was,” Wall Street Journal, October 26, 2001, page A1.
  2 A private communication to the authors by a middleman in the steel service center industry.




                                                        2
    The second quotation above suggests that even though new information technologies such as the In-
ternet make it nearly costless to post and update bid and ask prices publicly, it might still be unprofitable
for potential market makers to enter markets such as steel. If buyers of steel are accustomed to searching,
then middlemen can easily respond to the entry of a market maker by slightly undercutting the market
maker’s prices, stealing most of his business. So the second puzzle is to explain how a market maker such
as Cantor Fitzgerald can successfully enter a market such as the bond market if the existing middlemen
can respond by undercutting the market maker’s publicly posted bid and ask prices.
    As a step toward answering these puzzles and understanding the differences in the microstructure of
trade that we observe across various markets, we present a simple model in which the share of trade
intermediated by middlemen and market makers is endogenously determined. Our model also provides
insights into the likely effects of the huge reduction in search and transactions costs resulting from the
information revolution and the advent of the World Wide Web. These technologies have facilitated the
rapid emergence of market makers operating web-based “B2B exchanges” that intermediate business-to-
business trade, threatening the existence of traditional middlemen in these markets.3
    Our model is an extension of a model of intermediation and search due to Spulber (1996a). Spulber’s
model has three types of agents: buyers (consumers), sellers (producers), and price-setting middlemen.
Since middlemen are often called dealers, we refer to Spulber’s model as an analysis of the dealer mar-
ket. Our main extension is to consider the effect of introducing a fourth type of agent, market makers. In
Spulber’s model, middlemen are assumed to be the exclusive avenue of exchange: every producer wishing
to sell a commodity (or asset) and every consumer wishing to purchase it is required to transact via mid-
dlemen rather than trade directly with each other. Transactions in the dealer market occur over a range of
individually negotiated prices — the outcome of a costly sequential search process.
    We study the effect of introducing a monopolist market maker on the search equilibrium in the dealer
market. The market maker can be conceptualized as operating an exchange on which publicly observable
bid and ask prices are posted. Producers and consumers now have the option of trading on the exchange
at the publicly posted bid and ask prices, or searching for a better price in the dealer market. Since the
prices quoted by middlemen are not publicly posted, producers and consumers must obtain them by direct
   3 Therate of growth of B2B markets is nothing short of phenomenal: Forrester Research predicts that sales via computerized
market makers will expand fivefold in the next two years and will account for at least 25 percent of all sales in 2002, and a total
volume of $1.4 trillion in transactions by 2004. These estimates may be conservative: alternative forecasts quoted in a recent
symposium on B2B e-commerce published in the Journal of Economic Literature are substantially higher. See, for example,
Lucking-Reiley and Spulber (2001) and Bakos (2001) for even more optimistic forecasts of rapid growth in retail e-commerce.




                                                                3
contact (e.g., a telephone call), and the delays associated with searching constitute an implicit search cost.
    Entry by a monopolist market maker is profitable even if the market maker has higher per unit transac-
tions cost than most middlemen, provided that it is lower than that of the least efficient middleman operat-
ing in the dealer market before the entry of the market maker. If so, the entry of the market maker drives the
least efficient middle men out of business and segments the market: the highest-valuation consumers and
the lowest-cost producers (i.e., those with the largest implicit search costs) trade with the market maker,
and the residual set of intermediate-valuation consumers and intermediate-cost producers search for better
prices in the dealer market. All of the surviving middlemen undercut the bid-ask spread charged by the
monopolist market maker. Thus the entry of the monopolist market maker creates additional competition
that results in significant reductions in the bid-ask spreads in the dealer market, uniformly higher consumer
and producer surpluses, and higher trading volumes.
    Middlemen and market makers represent competing institutions for the intermediation of trade. A
market maker offers a superior exchange technology for the highest-valuation buyers and the lowest-cost
sellers, and its entry raises welfare and reduces bid-ask spreads compared with the free-entry search equi-
librium when all intermediation is done by middlemen. On the other hand, free entry of middlemen
provides a “competitive fringe” that limits the market power of a monopolist market maker. Without the
competitive threat of middlemen, a monopolist market maker would quote a wider bid-ask spread, and con-
sumer and producer surplus would be significantly lower. However in some situations the market maker
can enter the market, drive all middlemen out of business, and set unconstrained monopoly bid and ask
prices in the post-entry equilibrium. Even this monopoly outcome results in a strict Pareto improvement
relative to the free-entry equilibrium that existed in the dealer market before the entry of the market maker.
    The relative share of trade intermediated by middlemen rather than the market maker depends on three
parameters: the intertemporal discount rate δ and the per unit transactions costs of the market maker km
and most efficient middleman k. For a broad range of parameter values, the market maker coexists with
the dealer market. However if the market maker’s per unit transactions cost km exceeds that of the least
efficient middleman k operating in the dealer market before the entry of a market maker, then entry by
the market maker is not profitable and only middlemen will exist in equilibrium. Conversely, if the per
unit transactions cost of the most efficient middleman k is sufficiently high relative to the transactions cost
of the market maker km , then the entry of the market maker drives all middlemen out of business. The
dealer market can survive the entry of a market maker even if the transactions cost k of the most efficient
middleman exceeds the transactions cost km of the market maker – provided it is not too much greater.


                                                      4
    Our analysis is similar in some respects to those of Gehrig (1993) and Neeman and Vulkan (2001),
although our conclusions are quite different.4 Gehrig studies a model in which producers and consumers
of a commodity have the option of trading at publicly posted bid and ask prices on an exchange run by a
market maker (which Gehrig calls an “intermediary”), or entering a “search market” in which consumers
and producers are randomly matched and engage in bargaining in an attempt to negotiate a mutually
acceptable price. Gehrig’s model differs from ours primarily in the formulation of the search market; he
models the bargaining process in the search market as a static (one-shot) random matching game in which
consumers and producers negotiate directly with each other rather than transacting through middlemen.
In Gehrig’s model the market maker always coexists with the search market and charges the same bid-ask
spread and trades the same volume regardless of the level of search costs in the search market. Neeman
and Vulkan (2001) obtain a very different result, namely, that the market maker can never coexist with the
search market in equilibrium. In their model agents have a choice between trading at posted prices with a
market maker in a centralized market and engaging in direct negotiations with a randomly chosen producer
or consumer in the search market. They prove a result similar to ours, namely, that the highest-valuation
consumers and lowest-cost producers prefer to trade with the market maker rather than engage in direct
negotiation. However, in their model the entry of a market maker causes a complete unraveling of direct
negotiations, and in equilibrium all trade is conducted in the centralized market by the market maker.
    In section 2 we review a dynamic equilibrium model, introduced by Spulber (1996a), of trade with
search among competing middlemen. In section 3 we consider whether the dealer market equilibrium
characterized in section 2 can be upset by the entry of a monopolist market maker who runs a centralized
exchange with publicly posted prices. In section 4 we consider the case where there is free entry of market
makers, resulting in Bertrand-style competition that forces the bid-ask spread down to the transactions cost
of the most efficient market maker. Although our interest in alternative intermediation technologies arose
from our observations of the microstructure of trade in the steel market, we believe our theory provides
insights into the microstructure of trade in a wide range of markets. In section 5 we discuss three other
markets besides steel: the market for goods in Radford’s (1945) P.O.W. camp, the U.S. equity market,
and the U.S. Treasury market. In section 6 we offer some concluding remarks and suggestions for further
research.
   4 We  discuss related papers by Baye and Morgan (2001), Caillaud and Jullien (2001), Pirrong (2000), and Hendershott and
Zhang (2001) later in the paper. A number of other studies on the role of intermediaries deserve mention although we do not
explicitly discuss them. An incomplete list includes Garman (1976), Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1987), Yanelle (1989), Yavas
(1992), and O’Hara (1995).



                                                            5
2 Search Equilibrium with Middlemen but No Market Maker

Our point of departure is a simple exchange economy in which the only intermediaries are middlemen.
We present a modified version of Spulber’s (1996a) equilibrium search model with three types of agents:
producers, consumers, and middlemen. In this model producers and consumers cannot trade directly with
each other. Instead all trade must be intermediated by middlemen. To keep our presentation self-contained,
we review Spulber’s model in this section before presenting our extension of his model in which we analyze
the effect of introducing a fourth type of agent — a market maker. Since middlemen of the type studied in
this section are called dealers in a variety of financial and commodity markets, we refer to Spulber’s work
as an analysis of a competitive dealer market.
    The dealer market consists of a continuum of heterogeneous producers, consumers, and middlemen.
A producer of type v can produce at most one unit of the good at a cost of v. A consumer of type v
can consume at most one unit of the good and is willing to pay at most v to consume it. Producers and
consumers remain in the market for a random (geometrically distributed) length of time before permanently
exiting. Let λ
                  0  1    be the probability of a producer or a consumer exiting the market in period t. A
consumer or producer may randomly exit before having a chance to consume or sell a unit of the good,
respectively. However, if they succeed in trading prior to exiting, the unitary supply-demand assumption
implies that these individuals will not make any subsequent transactions after their initial trade.
    Suppose that whenever a producer or a consumer exits the market, he or she is replaced by a new
                                                                                                  
producer or consumer who is randomly drawn from U 0 1 , the uniform distribution on the 0 1 interval.
Suppose that at time t 0 the initial distribution of types v of producers and consumers is U  0  1 . Then
in all subsequent periods t 1  2  3     the distribution of types will also be U  0  1 . Thus U  0  1 is the
unique, invariant distribution of this entry and exit process, and in each subsequent period t 1  2  3          a
fraction λ of the population of producers and consumers exits the market and is replaced by an inflow of
an equal fraction of new producers and consumers.
    In a dealer market there is no central exchange or marketplace where the commodity is traded. In
particular, there is no advertising or central, publicly accessible site where middlemen can post bid and ask
prices. Instead, the only way for producers and consumers to obtain price quotes is by directly contacting
individual middlemen. Middle men are infinitely lived and set a pair of stationary bid and ask prices
to maximize their expected discounted profits. There are a continuum of middlemen indexed by k, the
marginal costs of executing each trade between a producer and a consumer. Transactions costs k are


                                                          6
                                                   
distributed uniformly over the interval k 1 . The lower bound k is the marginal transactions cost of the
most efficient middleman. It may not be possible for all potential middlemen to enter the dealer market and
make a profit. We will let k denote the transactions cost of the least efficient middleman who participates
in the dealer market in equilibrium. Thus profits earned by this marginal middleman k are zero, although
the more efficient, inframarginal middlemen with k
                                                                         k  k       can earn positive profits in equilibrium. A
                                                                               
middleman of type k  k  k  chooses a pair of stationary bid and ask prices b k   a k   that maximizes his
                                      
expected discounted profits, where a k  denotes the ask price at which the middleman is willing to sell to
                
consumers, and b k  denotes the bid price at which the middleman is willing to purchase from producers.
    Producers and consumers engage in sequential search. Each period a searcher obtains a single price
                                                                        
quote from one middleman, drawn randomly from U k k . Although there is no explicit cost to obtain a
price quote, there is an implicit “delay cost” involved in searching for prices. All producers and consumers
discount the future using the factor ρ 1
                                          λ . The first term in this composite discount factor, ρ  0  1 ,
                                                       
reflects the rate of time preference, and the second, 1  λ  , is the “survival probability” that accounts for
the possibility of random exit from the market prior to trading (in which case the exiting agent fails to
receive any gains from trade).5 The stationarity of the bid and ask prices charged by middlemen together
with the heterogeneity in their transactions costs implies that the sequence of realized price quotes obtained
by consumers and producers are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) draws from the stationary
                                                                                            
distributions of bid and ask prices charged by middlemen. Let Fα a denote the distribution of ask prices
                                
facing consumers and Fβ b denote the distribution of bid prices facing producers.
               
    Let Vc a v denote the present discounted value of an optimal search strategy for a consumer of type
v who has received a quoted ask price of a from a randomly chosen middleman. The consumer has three
choices: a) do nothing (i.e., do not buy at the ask price a and do not search), b) accept the middleman’s
ask price of a, or c) reject the middleman’s ask price of a and continue searching for a better price. These
three options are reflected in the following Bellman equation for the consumer’s problem:

                                                  
                               V a  v                 a  ρ  1  λ                   
                                                                                    a
                                 c          max 0 v                                     Vc a v Fα da                            (1)
                                                                                a

           
where a a is the support of the distribution of ask prices charged by middlemen. The value of 0 in
the Bellman equation corresponds to the option of not searching, not trading, and not consuming. All
    5 It is possible to extend the model by including explicit per period search costs γ. However, it is not difficult to show that a

                                                                                                
stationary equilibrium in the dealer market cannot exist if γ 0. Therefore we restrict γ 0 in the analysis that follows, accounting
only for the implicit search costs resulting from exiting the market before having an opportunity to execute a transaction (the λ
parameter), and the discounting of delayed gains from trade (the ρ parameter).



                                                                   7
consumers with sufficiently low valuations will choose this option. Clearly, any consumer with valuation
v      a will never search or trade in the dealer market.
        Now consider the remaining high-valuation consumers. As is well known, the optimal search strategy
for a consumer of type v takes the form of a reservation price rule: accept any ask price less than the
                                           
reservation price rc v , where rc v is the function implicitly defined by the unique solution to

                                                      v    rc v
                                                                   1   rc v
                                                                                            
                                                                                    Fα a da                                            (2)
                                                                       δ a

where
                                                                   !  1 
                                                                        ρ 1  λ
                                                      δ      δρλ                                  1                                    (3)

is the composite exit-adjusted per period discount rate. It is not difficult to see from equation (2) that rc v
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                           
is a strictly increasing function of v on the interval vc 1 , where vc is the marginal consumer for whom
the gain from entering the dealer market is zero. We have vc
                                                                                                   #"
                                                                                              rc vc       rc       a.
              
        Let V b  v 
              p         denote the present discounted value of an optimal search strategy of a producer of type v
facing a bid price of b. The Bellman equation for the producer is given by

                                         #
                                   Vp b v         max 0 b $   v ρ  1  λ  
                                                                                          b
                                                                                                       %&
                                                                                              Vp b v Fβ db                             (4)
                                                                                      b


             
where b b is the support of the distribution of bid prices offered by middlemen. The optimal strategy
for a producer of type v also takes the form of a reservation price strategy, but in this case it is optimal to
                                                                                     
accept any bid price b that exceeds the reservation price rp v , given by the unique solution to

                                                             ' 1   1 
                                                                        b
                                                                                               
                                                                  δ 
                                                  v       rp v                        Fβ b db                                          (5)
                                                                       rp v

                                  
In the producer case rp v is monotonically increasing over the interval 0 vp where v p
                                                                                                                        ("
                                                                                                                        rp vp     rp     b
is the marginal producer for whom the expected gain from searching is zero.
                                                                               
        Figure 1 graphs the reservation price functions rc v and r p v for an example where δ
                                                                                                                         ) 2 with a
specific (equilibrium) pair of bid and ask distributions Fα and Fβ that will be derived shortly. Valuations
for buyers are plotted from high to low, whereas sellers’ costs are plotted from low to high, resulting in
notional “supply” and “demand” curves. However, actual transactions in this market are determined by
producers’ and consumers’ optimal search behavior. Consumers purchase the good from middlemen at
prices in the interval a a  '*+ 61  71 , and producers sell the good to middlemen at prices in the interval
 b  b,)+ 28  39 . Note that the reservation price function for producers, r  v , lies uniformly above the
                                                                                                               p


                                                                        8
sellers’ supply curve, provided that the producer participates in the dealer market. It is easy to see from
equation (5) that when the seller’s cost v exceeds the upper bound b of the distribution Fβ of bid prices
offered by middlemen, there is no point in searching. Thus all producers with costs v                            -   b   vp   . 39
remain out of the market. Symmetrically, the reservation price function for buyers lies uniformly below
                                                            v / 61 of the distribution of ask prices F .
their valuations, intersecting it at the lower support point a                                                                  α
                                                          0
                                                                          61  1 .
                                                                             c

Therefore the set of active consumers are those for whom v v  11 a  12       c




                Figure 1: Reservation Prices for Buyers (Consumers) and Sellers (Producers)
     Along the abscissa, buyers’ valuations are plotted from high to low, whereas sellers’ valuations (costs) are plotted from low
to high.


     The difference between a consumer’s valuation v and his or her reservation value rc v is the net value
                                                                                                            
of search, i.e. the expected discounted surplus or “gains from trade.” For reference, we plot a horizontal
dashed line of height equal to 5 in figure 1. The area in the triangular regions between the 45-degree line
and this horizontal line (and to the left of the intersection of the “supply” and “demand” curves) represents
the surplus that consumers and producers would achieve in a frictionless Walrasian equilibrium, where the
equilibrium price for the good equals p     34/ 5. In that case the surplus for a consumer with valuation v is
given by max  0  v  5 , and the surplus for a producer with cost v is given by max  0  5  v . The area of
the triangular regions, i.e. the surplus achieved by producers and consumers in Walrasian equilibrium, is
 5          5                                                          5
1 8 and 1 8, respectively, resulting in a total surplus of 1 4. The area between the horizontal dashed line
and the reservation price curves represents the inefficiency of the search equilibrium outcome, i.e. the lost
gains from trade to producers and consumers.
     Intermediaries maximize expected discounted profits subject to the constraint that supply and demand

                                                                9
for the commodity are equal in every period. This constraint is necessitated by the assumption that mid-
dlemen do not carry inventories across successive periods. Suppose a middleman sets an ask price of a.
        
Let Di a denote the mass of consumers who were among the initial population at t                                                        0 who purchase the
good in period i
                                         1  v   1  λ  1  F  r  h  r  dr
                                     Di a                            c
                                                                             rc
                                                                                                i
                                                                                                           α
                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                 (6)
                                               N
                                                                    
                                                                         a

where N is the number (total mass) of middlemen, r " r 1  is the reservation price of the highest-
                           
                                                                                            c         c

valuation buyer, and h r  is the (conditional) distribution of reservation prices among the fraction 1  v
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                           c

of the initial population of consumers who chose to participate in the dealer market. Thus, h r 6 1  v 5 N
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                     c

is the per-firm density of consumers. So D a  equals the integral of the product of the probability 1  λ                                                i

                                                      i  1 times the probability  1  F  r  of not trading in
                                                                 i

of not exiting the market in periods t 0  1                                                                                   α
                                                                                                                                        i


periods 0      i  1, times the per-firm density of consumers h  r 7 1  v 5 N, integrated over the region of   c

reservation values  a  r  corresponding to buyers who are willing to purchase at price a. By a change of
                                                                           
                        c

variables, the density h r  can be derived from the distribution r v  and the fact that the valuations of    c

those consumers who participate in the dealer market are uniformly distributed on  v  1 :

                                h r 8  1   dr  r 9  r   9 1  F  r  5 δ
                                                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                       α
                                           1 v                               1 v
                                                                             c          1
                                                                                   c                             (7)
                                                   dv            c                                                         c

Let Di be the share of the initial population that purchases from any middleman at time i:

                            Di       
                                             a
                                                             1  λ  1 
                                                 Di a Fα da
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                      i               
                                                                                                               Fα v i Fα v dv                            (8)
                                         a                                         vc

It is not hard to verify that, when λ              -        0, the share of consumers who ultimately purchase the good is less
than the share of consumers who choose to search for it in the dealer market:
                                     ∞
                                                                         F v
                                                                              
                                                                                                      dv  1 
                                                             1
                                                                                   α
                                 ∑ Di                            1  1  λ 6  1 
                                 :
                                                                                                                           vc                            (9)
                                 i 0                        vc                                      Fα v
This occurs since some of the consumers who attempted to search for the good ended up exiting the
dealer market before they were able to find a sufficiently attractive price. This is part of the deadweight
loss involved in the operation of the dealer market. Another component of the deadweight loss due to
sequential search and the implied delay in trading and consuming is the discounting of the gains from
trade for those transactions that are ultimately realized.
    Total expected discounted demand is the expected discounted value of the stream of demands in all
future periods by the initial population at time t                                0 as well as the stream of demands from each succeeding
generation of new producers and consumers entering the dealer market. The subsequent entrants are drawn

                                                                                   10
                       
from the same U 0 1 distribution of types as the initial population of producers and consumers at t                                                                                  0,
but their mass is scaled by the factor λ, the fraction of the population entering and exiting each period.
Assuming that all middlemen discount future flows using the discount factor ρ, we have
          ;              ∞
                      ∑ ρi Di a 
                                                          ∞           ∞
                                                      λ ∑ ρ j ∑ ρi D i a
                                                                                    
                       :                                   :       :
       Da
                      i 0                              j 1         i 0

                       1 v  
                              $ ∑ ρ  1  λ  1  F  r   λ ∑ ρ ∑ ρ  1  λ  1  F  r  % h  r  dr
                                    c
                                                 rc    ∞
                                                               i           i                          i
                                                                                                              ∞
                                                                                                                        j
                                                                                                                                ∞
                                                                                                                                        i           i            i
                           N
                                   :       a        i 0
                                                           δ  ρ  λ< : F  r: 
                                                                                          α
                                                                                                              j 1           i 0
                                                                                                                                                             α


                              1  ρλ 5 1  ρ 
                          1                                                     dr
                       1           rc
                                                                                                                    α
                             ρ 1  λ 6 1  F r                δ ρ  λ
                       N       a
                                               
                                       1  ρλ 5 1  ρ 
                                                                     1  ρ  1  λ ρ  1  λ F  r 
                                                                               α

                           1                                                                        dr
                       1           rc
                                                                                                                                                         α
                             ρ 1  λ < ρ 1  λ  F r                             1  ρ 1  λ
                       N
                              
                       r  a 1
                               a
                                        
                             ρλ 5 1  ρ 
                                                                                           α


                   N
                           c
                                     
                          1  ρ 1  λ
                                                  =                                                           (10)



                                          S b8 b  r  1  ρλ5  1  ρ =
By similar reasoning the middleman’s expected discounted supply function is


                                                             1  ρ 1  λ
                                                                                     p
                                                                                                               (11)
                                                      N

        p
              
where r " r 0  is the reservation value of the lowest-cost producer. Given the discounted supply and
                p


                                                        1  ρλ5  1  ρ  a  r  a'   b  k   b  r 
demand functions, the middleman’s present discounted value of future trading profits is given by
             
            Π a  b  k !
                                               
                               aD a > b  k  S b 8                                                                          c
                                                          1  ρ 1  λ
                                                                                                                                                                     p
                                                                                                                                                                                (12)
                                                                                            N
The middleman’s problem is to:
                                                                                                               A@ S  b
                                                       ab  ?
                                                      max Π a b k                        subject to: D a                                                                        (13)

The optimal bid and ask prices are
                                                                     B  3r  r  k  5 4
                                                                   ak                             c       p
                                                                     
                                                                   b k B
                                                                           r  3r  k  5 4  c           p                                                                     (14)

These bid and ask prices also equate supply and demand in every period: Di a k
                                                                                                                                                 C S  b  k   , i 0  1  2
                                                
                                                                                                                                                             i

    The linearity of a k                   and b k           in k implies that the distributions of the bid and ask prices Fα and Fβ
are uniform. To find the support of these distributions, we need to compute k, the transactions cost of the
marginal middleman entering the dealer market in equilibrium. Plugging the solutions in equation (14)
back into the profit function (12), we obtain

                                        Π a  k   b  k   k 8  1               5     $  r 
                                                                                     ρλ 1 ρ                                 c       rp k      %
                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                       
                                                                                   1 ρ1 λ                                           8N
                                                                                                                                                                                (15)


                                                                                           11
                     (
Solving for Π a k b k k              0, we see that the marginal middleman has a transactions cost of k                                                                  rc       r p,
and the number of middlemen operating in equilibrium is N                                                         k              k   rc      rp      k. Letting k equal k and
k, we obtain supports of the equilibrium distributions of bid and ask prices. The upper and lower support
points of the distribution of bid and ask prices are functions of the highest and lowest reservation values of
buyers and sellers. This characterization will play a key role in section 3 when we analyze how the dealer
market is affected by the potential entry of a market maker.
Lemma 1: If k      1, there is a unique stationary equilibrium in the dealer market. Bid prices are uniformly
                                   
distributed on the interval b b , and ask prices are uniformly distributed on the interval a a , where                                                            
                                          a           rc               a        rcD 25  r  k E 75r  p                           c

                                          b           rp               b         p
                                                                                                   
                                                                                 r D 75r F 25 r  k  p                          c                                               (16)

    To complete the characterization of the dealer market equilibrium, we need to derive expressions for
the reservation values of the highest-valuation consumer rc and the lowest-cost seller rp in terms of the
                                                                                     
underlying preference and technology parameters ρ λ k . Substituting the uniform distribution Fα of ask
prices and the expression for its lower support point a into equation (2) for the consumer with the highest
reservation value rc
                            
                        rc 1 , we obtain

                                                                                1δ  F  a da
                                                                                                rc
                                                      1                     rc                        α
                                                                             1  8δ r  r  k
                                                                                            a
                                                                                                c             p
                                                                                                                                                                                  (17)
                                                                                            8δ

Similarly, substituting Fβ and the formula for its upper support point b into the reservation price equa-
tion (5) for the producer with the lowest reservation value rp
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                  r p 0 , we obtain


                                                                             1δ   1  F  b db
                                                                                        b
                                                  0                    rp                                     β
                                                                         1  8δ r  r  k
                                                                                       rp

                                                                                            p         c
                                                                                                                                                                                  (18)
                                                                                       8δ

Solving these equations for rc and r p , we obtain 1                                   rc           r p , which implies that

                                                      1    k  8δ                                                 1 k       
                                                           2  8δ                                                         
                                         rc                                            and            rp                                                                          (19)
                                                                                                                   2 8δ

The fraction of consumers and producers who participate in the dealer market is given by
                                                                                             1  k   1  2δ
                                          q   3       1               vc        rp
                                                                                                  2  8δ
                                                                                                                                                                                  (20)


                                                                                      12
The distribution of ask prices Fα is uniform on the interval
                                             1          
                                                    6δ k 1              2δ 1    k  8δ 
                                                         
                                                      2 8δ                        2  8δ
                                                                                                                                        (21)

The distribution of bid prices Fβ is uniform on the interval
                                          1  k  1  k  1  2δ
                                           2  8δ
                                                   2  8δ                                            (22)

We can see from these equations that as δ G 0 and k G 0, the distributions of bid and ask prices converge to
a degenerate distribution with all mass on the single price p H 5, the Walrasian equilibrium value. We can
also see from equation (20) that the equilibrium quantity traded also converges to q3 I 5, the Walrasian
equilibrium quantity. Thus the dealer market equilibrium contains the Walrasian equilibrium as a limiting
special case as search and transactions costs tend to zero.
    The mass of middlemen who are active in equilibrium is given by
                                                                                   
                                                    N       k      k
                                                                             4δ 1 k
                                                                              1 4δ                                                     (23)

Note that the dealer market collapses to a no-trade equilibrium as k                          J   1. We also have N         G   0 in the limit
    G
as δ 0. In this case the dealer market is not collapsing, but rather converging to a degenerate distribution
where the most efficient middleman handles all trade, setting an ask price of a                                    a
                                                                                                                        1  k  5 2 and a bid
price of b    b
                    1  k  5 2.   This is a zero-profit equilibrium, since the bid-ask spread of k just offsets
                                                                                   G
the transactions cost of the most efficient middleman. As k 0, the competitive positive transactions cost
equilibrium converges to the frictionless Walrasian equilibrium outcome.
    We conclude by providing formulas for profits and surplus in this economy. These formulas will be
important in the next section, since they enable us to determine the relative efficiency of the dealer market
equilibrium compared with an equilibrium with possible entry by a market maker. Total consumer and
producer surplus, denoted by Sc and S p respectively, are given by

                 I 1  λρ5  1  ρ   v  r  v dv S I 1  λρ5  1  ρ   r  v> v dv
                                                1                                                          1
             Sc                                         c                    p                              (24)
                                                                                                               p

               
                                            0
                                                                     
                                                                                                       0

where we set r v , v for the consumers who do not trade and r v ( v for producers who do not trade, so
                                                                               
               c                                                                         p

these individuals do not contribute to total surplus. The factor  1  λρ 5 1  ρ  adjusts for the discounted
surplus of all current and future consumers and producers who enter the market.
    The total discounted profits of all middlemen participating in the dealer market is given by

                                                                       1  δ N
                              "K Π a k   b k   k  dk 1   1  ρ  24δ =
                                                                  ρλ
                                        k                                                                  2
                         Πd                                                                                                             (25)
                                    k


                                                                        13
We see from this formula that total profits of middlemen tend to 0 as δ                                   G   0 (due to convergence to a
                                                   L
zero-profit competitive equilibrium) or as k 1 (due to convergence to a no-trade equilibrium).
     The total gain from trade from the operation of the dealer market, Wd , is the sum of producer surplus,
consumer surplus, and the total discounted profits of middlemen

                                              Wd            Sc       Sp          Πd                                              (26)

In the limiting Walrasian equilibrium, we have Sc                        Sp       ) 125 and Π         d   0, so the total surplus equals
Wd * 25, the area under the notional supply and demand curves to the left of the intersection at q * 5.
When δ M 2, λ 0, and k 0, we compute S           S M 0489 and Π M 0494, so that the total surplus
                                                        c            p                            d

equals W N 1471, which is only 59 percent of the maximum possible surplus of 25 that would be
          d

achieved in a frictionless Walrasian equilibrium.


3 Search Equilibrium with a Monopoly Market Maker

In this section we extend Spulber’s (1996a) model of search equilibrium with producers, consumers, and
middlemen by introducing a fourth type of agent: a monopolist market maker. Initially we assume there is
at most one potential entrant who could assume the role of a monopolist market maker, quoting publicly
                                   
observable bid and ask prices am bm . If this market maker enters, producers and consumers can choose
between trading with the market maker at the publicly posted bid and ask prices am bm , and searching
                                                                                                                    
for a better bid or ask price in the dealer market.
     We begin our analysis by characterizing how the presence of a market maker affects the solution to
consumers’ and producers’ optimal search problems. We then derive conditions under which entry by
a market maker is profitable and compute the market maker’s optimal pricing strategy. In doing so, we
compute the dealer’s equilibrium response to the market maker’s entry and pricing rules. We then compare
equilibrium outcomes for economies with and with out a market maker. Finally we summarize the limiting
properties the model.

3.1 The consumers’ and producers’ decision rules

Consider a consumer who has not yet chosen to search. The consumer has three options: a) do nothing,
b) purchase a unit of the commodity in the exchange at price am , or c) search for a better price in the dealer

                                         
market. The consumer’s value function is given by
                          
                        V a  v 8                           λO                            
                                                                                       a
                         c   m       max 0 v           am ρ 1                              Vc a am v Fα da                         (27)
                                                                                   a


                                                                 14
                  
where Vc a am v denotes the value function for a consumer who has chosen to search and has received
an ask price of a from a middle man, modeled as a random draw from Fα . Once the consumer has an offer
in hand, he has the fourth options of accepting the offer from the middleman. The Bellman equation for
        
Vc a am v is given by

                                              
                         V a  a  v 8              a v               λO                         
                                                                                              a
                          c     m           max 0 v                  am ρ 1                       Vc a am v Fα da                    (28)
                                                                                          a

Theorem 1: Suppose an equilibrium exists where the market maker coexists with middlemen in the dealer
market. Let a be the lowest ask price in the dealer market after the entry of the market maker. Let vc a am
                                                                                                                                     
be the value of the marginal consumer (with reservation value am ), who is indifferent between trading with
the market maker and trading in the dealer market:

                                                     !
                                               vc a am           am    1δ 
                                                                                   am
                                                                                           
                                                                                        Fα a da                                      (29)
                                                                               a
          P
If vc a am          1, then there are three different optimal search-purchase strategies depending on the con-
sumer’s type. If v
                     0  a  , then it is not optimal for the consumer to trade with the market maker or to
                                                                 
search for a middleman in the dealer market. If v  a  v a  a   , then it is optimal for the consumer to
                                       v  a  a   1 , then it is optimal for the consumer to bypass the dealer
                                                                                   c      m

trade in the dealer market. If v               c        m

market and to immediately purchase the good from the market maker at the ask price am .
We also have a symmetric result for producers, namely:
Theorem 2: Suppose an equilibrium exists where the market maker coexists with middlemen in the dealer
                      
market. Let v p bm b be the value of the marginal producer (with reservation value bm ), who is indifferent
between trading with the market maker and trading in the dealer market:

                                                 8
                                             v p bm b           bm    1δ   1 
                                                                               b
                                                                                               
                                                                                         Fβ b db                                     (30)
                                                                            bm
       Q - 0, then there are three different optimal search-sell strategies depending on the producer’s
If v p bm b
type. If v
           R b  1 , then it is not optimal for the producer to trade with the market maker or to search for
a middleman in the dealer market. If v
                                               v  b  b  b , then it is optimal for the producer to trade in the
                                 
                                                            p   m

dealer market. If v  0  v b  b  , then it is optimal for the producer to bypass the dealer market and to
                                    p   m

immediately sell the good to the market maker at the bid price bm .
       Figure 2 illustrates Theorems 1 and 2 for the case where δ                             0 2. The curved line in the left panel is the
net value of search for consumers, v            r  v , and in the right panel it is the value of search for producers,
      vC
                                                    c

rp            v. The straight lines plotted in each panel of figure 2 are net values of trading with the market

                                                                       15
                                                        
maker at the publicly posted bid and ask prices am bm ; that is, they are graphs of the functions bm             v
and v  a . In this example, b  v - r v 1
         m                      m        p
                                                             p
                                                                  m              p
                                                                                      
                                                v for v  0  v b  b  , where v b  b CH 25. It follows that
                                                                                        m

all producers in the interval  0  25  prefer to trade with the market maker rather than search for a better
                                                                                                
price in the dealer market. However, for producers in the interval 25  b , we see that r v ' v - b  v.
                                                                                                p            m

Thus these producers choose to search for a better price in the dealer market rather than trade with the
market maker at price bm . The remaining producers with production costs v
                                                                                      0 b  1 would not gain from
trading with the market maker or with any middleman in the dealer market, and so these producers do not
participate and earn a net surplus of zero. Symmetrical results hold for consumers.




                         Figure 2: Decision Rules for Producers and Consumers



3.2 The intermediaries’ entry and pricing decisions

In the previous subsection, consumers and producers took prices as given. In this subsection we analyze
the market maker’s entry and pricing decision. We then derive the response of the middlemen to the market
maker’s entry. In particular, there are three possible regimes in equilibrium: an unconstrained monopoly
regime, a limit-pricing regime, and a competivitive regime. In first two regimes, the market maker drives
all the middlemen out of business. In the competitive regime, a set of middlemen coexists with the market
maker. In the limit-pricing and competitive regimes, the existence or potential entry of middlemen in the
market limits the market power of the market maker.
    All consumers know they have the option of purchasing the commodity from the market maker at
price am , and all producers know they can sell the commodity to the market maker at price bm . Clearly,


                                                       16
no middleman in the dealer market would be able to sell at an ask price a higher than am . Similarly, no
middleman would be able to purchase the commodity for less than the bid price charged by the market
maker. Thus we have:
Theorem 3: bm is the lowest reservation price of producers participating in the dealer market and a lower
bound on the support of the distribution of bid prices offered by middlemen. am is the highest reservation
price of consumers participating in the dealer market and an upper bound on the support of the distribution
of ask prices charged by middlemen in the dealer market:

                                                     b   rp   bm           a        rc        am                                             (31)

      Applying the results from section 2, it is not difficult to show that in the presence of a market maker Fα
and Fβ will still be uniform distributions, but with supports given by a a                                  <I+ 75a E 25  b  k   a  and
                             T 25  a  k   . Thus middlemen in the dealer market uniformly undercut the posted
                                                                                                                       m         m        m

 b  b(S b 
              m       75bm          m

bid-ask spread set by the market maker. Even though it is common knowledge that a randomly drawn
bid from the dealer market will be less than bm with probability 1, this bid will only materialize after a
one-period delay. The highest-valuation buyers and lowest cost producers prefer to trade immediately at
the less favorable prices offered by the market maker rather than incur the search/delay costs involved in
trying to find a better price in the dealer market.
      If the monopolist market maker sets an ask price of am and offers a bid price bm , Theorem 1 implies that
the quantity of the commodity that will be demanded by the highest-valuation consumers in the interval
 v  a  a    1 is
                                                   ! 1                                           
  c       m

                                                                             1δ 
                                                                                          am
                                             Qdm am bm                 am                      Fα a da                                        (32)

                                                                                                                     
                                                                                      a

Similarly, the quantity supplied by the lowest-cost producers in the interval 0 vp bm b                                        is

                                                     8 b  1   1  F  b db
                                             Qsm am bm        m
                                                                                 b
                                                                                               β                                              (33)
                                                                    δ           bm
                 ! Q
Theorem 4: Qdm am bm                    s
                                        m
                                             a  b CU δ - 0 if and only if b 1  a .
                                             m   m                                        m                 m

Proof: If a    1  b , then corresponding symmetry relations hold in the dealer market: a 1  b and
            
                  m            m

F v > 1  F v  . It is easy to see from formulas (32) and (33) that this implies that Q
 α                    β                                                                   Q . Conversely,                  d
                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                    m

if Q  d
      m Q for all δ - 0, then it must also hold in the limit as δ J ∞. But in the limit Q
              s
              m                                                                               1  a and                         d
                                                                                                                                m         m

Q s
  m   b . m                                                                                           V
      Clearly the number of intermediaries that can be supported in equilibrium depends on how aggressively
the market maker prices. The following result shows that the number of middlemen operating in the dealer

                                                                       17
market is determined by the monopolist market maker’s bid-ask spread.
Corollary: If am    -          +  
                          max 5 1         km         5  1  k   , then the mass of middlemen who are active in the dealer
market is given by
                                           N         max 0 am
                                                                               bm       k 8         2am    1        k                                 (34)

If k     0, then as long as the bid-ask spread charged by the monopolist market maker is positive, the dealer
market will never be driven out of existence by the entry of the market maker. This will be true even if
am      a, which is the lowest ask price charged by the most efficient middleman (with cost k                                                         k   0) in the
search equilibrium without a market maker. The least efficient intermediaries are driven out of the market,
and the remaining, more efficient intermediaries are forced to reduce their bid-ask spreads below their pre-
entry values in order to avoid taking a loss. Therefore both the upper and lower supports of the distribution
of ask prices in the dealer market fall as a result of the entry of the market maker. Symmetrically, the entry
of the market maker increases the lower and upper support points of the distribution of bid prices in the
dealer market. This suggests that the entry of the market maker should result in a strict increase in the
expected gains from trade for all producers and consumers who participate in the market – regardless of
whether they choose to trade with the market maker or search for a middleman in the dealer market.
       On one hand, the fact that middlemen uniformly undercut the market maker’s posted bid and ask prices
could make it unprofitable for the market maker to enter. On the other hand, if the market maker’s per unit
transactions cost km is sufficiently lower than k, the transactions cost of the most efficient middleman,
the entry of the market maker might succeed in driving the entire dealer market out of existence. To
determine what will actually happen, we need to derive the market maker’s profit function and optimal
pricing strategy. By Theorem 4 we know that bm                                             1       am implies Qdm                   Qsm , and so we can write the
market maker’s problem as follows:


                                         ?  
                                       max 1
                                       am bm
                                                      λρ 1   5   ρ W a         m            bm    k Q b a  
                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                                     m    m    m                             (35)

subject to
                                         bm          1      am          1          km
                                                                                           @       am    @ 1  2  8δ8δ k                                   (36)
                                                                                  2
Substituting the constraint bm             1       am , the market maker’s problem reduces to maximizing the following
quadratic objective function with respect to the single control variable am :

                         a 8I 1                                                                                                 1  k 
                                        ρλ 5 1  ρ   2a  1                                     1                 max 0 2am
                 Πm       m                                           m                    km               am                                               (37)
                                                                                                                                8δ


                                                                                      18
The market maker’s objective is concave in am and thus has a unique optimal solution provided the market
maker’s choice of am does not violate the search equilibrium conditions in the intermediary market. The
solution to the market maker’s problem and the resulting configuration of the dealer market is given below.
Theorem 5: It is profitable for a market maker to enter the dealer market if and only if the market maker’s
transaction cost km satisfies km                  km , where
                                                                             k                  4δ
                                                                 km
                                                                             1                  4δ
                                                                                                                                (38)

If km is below the threshold for profitable entry km , there are three possible configurations for the post-
entry equilibrium depending on the model parameters k km δ ρ λ . There exist thresholds 0
                                                                                                               kl       km
such that if k
                           0 k    the market maker coexists with the most efficient middlemen, but the least efficient
                                                              k  k  , the market maker’s entry drives all middlemen out of
                                 l

middlemen are driven out of business. If k                       l       u

business, and the market maker sets “limit prices” that deter the most efficient middleman from entering.
If k
          k  1 the market maker sets unconstrained monopoly bid and ask prices.
                 u

        The fundamental condition for the viability of entry by a monopolist market maker given in equa-
tion (38) of Theorem 5 has a very simple interpretation. The expression on the right-hand side of equa-
tion (38) equals the efficiency level k of the marginal middleman in the equilibrium without a market
maker. Thus the monopolist market maker’s per unit transactions cost must be lower than the marginal
cost of the marginal middleman in the pre-entry dealer market equilibrium if entry is to be feasible. How-
ever the market maker need not have lower transactions costs than all middlemen in order for entry to be
feasible. Even if the market maker’s transactions cost is uniformly lower than the transactions costs of all
middlemen, the dealer market will not necessarily be driven out of existence.
Corollary 5.0: The thresholds kl and ku for the limit-pricing and unconstrained monopoly regimes satisfy
0      kl          ku and are given by
                                                                  1         km 4δ 1       >        1
                                                       kl
                                                                                8δ 1        
                                                       ku
                                                                 1          km
                                                                                                                                (39)
                                                                         2
        We now complete our characterization of the post-entry equilibrium by summarizing the quantities
traded by the market maker, his bid-ask spreads, the number of middlemen, and the total quantity traded
in the dealer market.
Corollary 5.1: In the unconstrained monopoly regime, the market maker sets bid and ask prices given by

                                                                am
                                                                                         3          km
                                                                                                 4

                                                                             19
                                                                                bm
                                                                                                          1                       km
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (40)
                                                                                                                               4
The market maker trades the monopoly volume Qsm am bm
                                                                                                        Q                                               bm . The dealer market is driven out of
existence.
Corollary 5.2: In the limit-pricing regime the market maker sets bid and ask prices given by

                                                                                am
                                                                                                          1                       k

                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                          1                        k
                                                                                bm                                                                                                                               (41)
                                                                                                                               2
The market maker trades the volume Qsm am bm
                                                                            8                  bm . The dealer market is driven out of existence.
Corollary 5.3: In the competitive regime the market maker coexists with the dealer market. The market
maker’s bid and ask prices are given by
                                                                                     3               km
                                                                                                                                   k 1    
                                                                         am
                                                                                                  4                                16δ 4           
                                                                                     1               km
                                                                                                                                   1 k        
                                                                         bm
                                                                                                  4                                16δ 4                                                                        (42)

The quantity traded by the market maker is given by
                                                                                                                                                                             
             Qdm
                   a  1
                     m       am   #           Qsm
                                                      a  1    m        am   8  4k 
                                                                                     1                m                         1 k
                                                                                                                               16δ 4
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                    1 1 km
                                                                                                                                                                   8δ   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                   k 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  8δ 2   k=   (43)

Corollary 5.4: In the competitive regime the post-entry equilibrium mass of middlemen operating in the
dealer market is given by

                                                                          2a  1  k# 1  k                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                       m            k 1
                                       N             k               k          m                                                                                                 k                              (44)
                                                                                            2                                                                      8δ 2
Corollary 5.5: In the competitive regime the equilibrium distribution of ask prices quoted by middlemen
in the dealer market is uniformly distributed on the interval a a , where                                                                    
                                                                     8δ  1  k  8δ  3                                                                                        
                             a
                                       3
                                               8
                                                   km
                                                                           32δ  8
                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                       km
                                                                                                                                                                                  k 1
                                                                                                                                                                                  16δ 4                         (45)

The equilibrium distribution of bid prices is uniformly distributed on the interval b b where                                                                        
                                                         1 k                                                                                      k  8δ  3
                             b
                                   1
                                           4
                                               km
                                                       16δ  4                   b
                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                               km
                                                                                                                                            8δ  132δ    8                                                     (46)

Corollary 5.6: In the competitive regime, the equilibrium mass of producers and consumers who partici-
pate in the dealer market is given by:

                                                                          Qdd       Qsd               b     b                                N
                                                                                                                                               8δ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (47)

                                                                                                  20
               Figure 3: Market Maker’s Optimal Trade Volume and Ask Price as a function of k


       Figure 3 illustrates the market maker’s pricing and quantity decisions in the three regimes in the case
where km        * 95, and λ / 12. These values imply a discount rate of δ  ρ  λX* 2. In this case the
                   0, ρ
cutoff between the competitive and limit-pricing regimes is k . 31, and the cutoff between the limit-
                                                                     l

pricing and monopoly regimes is k I 5. Note that the market maker’s ask price and quantity traded are
                                        u

increasing functions of k in the competitive regime. As k increases, the dealer market gets increasingly
inefficient relative to transacting with the market maker, and the market maker exploits this by raising the
ask price (and bid-ask spread). The volume of trade in the dealer market decreases monotonically in k until
at k   / 31 the dealer market vanishes. For k  + 31  50   the market maker adopts a limit-pricing strategy,
choosing the largest possible ask price that will not induce entry by middlemen. As k increases in this
region, the market maker is able to raise prices, leading to a reduction in quantity traded. When k           -D 5,
the most efficient middleman is so inefficient relative to the market maker that the market maker no longer
fears the possibility of entry and is able to set the bid-ask spread equal to the unconstrained monopoly level
of 75 and trade the monopoly quantity of 25. Thus the market maker’s profits increase monotonically for
k
      0  1      5 
                   km 2 but are constant in the unconstrained monopoly regime when k       -  1  k  5 2.
                                                                                                    m


3.3 Equilibria with and without a monopolist market maker

In this subsection, we compare the equilibrium with a monopolist market maker describe in the previous
subsection to dealer-market equilibrium described in section 3. Figure 4 compares the equilibria with and
without a monopolist market maker in the case where km           k       0, and δ   * 2. The market maker trades
                                                       21
a total quantity of Qm   * 25, and the dealer maker trades a total quantity of Q * 19 * 44  25, which
                                                                                                d

is less than half the total amount traded in the dealer market prior to the entry of the market maker. The
market maker charges a bid-ask spread of am                  bm       * 22 * 61  39, which equals the bid-ask spread of
the most efficient middleman in the equilibrium without a market maker. The average bid-ask spread in
the dealer market nearly halves, from 1666 to 085, following the entry of the market maker. In this case,
the market maker’s bid and ask prices bm and am equal the highest bid price bd and the lowest ask price
ad , respectively, in the pre-entry dealer market equilibrium. The following corollary characterizes how
the market maker’s prices relate to the bid-ask prices prevailing in the pre-entry equilibrium in the dealer
market.




           Figure 4: Comparison of Search Equilibria with and Without a Market Maker


Corollary 5.7: Assume that k           km , so that middlemen coexist with the market maker in the post-entry
                                  
equilibrium. Let bd bd and ad ad be the supports of the pre-entry equilibrium distributions of bid and
ask prices, respectively. Then we have

                                                 am          ad           bm   -   bd                              (48)

am and bm can be smaller or larger than ad and bd , respectively, depending on the values of km k δ .
                                                                                                                    
However, if km      k    0, then
                                                 am           ad           bm       bd                              (49)

Proof: Using the formula for am in equation (42) and the formula for ad in formula (21), it is not hard to
show that am      ad if and only if km      km , where km is the threshold for which entry by the market maker


                                                                       22
is profitable given in equation (38). If km                          0           k, then it is easy to see from equations (42) and (21) that
am        ad . Symmetric arguments establish the results for the case of bids.                                                                                       V
Corollary 5.8: Assume that middlemen coexist with the market maker in the post-entry equilibrium. Let
am and bm denote the lowest ask price and highest bid price set by middlemen in the dealer market in the
post-entry equilibrium, respectively. Then

                                                                    am          ad              bm    -           bd                                             (50)

If the entry by the market maker eliminates the dealer market in the post-entry equilibrium, then we have

                                                                    am          ad              bm    -           bd                                             (51)

Proof: Using the fact that am                     1           bm and ad              1          bd and the fact that am               * 75a T 25  b  k       and
                  R 25  b  k  , we see that a 
                                                                                                                                                   m        m

ad   Y 75a    d           d                                     m   ad implies that am                                   ad . Now consider the case where the entry
of the market maker drives the dealer market out of existence. Consider first the limit-pricing regime.
Doing some algebra, we find that am                            ad if and only if k                                1. Now consider the unconstrained monopoly
regime.
                                
              The condition k - 1                        5
                                                  km 2 characterizing the unconstrained monopoly regime implies that
am       ad . As in Corollary 5.7, a symmetric argument establishes the results for bids.                                                                               V
         Corollaries 5.7 and 5.8 formalize the notion that entry of the market maker lowers bid-ask spreads. In
the competitive regime the market maker’s bid-ask spread is strictly smaller than the worst bid-ask spread
charged by the highest-cost middleman in the pre-entry equilibrium. Since the market maker’s bid-ask
spread is necessarily the worst bid-ask spread in the post-entry equilibrium, it follows that the market
maker’s entry has succeeded in reducing both the average and the worst bid-ask spreads in the dealer
market. Indeed, the entry of the market maker not only narrows bid-ask spreads, but also shifts the entire
distribution of ask prices downward. That is, if we let ai and ai denote the support of the distribution of ask
prices in the pre-entry dealer market equilibrium i
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  d and post-entry equilibrium i
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                       m , respectively,
then assuming that the market maker and middlemen coexist in the post-entry equilibrium, we have
Corollary 5.9: If k              kl and km          km , then

                                                                     am              ad              am               ad   
                                                                     bm      -        bd              bm       -        bd                                        (52)

         Since the distributions of bid and ask prices have strictly improved in the post-entry equilibrium, it
follows that all consumers and producers who participate in the post-entry equilibrium are strictly better

                                                                                          23
off as a result of the entry of the market maker. Corollary 5.8 shows that even when the market maker
drives the dealer market out of existence, the market maker’s ask price am is strictly less than the valuation
ad of the marginal consumer in the pre-entry equilibrium. Since the reservation price function for buyers
in the pre-entry equilibrium is strictly increasing in v with a minimum value of ad , it follows that all buyers
whose valuations satisfy v                 -   am are strictly better off in the post-entry equilibrium (where am is the lowest
ask price in the dealer market in the post-entry equilibrium). We formalize the foregoing discussion as
                              
Theorem 6: Let rcd rdp denote the reservation price functions for consumers and producers in the dealer
market equilibrium before the entry of a market maker. Assume that km                                                               km , so that entry by a market
                         
maker is profitable. Let r  r            m
                                           c
                                               m
                                               p       denote the reservation price functions for consumers and producers in the
post-entry equilibrium. Then we have

                                                              4Z
                                                         rcd v
                                                               A@ r  v 
                                                                         rcm v
                                                                                   and         rdp v      (53)     m
                                                                                                                     p

                                                                  
with strict inequality for producer valuations in the interval v  0  b  and for consumer valuations in the
           0
                                                                                                                         m

interval v a  1 .
                                                                                                     
                        m

Proof: If the entry of the market maker drives the dealer market out of existence, we have r v  a for                                              m

  
                                                                                                                                                     c           m

v  a  1 . It is easy to see from the definition of r in equation (2) that it is a strictly increasing function
                                                                                     d

                      
        m                                                                            c

of v on the interval a  1  with slope
                                   d

                                          dr 
                                               v 8          - 0
                                                          1          d

                                                     1  F v 5 δ
                                                                     c
                                                                                             d
                                                                                                            (54)
                                          dv                                                 α

where Fαd is the distribution of ask prices in the pre-entry dealer market equilibrium. By Corollary 5.8 we
have am            ad , so that
                                                           A-
                                                       rcd v         ad   -     am
                                                                                              
                                                                                         rcm v               v
                                                                                                                 0 a  1[
                                                                                                                         m                                       (55)

Now consider the case where the dealer market coexists with the market maker. In this case rcm will be
                                                          
strictly increasing on the interval am am and equal to am for v
                                                                       a  1 , since these latter consumers trade m

with the market maker by Theorem 5. By Corollary 5.8 we have a  a , so that it is sufficient to show
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                         m       d

that the slope of r is strictly less than the slope of r on the interval a  1  since r v X r v  v for
                            m                                                            d                                                   m           d

                    a  1 the slope of r is zero, whereas from formula (54) we can see that the slope
                            c                                                            c                                       m           c           c

v  0  a  . For v                                                  m

                                  a  1 . So we have 0 dr 5 dv  dr 5 dv for v  max  a  a [ 1 . For
            m                      m                                 c
    d
of r is strictly positive for v                                                                          m                   d

    E a  a  we have dr 5 dv 1, whereas dr 5 dv 15  1  F  v 5 δP 1, where F is the post-entry
    c                                                    d                                               c                   c                       d       m

v                                      d                                       m                                 m                               m
        m       d                      c                                       c                                 α                               α

distribution of ask prices. If a Z a we are done. If a  a , we complete the argument by showing
                                                         a  a  . If k k 0, Corollary 5.7 implies that
                                                   d         m                                       d           m

that dr 5 dv  dr 5 dv on the remaining interval v
        m
        c
                            d
                            c                                                                    d       m               m


                                                                                     24
am     ad , and we are done. Corollary 5.9 implies that Fαd strictly stochastically dominates Fαm on the interval
 a  a  ; that is,
                                                     A                 \ a  a 
  m    d

                                                 Fαd v      Fαm v        v         m    d                                                 (56)
                       
Since rcd v and rcm v are both strictly increasing functions on the interval ad am (where ad
                                                                                                                                  -   am by
Corollary 5.8), and since the slope of rcm is given by formula (54) but with Fαm substituted in place of Fαd ,
it follows that the strict stochastic dominance condition implies drcm dv                   5          5
                                                                                                   drcd dv for v
                                                                                                                         \ a  a  . But by
                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                             m   d

Corollaries 5.7 and 5.8 we have am               ad and am         ad , and so the slope of          rcm          is strictly less than the
                                                    
slope of rcd v in the remaining interval ad am . Thus the slope of rcm is strictly less than the slope of rcd
                                
over the entire interval am 1 , which implies that rcm v
                                                                       4 r  v
                                                                               d
                                                                               c       for v
                                                                                               \ a  1 as claimed.
                                                                                                   m                                        V
      Figure 5 illustrates the welfare gains resulting from the entry of a market maker. In this example we
continue to set δ        0 2, km      0, and k
                                                                                                         
                                                         0. Any consumer in the interval am 1 is made strictly better
off from the entry of the market maker, where am                    M 56 is the lower support point of the distribution of
ask prices in the dealer market in the post-entry equilibrium. The low-valuation consumers located in the
             
interval 0 am do not trade, and their welfare is not affected by the entry of the market maker. Clearly, the
entry of the market maker causes the lower support of the distribution of ask prices to fall. Thus there is
a larger set of active consumers in the equilibrium with a market maker, and the consumers who switch
from non-participation to search become strictly better off. Symmetric results apply to producers.




           Figure 5: Comparison of Equilibria Before and After the Entry of a Market Maker
     Along the abscissa, buyers’ valuations are plotted from high to low, whereas sellers’ valuations (costs) are plotted from low
to high.




                                                                    25
     The entry of the market maker halves the volume of trade in the dealer market (from 3889 to 1944)
and the discounted profits of middlemen, and cuts profits to one fourth of the pre-entry level (from 0494
to 0123). However the market maker’s volume of 25 and profits of 0556 more than make up for the
losses incurred in the dealer market, so that overall quantity traded and overall discounted profits increase
following the entry of the market maker. Total discounted surplus of consumers (and producers) is 0782
in the post entry equilibrium (i.e., with a market maker) compared with 0489 in the pre-entry equilibrium
(i.e., without a market maker). Total discounted surplus (i.e., including the discounted profits of middlemen
and the market maker) increases from 1471 in the equilibrium without a market maker to 2242 in the
equilibrium after the entry of the market maker. Comparing these total gains from trade with the 25 gains
from trade that would be realized in a frictionless Walrasian equilibrium, we see that the entry of the
market maker has increased overall market efficiency from 58.8 percent to 89.7 percent.
     The rise in total surplus is due largely to the reduction in the deadweight loss of the transactions costs
of the less efficient middle men who were forced out of business by the more efficient market maker
(whose marginal transactions cost is zero). However, another source of the reduction in deadweight loss
is the reduction in search costs due to the entry of the market maker: in the post-entry equilibrium over
half of all trades occur at the bid and ask prices set by the market maker, so that a much smaller fraction
of trading is subject to search costs in the post entry equilibrium. We obtain these favorable results even
though the market maker is a monopolist: ordinarily monopoly power creates deadweight losses rather
than reduces them. Provided that the market maker’s transactions costs are not too high, publicly posting
bid and ask prices represents a superior institution for conducting trade via a search market.
     The following theorem shows that entry of the market maker does not always increase total discounted
profits: total discounted profits increase in the post-entry equilibrium only when km is not too high.
                           
Theorem 7: Let Πm km k denote the total discounted profits of the market maker, and Πdd k and
                                                                                                         
Πm
       
 d km k denote total discounted profits of all middlemen operating in the dealer market in the pre-

and post-entry equilibria, respectively. Let km be given by

                                             36δ2              
                                                          16kδ2 29kδ       4k
                                       km
                                                            
                                                        52δ2 29δ 4                                           (57)

Then k        k where k is the threshold for profitable entry by a market maker, given in equation (38). If
        0  k  , the entry of the market maker increases total discounted profits from intermediation, and if
                 m     m

km
     ] k  k  , the entry of the market maker decreases total discounted profits from intermediation (relative
             m

km       m   m

to the pre-entry equilibrium value).

                                                          26
Proof: km is the (smallest) solution to the equation

                                                         <
                                                  Πm km k                Πm
                                                                          d km k
                                                                                    #                 
                                                                                                     Πdd k                                           (58)

Ignoring the common factors 1
                                             λρ 15   ρ  , which are common to Π , Π                             m
                                                                                                                          m,
                                                                                                                          d    and Πdd , substituting the
formula for N in the pre-entry equilibrium in equation (23) into the formula for Πdd in (25) yields
                                                                   1          4δ  1  k
                                                                       δ
                                                                               1  4δ 
                                                                                                        2
                                                   Πdd                                                                                               (59)
                                                                    24δ

Similarly, substituting the formula for N in the post-entry equilibrium from Corollary 5.4, we obtain
                                                    1              1                             < 
                                                          δ
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                 km            k 8δ 1 1
                                        Πm
                                         d
                                                       24δ                   2                    8δ 2                                              (60)

Corollary 5.3 implies that in the competitive regime
                         1                      1 k                                        1 k
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                          k 8δ  1  1
                 Πm
                               2
                                   km
                                              k 1
                                                
                                              8δ 2     4
                                                                         m         1 k
                                                                                  16δ 4           16δ
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           8δ 8δ  2 
                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                    (61)

Substituting these expressions, we see that equation (58) is quadratic in km and thus has two roots. One
                      !
root is km , since Πm km k          0 and Πm
                                           d km k
                                                         !                     
                                                                         Πdd k by Theorem 5. It is not hard to show that the other
root satisfies 0  k  k .         Further using the formulas above, we can show Πm km k
                                                                                                                                 '   Πm
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                          d km k is a
                                                                      
                    m      m

strictly convex function of km on the interval 0 km . It follows that entry of the market maker increases
total discounted profits if km
                                     0  k  , and decreases total profits if k 0 k  k  .
                                              m                                                               m       m   m                           V
     Figure 6 illustrates Theorem 7 by plotting the profit functions Πm , Πm
                                                                           d , and Πd as functions of km for
                                                                                    d

k    0 and k^ 6. Profits of the market maker decline monotonically in k whereas the profits in the dealer         m

market increase monotonically in k until k - k I 44. Above this point, entry by the market maker is
                                         
                                              m               m          m

no longer profitable so Π k  k ! Π k  k  for k - k . When k 0 we have k D 12, so entry of the
                          m
                          d        m
                                                   d
                                                   d      m                  m                 m                                m

market maker increases total discounted profits for k in the interval  0  12  and decreases total profits for
                   
                                                                                 m

k in the interval 12  44  . The right-hand panel of figure 6 plots the profit functions in the case where
 m

k Y 6. In this case the larger value of k has increased the lower threshold k to 65 and the upper threshold           m

km to 77. Thus the range of km for which entry by the market maker increases total discounted profits
from intermediation is a monotonically decreasing function of k, as is evident in the formula for km given
in equation (57).




                                                                             27
    Figure 6: The effect of entry on total discounted profits for various km when k                0 and k   /6
Corollary 7.1: If kl      km , i.e., if the entry of the market maker drives the dealer market out of existence, the
market maker’s total discounted profits exceed the total discounted profits of middlemen in the pre-entry
dealer market equilibrium.
    Since the entry of the market maker strictly increases both consumer and producer surplus, but can
decrease total discounted profits from intermediation when km         -   km , the effect of entry on total discounted
gains from trade (i.e., the sum of discounted surplus and discounted profits) is unclear. Figure 7 plots
a decomposition of total surplus in the two cases k             0 and k   * 6. In each case, total gains from trade
increase following the entry of the market maker. However, we also see that total surplus is a monotonically
declining function of km until km     -   km , at which point entry by the market maker is no longer profitable. In
figure 7 we indicate the various equilibrium regimes by the symbols R1 (for the unconstrained monopoly
regime), R2 (for the limit pricing regime), R3 (for the competitive regime where the middle man and dealer
market coexist), and R4 (for the case where km        -   km so entry by the market maker is not profitable). Note
that surplus is constant as a function of km in region R2 since, in this regime, the market maker’s bid and
ask prices are functions of k, not km .




                                                           28
     Figure 7: Decomposition of Total Gains from Trade for various km when k             0 and k   D6
    The two panels of figure 7 illustrate how the competition between middlemen and the market maker
affects the division of the gains from trade between producers, consumers, and intermediaries. Consider
the case where the market maker has transactions cost km     0. When the most efficient middleman also has
transactions cost k     0, the dealer market and the market maker coexist and generate total gains from trade
of 2242, or nearly 90 percent of the Walrasian surplus of 25. Producers and consumers realize a surplus of
1564, or nearly 70 percent of the total discounted gains from trade. However when k      D 6, producers and
consumers realize a surplus of only 0625, which is only one-third of the total gains from trade of 1875.
The market maker obtains the lion’s share of the surplus, earning the unconstrained monopoly profit of
125. Thus the market maker is made better off, and producers and consumers are made correspondingly
worse off, by any measure that limits entry or increases the transactions costs of middlemen.
    Similarly, middlemen can increase their profits at the expense of consumers and producers by pro-
mulgating measures that artificially limit entry or increase the transactions cost of the market maker. For
example, the left-hand panel of figure 7 indicates that if middlemen were successful in passing a law
preventing the entry of market makers, total discounted surplus of producers and consumers would fall
significantly. For example in the presence of a market maker with km        0, total producer and consumer
surplus is 1564, whereas if entry of a market maker is prohibited, total producer and consumer surplus
would fall by 38 percent to 0977.
    Although all of our numerical results indicate that total gains from trade are a monotonically decreasing
function of km for km      km (which implies that the entry of a market maker always increases total gains


                                                      29
from trade for any km                 k), we have not yet been able to prove this analytically. Below we simply state our
conjecture that entry by the market maker is always welfare-improving.
Conjecture 8: Let W d denote total market surplus in the pre-entry dealer market equilibrium, given in
formula (26). Let W m denote total market surplus in the post-entry equilibrium, given by

                                                                 Wm           Scm         Smp         Πm
                                                                                                         d      Πm                                     (62)

where Scm and Smp are total discounted consumer and producer surplus in the post-entry equilibrium, re-
spectively. Then W m is a strictly monotonically decreasing function of km for km                                                     km . In particular, for
any km        km we have
                                                                                   Wm       -       Wd                                                   (63)

Theorem 9: If km
                        0  k  , then the mass of middlemen operating in the pre-entry dealer market equilib-
                                       m

rium is greater than the mass of middle men operating in the post-entry dealer market equilibrium. When
k        0, the number of middlemen in the post-entry equilibrium is never less than half of the number of
middlemen that would be operating in an equilibrium where entry by a market maker is prohibited.
Proof: Let N d be the mass of middlemen in the pre-entry dealer market equilibrium, and Nm be the mass
of middle men in the post-entry dealer market equilibrium. We have

                                                                                                                 
                                               Nm
                                                        1
                                                                 2
                                                                     km
                                                                              k 1
                                                                              8δ 2       k@
                                                                                                         4δ 1 k
                                                                                                          4δ 1               Nd                         (64)

                                                                                                                V
Theorem 10: If km
                             0  k  , the total mass of producers and consumers who participate in the market is
                                           m

strictly larger in the post-entry equilibrium than in the pre-entry equilibrium.
Proof: The mass of consumers who participate in the dealer market prior to the market maker’s entry is
                                                                                            1  k   1  2δ
                                                                                                 8δ  2
                                                                 Qdd          bd                                                                         (65)

By Theorem 5, when k               -       ku , the market maker drives the dealer market out of existence, so that Qm
                                                                                                                     d                                     0.
Thus the total mass of consumers who participate are those who trade with the market maker, Qm . By
Corollary 5.1 we have Qm
                                               1              5
                                                        km 4 in the unconstrained monopoly regime. It is easy to see that
Qm   -            k  1 . In the limit-pricing regime we still have Q 0, but the monopoly quantity is
          Qdd for k                                                                                                       m

                  1  k  5 2. Since Q - Q at k k , it suffices to show that the slope of Q is steeper
                       u                                                                                                  d

given by Q                                                             d

                               _ k  k  . The slope of Q with respect to k is  15 2 which is less (i.e., steeper)
                m                                       m              d                        u                                                 m
                       d
than the slope of Q for k
                                                                                           
                       d                       l    u                                      m

than the slope of Q with respect to k,  1  2δ  5 2  8δ  . For the final case, k  0  k  we proceed
                           d
                           d                                                                                                                  l


                                                                                            30
similarly. We need to show that the slope of Qm                Qm                  d
                                                                 d is steeper than Qd in k. The slope of the former is

  8δ  3 5  32δ  8   and it can be readily verified that this is less (i.e., steeper) than       2      2δ    5  2   8δ , 
the slope of Qdd .                                                                                                                V
3.4 Limiting properties

                                                                                             G
Finally, we summarize the limiting properties of the post-entry equilibrium as δ 0, km 0, and k 0.        G                 G
                                      G
Theorem 11: In the limit, as δ 0, k 0 and km G              G   0 the equilibrium prices, quantities, and producer and
consumer surpluses tend to the Walrasian equilibrium values. In the limit the market maker handles half
of the transactions in the market, and the most efficient middleman (with k              k       0) handles the rest. Both
charge a limiting bid-ask spread of zero at the common Walrasian equilibrium price of p                       3A 15 2.
    This result implies that the coexistence of middlemen and market makers should be fairly robust in a
world of steadily declining search and transactions costs due to technological improvements in information
and communications technologies. However, the conceptual distinctions between middlemen and market
makers start to blur in the limit, since the prices charged by all surviving middlemen are virtually the
same as the bid and ask prices charged by the market maker. We view Theorem 11 as a characterization
of “efficient markets”: when search and transactions costs are small, bid-ask spreads are very narrow, so
that there is not much difference between trading with a market maker and trading in the dealer market.
For this reason there is approximately a 50-50 split in trade between these two competing institutions.
However in the limit it does not matter whether the microstructure of trade involves only middlemen or
a combination of middlemen and a market maker. As we saw in section 2, we have convergence to a
Walrasian equilibrium even in the absence of entry by a market maker provided that δ 0 and k 0.       G                 G
    The entry of a market maker is much more important when k or δ is large. Conversely, if a market
maker is able to obtain unconstrained monopoly power by creating artificial barriers to entry by middlemen
or other, competing market makers, then large efficiency and welfare gains can be achieved by breaking
down these barriers and subjecting the market maker to competitive pressure to reduce bid-ask spreads.
In the next section we will consider the case in which the market maker faces competition from other
potential market makers as well as from middlemen.


4 Search Equilibrium with Competitive Market Making

Now suppose there is free entry into market making. If there are no fixed entry costs and entry occurs
simultaneously, Bertrand-style price competition will ensue among competing market makers. Since all

                                                                31
producers and consumers can costlessly observe the bid and ask prices quoted by alternative market mak-
ers, all trade will occur with the market maker that offers the best bid and ask prices. Bertrand price cutting
will result in two possible outcomes, depending on the heterogeneity in transactions costs. If there is more
than one market maker who has the smallest per unit transactions cost, price competition will result in a
zero-profit equilibrium where the bid-ask spread equals the per unit transactions cost of the most efficient
market maker. The division of trade among the competing most efficient market makers is indeterminate.
If the most efficient market maker has a strictly lower per unit transactions cost than the next most efficient
market maker, the most efficient market maker can earn positive profits by charging a bid-ask spread equal
to the per unit transactions cost of the next most efficient market maker.
    However we think a model of sequential entry into market making provides a better approximation of
reality, as we will see in the examples we discuss in the next section. In addition, the fixed costs associated
with entry into market making are likely to be substantial. These fixed costs include advertising costs to
make everyone aware of the market maker’s identity and where his prices are posted.
    In this case, the outcome of a sequential entry process depends on the order in which potential market
makers arrive and enter the market. If the first potential entrant can enter profitably, he will do so according
to a modified version of theory presented in the previous section. The first market maker will enter if his
expected profits from market making exceed the fixed costs of entry. However his expected profits will be
lower than the values computed in the previous section since he will anticipate that potential challengers
will eventually arrive and force him to limit price, i.e. to reduce his bid-ask spread to the point where
the most efficient challenger will not expect to make a profit after the challenger’s fixed costs of entry are
taken into account. Indeed, a sufficiently efficient challenger could even displace the existing incumbent.
In either case the entry decision of the first potential entrant depends on his beliefs about how long he will
be able to earn monopoly rents from market making before these rents are partially or fully dissipated by
the arrival of more efficient challengers for the position of market maker. A full analysis of this dynamic
“entry game” is beyond the scope of this paper. We simply note that the combination of fixed entry costs
and post entry competition for the position of market maker will narrow the range of parameter values
for which entry by a market maker is profitable. The precise parameter configurations for which entry is
profitable will depend on a specification of the fixed costs of entry, and the first potential entrant’s beliefs
about the arrival of challengers for the position of market making.
    It should be clear from the analysis in the previous section that any additional competition between
potential market makers, in addition to the competition that already exists between middlemen and market


                                                      32
makers, will result in further narrowing of bid-ask spreads and additional welfare gains for producers
and consumers. Total profits earned by middlemen and market makers will generally fall as a result of
additional competition from new potential market makers, but this fall in profits will be more than offset
by the increase in expected surplus accruing to consumers and producers.
   The stationary equilibrium model used in this paper is not a fully satisfactory framework in which to
study the issue of competition between market makers. A model with stochastic arrivals of potential chal-
lengers might be one way to incorporate these dynamics, however there difficult issues to consider when
there are multiple market makers and consumers are not all instantaneously informed of their existence
and bid and ask prices. If producers and consumers need to search in order to discover the bid and ask
prices charged by competing market makers, then there is the possibility of “market fragmentation.” In
this case, competing market makers may not be very different from competing middlemen: producers and
consumers will not know which market maker is offering the best bid-ask spread without undertaking a
sequential search process to obtain the best price quotes, and most of the benefits of having a single market
place where credible bid and ask prices are quoted could be lost.
   In addition, if there are elements of increasing returns to scale and network externalities associated
with having larger populations of traders (which enable a market maker to have a “thicker” and more
“continuous” market), there may be “natural monopoly” elements to market making. In such an environ-
ment the equilibrium outcome may be indeterminate, or there may be multiple equilibria. Caillaud and
Jullien (2001) analyzed the “chicken and egg” problems arising from the network externalities involved
in competition between market makers (or “matchmakers”) in a different framework. These issues are
worthy of further exploration, but they require a more complicated model than we have employed here. A
more realistic model will have to account for various types of non-stationarities and network externalities
in order to yield a more satisfactory dynamic analysis of competition in market making in which issues of
market fragmentation and natural monopoly can be addressed.


5 Applications

The theory in this paper is applicable to a wide range of asset and commodity markets. In this section we
look at four markets: the market for commodities in a World War II P.O.W. camp, the U.S. equity market,
the U.S. Treasury market, and the U.S. steel market. In the first three markets we observe the co-existence
of both middlemen and market makers. In the fourth we observe only middlemen despite recent attempts



                                                    33
by Enron and two potential web-based market makers, e-STEEL and MetalSite, to enter the market. In
light of the quotation at the beginning of the article, we discuss why the brokerage firm Cantor Fitzgerald
was able to become a market maker in the U.S. Treasury bond market whereas the two steel dot-coms have
not become market makers.
    Perhaps one of the best-known examples (at least among economists) of the co-existence of middle
men and market makers is the World War II P.O.W. camp described by Radford (1945). In this camp,
prisoners traded a variety of commodities among themselves: canned milk, jam, biscuits, and chocolate.
In the absence of fiat money, cigarettes became a form of currency. Trade was facilitated by “Exchange
and Mart notice boards” on which bid and ask prices for different goods were posted. When a deal was
consummated, the posting was crossed out. Radford notes, “The public and semi-permanent record of
transactions led to cigarette prices being well known and thus tending to equality throughout the camp.” In
addition to the Exchange and Mart, middlemen were active in the camp, although they were viewed with
disdain:

       Despite the fact that his very existence was proof to the contrary, the middleman was held to
       be redundant in view of the existence of the Shop and the Exchange and Mart. ... And mid-
       dlemen as a group were blamed for reducing prices. Opinion not withstanding, most people
       dealt with a middleman, whether consciously or unconsciously, at some time or another. (Rad-
       ford, 1945, p. 199)

In this camp the Exchange and Mart served the role as a market maker. Both current and historical bid
and ask prices were publicly and costlessly observable. As our model predicts, these middlemen did help
reduce ask prices. Radford does not mention whether middlemen had any effect on bid prices.
    In the contemporary market for U.S. equities there is substantial interest in the question of whether
entry of middlemen can reduce the bid-ask spread of market makers such as the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE). The NYSE is a collection of market makers known as specialists. Each specialist is responsible
for creating a market in one or more individual securities. Each holds inventories, posts publicly observable
bid and ask prices, and reports a history of past transaction prices.6 However there is also an active set of
middlemen commonly referred to as the “over the counter” market (OTC). Pirrong (2000) estimates that
the OTC market accounts for only 8 percent of the volume and 10 percent of the transactions in NYSE-
listed securities. Despite this small market share, the OTC market does appear to play the role of the
   6 Typically a specialist on the NYSE posts prices for only relatively small transactions. Almost all large transactions are

negotiated “upstairs” via middlemen; only after the deal is consummated is the transaction price publicly posted.


                                                             34
competitive fringe as in our model. Although the evidence is mixed, several empirical studies, such as
Battalio (1997), document that the quoted bid-ask spread for NYSE-listed securities tightens when “third
market” dealer/brokers enter and compete against the NYSE to execute trades.
    The NYSE also faces increasing competition from other potential market makers such as R. Steven
Wunsch’s computerized Arizona Stock Exchange (www.azx.com) and the Cincinnati Stock Exchange. In
recent years the advent of “electronic communication networks” (ECNs), competition from computer-
ized foreign exchanges, and a change to a more pro-competitive regulatory regime at the Securities and
Excahnge Commission (SEC) have subjected the NYSE to much more competitive pressure than it has
experienced in the past.7 This has forced the NYSE to make changes it had previously resisted such as
repealing “Rule 390”, moving toward 24-hour trading, and allowing prices to be quoted in decimals rather
than in 1/8 increments.8 Battalio, Greene, and Jennings (1997) studied the effect of a set of rule changes
in the early 1990s that made it easier to trade NYSE-listed securities on regional exchanges. They found
that, after the rule changes, bid-ask spreads decreased for about two-thirds of the securities in their sample.
    Although the narrowing of bid-ask spreads that Battalio (1997) and Battalio, Greene, and Jennings
(1997) find in response to increased competition is consistent with our model, it runs counter to the in-
tuition of a set of models in the financial intermediation literature. See, for example, Easley, Kiefer, and
O’Hara (1996) and Fong, Madhavan, and Swan (1999). These papers emphasize the potential adverse
selection problem associated with competition between intermediaries. These models generally consider
two types of traders: informed and uninformed. If the middlemen are able to selectively trade with only the
uniformed traders (e.g. by only accepting small orders), then the market maker is left trading with only the
informed traders. This “cream skimming” by the middlemen leaves the market maker at an informational
disadvantage against the informed traders. In response, the market maker must widen his bid-ask spread
in order not to systematically lose money.
    Within this adverse selection literature, Pirrong’s (2000) model is perhaps the closest to ours. He
considers the effect of competition between a monopolist market maker and a “third market” consisting of
middlemen. He focuses on the effects of entry by middlemen on an initial equilibrium with a monopolist
market maker, whereas we focus on the effect of the entry of a monopolist market maker on an initial search
equilibrium where there is free entry and exit of middlemen. Pirrong’s model has differently informed
traders, and studies whether the creation of a third market results in free riding on the price discovery
  7 See   www.island.com for an example of an ECN with posted transactable prices and completely open order books.
  8 NYSE Rule 390,  which prevented member firms from trading with middle in the OTC market, was repealed on May 5, 2000.



                                                           35
provided by a monopolist market maker. The NYSE has advanced this latter argument to the SEC as its
rationale for the need to limit the formation of third markets and competing exchanges. However, Pirrong
concludes that “although free entry to the exchange would maximize welfare, encouragement of a free
entry third market may be a second-best response to exchange market power” (p. 2).
   Our model is silent on this adverse selection problem, and, as noted above, does not address potential
network externalities associated with market making. In our model, free entry by middlemen provides a
significant competitive threat to a monopolist market maker, forcing it to substantially reduce its bid-ask
spreads. This results in a significant welfare gain to both buyers and sellers. Since middlemen undercut the
market maker’s quoted prices, their entry increases price dispersion compared with the initial equilibrium.
From the monopolist market maker’s point of view, this additional price dispersion is unnecessary and
evidence that the middlemen are free riding on its price discovery; however, from the point of view of
producers and consumers, any additional costs associated with the extra price dispersion are outweighed
by the benefits of the reduction in the market maker’s bid-ask spreads.
   Thirty years ago the secondary market for U.S. Treasury securities was dominated by middlemen.
Trades between dealers were made through a small set of inter-dealer brokerage firms. Trades were con-
ducted over the telephone, and dealers did not know the prices other dealers received, nor were customers
(e.g., pension funds) shown the prices dealers faced. However, in 1972 Cantor Fitzgerald, a brokerage
firm, began allowing dealers to see transactable bid and ask prices on computer screens. Dealers could
now see the prices other dealers received. As the quotation at the beginning of the article states, by making
its prices transparent, Cantor Fitzgerald “vaulted to nearly monopolistic pre-eminence in the bond mar-
ket.” In 1990, in response to calls from the SEC and customers for greater market transparency, several
of the major brokers in the inter-dealer market formed a joint venture, GovPX, to consolidate inter-dealer
data. Once consolidated, these data are transmitted in real time to customers through vendors such as
Bloomberg. In our view the Treasury market has been transformed from primarily a dealer market like the
one described in section 2 to a market with competitive market making like the one described in section 4.
   Today trades in the inter-dealer market are made through brokers either by telephone or over an elec-
tronic transaction system (ETS). Like the market maker in our model, ETSs allow dealers to post trans-
actable prices and quantities and execute trades electronically. The Bond Market Association (2001) re-
ports there are currently 33 ETSs active in the U.S. Treasury market, but the two largest ETSs, eSpeed, Inc.
and BrokerTec Global, LLC, dominate the market.9 The Bond Market Association reports that although
  9 Cantor   Fitzgerald owns 55 percent of eSpeed. BrokerTec is run and owned by a consortium of large Wall Street firms.


                                                              36
the ETSs are capturing a large share of trades in the most liquid issues, trades in less liquid issues still
take place primarily over the telephone. We are told by Treasury market participants that the telephone
market is helpful in getting information about the depth of the market that is not always available on an
ETS. Although our model does not explicitly account for liquidity, one can stretch the model’s intuition
by interpreting a decrease in liquidity as an increase in the cost of carrying out a transaction. This would
suggest that liquid securities are associated with low km ’s relative to k whereas the reverse holds true for
less liquid securities.
    Although precise data on the fraction of inter-dealer trades executed electronically are unavailable,
one (albeit noisy) way to measure the movement away from telephone trading and toward ETSs is to view
the fraction of total inter-dealer trades not captured by GovPX. Neither eSpeed nor BrokerTec reports its
trades to GovPX; therefore the trades recorded by GovPX are dominated by the telephone brokers. All
inter-dealer broker trades, including those made through the ETSs are reported to the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York. Fleming (2001) reports that GovPX’s coverage of the total market has fallen in recent years
from 65 percent in 1997 to 57 percent in 1998 and 52 percent in 1999. Although certainly not conclusive,
this evidence suggests that the ETSs’ market share is increasing.
    Although our model predicts that the rise in electronic trading should lead to a decrease in bid-ask
spreads in the inter-dealer market, bid-ask spreads are generally higher today than they were in 1997. In
particular bid-ask spreads widened substantially in 1998 during the Russian crisis and the near collapse of
Long Term Capital Management and have not returned to pre-crisis levels. We do not have access to the
high-quality transactions data necessary to tease out the effect of the ETSs on bid-ask spreads, taking into
account other broad market events (e.g., the reduction in U.S. Treasury debt during the second half of the
Clinton administration and the Treasury’s buy-back program).
    Just as ETSs have transformed the U.S. Treasury market securities from one dominated by middlemen
to one dominated by market makers, it is not hard to imagine similar conversions happening in other
markets. In particular, we believe the U.S. steel market is a likely candidate for such a transformation.
Spulber’s (1996a) model of a dealer market provides a reasonable caricature of the current state of the
U.S. steel market. It is a highly competitive and unconcentrated market where over 5,000 “steel service
centers” (SSCs) play the role of middlemen between buyers and sellers of steel products. In 1998 three
potential market makers – Enron, e-STEEL, and MetalSite – entered the market. None has yet been
successful in garnering a significant share of transactions.10 From November 2000 to December 2001,
  10 Enron   declared bankruptcy in December 2001. Although both e-STEEL and MetalSite are still in business, neither firm is


                                                              37
Enron attempted to become a market maker in steel: it posted bid and ask prices on the web for coil steel
and held inventory in Chicago to ensure market liquidity. However, as we are writing this paper (in the
Winter of 2002), it is our understanding from discussions with executives in the steel industry (but outside
of Enron) that the prices currently posted on the web for Enron steel are several months out of date and that
Enron is exiting the steel industry. As far as we know, Enron went out of business for reasons unrelated to
its maker making position in steel.
    In contrast to Enron, neither e-STEEL nor MetalSite claims to be an explicit market maker: nei-
ther holds its own inventories, and neither posts its own bid and ask prices. Instead, these sites operate
like the Exchange and Mart in the P.O.W. camp discussed above or like the “information gatekeepers”
studied by Baye and Morgan (2001). Information gatekeepers are web sites, such as Shopper.com or
Mortgage-quotes.com, that centralize dispersed price information and reduce search costs by allowing
buyers and sellers to post bid and ask prices on the web.
    We can reinterpret the market maker in our model as an information gatekeeper that charges commis-
sions to buyers and sellers rather than buying and selling on its own account and charging its own bid-ask
spreads. Suppose the gatekeeper charges a per unit commission or transaction fee τ to buyers and sellers to
post prices on the site. Thus if a buyer posts a bid of b and succeeds in transacting, the total per unit cost he
actually pays would be b           τ. Similarly, if a seller posts an ask price of a and transacts, the seller’s actual
per unit proceeds are a        τ. With a continuum of buyers and sellers, the only Nash equilibrium outcome is
for all buyers to post a common bid price b and all sellers to post a common ask price a. For any given value
of τ, supply and demand for units advertised by the gatekeeper will be equated if and only if a                           1      b.
Consider an equilibrium where a             b     5
                                                 1 2 and the gatekeeper’s commission is one-half the bid-ask spread
charged by a monopolist market maker, namely, 2τ              3 a  m    bm   8  1    km 2 5   k  1 5  8δ  2 , where
km is the gatekeeper’s marginal cost per transaction (i.e., the marginal cost of posting a bid-ask pair on the
                                                                                          5
gatekeeper’s website). In this equilibrium a seller posts an ask price of 1 2 but net of the commission, re-
ceives a per unit sales price equal to 1 2      5  τ3   bm , which is the same price the seller would have obtained
from a monopolist market maker. Symmetrical remarks apply to buyers. It is immaterial whether a market
has a monopolist market maker or a monopolist gatekeeper: both lead to exactly the same equilibrium
outcome.11 There can be no dispersion in the bid and ask prices posted on the gatekeeper’s website, but
capturing a significant share of transactions. MetalSite shut down its website and all trading in June 2001, but relaunched it in
late November 2001. e-STEEL is now NewView and has switched its focus to licensing inter-enterprise software.
   11 The gatekeeper can use a variety of different commission structures to implement the same outcome as a monopolist market

maker. For example, the gatekeeper might charge nothing to buyers who post bids on the site, but a commission equal to



                                                              38
there will be price dispersion in the dealer market due to the search frictions.
    The crucial difference between the two steel dot-coms and the ETSs in the U.S. Treasury market is
price transparency. In the Treasury market dealers must post transactable, “take it or leave it” prices. The
ETSs in the inter-dealer Treasury market are designed so that no negotiation over price occurs (although
negotiation over quantity may still occur). Posted prices are available to all subscribers, and the history
of past transactions is made public. In contrast, e-STEEL and MetalSite are designed as “computerized
chat rooms” where private transactions are negotiated. Both websites allow buyers and sellers to post
prices, but next to each posted price is a “negotiate” or “counter-offer” button. From our discussions
with steel middlemen, we learned that these posted prices were much like the list price for a new car;
they represent first offers, not take-it-or-leave-it prices. Negotiation is expected. Consequently these
two websites are more akin to a computerized extension of the existing dealer or telephone market for
steel, but where individual deals are negotiated by typing messages into a computer terminal rather than
conducted over the telephone. To the extent that most producers and consumers in the steel market find
it easier to negotiate verbally by telephone than by typing messages over a computer terminal, e-STEEL
and MetalSite not only fail to perform the role of market maker, but may indeed constitute an inferior
technology for intermediation in the dealer market compared with the pre-existing telephone technology.
    Furthermore, neither e-STEEL nor MetalSite posts historical transaction data, and both allow buyers
and sellers to limit who can view their own postings. There is a question on the “frequently asked ques-
tions” page of the e-STEEL web site: “Does e-STEEL create pricing transparency?” The posted answer
is “Since e-STEEL is not an auction, your pricing remains private. e-STEEL preserves your current way
of doing business since online negotiations and transactions between you and your trading partners are
kept private and secure.” This emphasis on privacy made it difficult to learn about the current market price
of steel from visiting e-STEEL. We conclude that these two web sites are simply offering an alternative
communication channel to the telephone to enable buyers and sellers to negotiate privately. Neither fulfills
the role of a market maker or an information gatekeeper that posts publicly observable and transactable
bid and ask prices. This may be part of the reason that these firms have not been successful in gaining a

  a` b c
significant share of transactions in steel.
τ    am bm to sellers. In this case the equilibrium outcome would be for all buyers to place bids equal to am and all sellers
would place asks equal to am . The price received by sellers net of commission is then the same as the bid price bm that a
monopolist market maker would choose.




                                                             39
6 Conclusions

This paper has developed a theory of competitive exchange in which the microstructure of exchange is
determined endogenously. We have done this by introducing a fourth type of agent, market makers, into
the equilibrium search model with competitive middlemen introduced by Spulber (1996a). Middlemen
and market makers represent complementary and competitive exchange institutions: market makers post
publicly observable bid and ask prices, whereas prices quoted by middlemen in the dealer market consti-
tute private information that can only be obtained through a costly search process. We have focused on
the effect of entry by a monopolist market maker on an initial equilibrium where there is free entry by
competitive middlemen.




                                 Figure 8: Summary of Equilibria, δ      D2
    Figure 8 summarizes the range of equilibrium outcomes predicted by the model. The type of equilib-
rium outcome depends on three key parameters: the search cost parameter δ, the per unit transactions cost
of the market maker km , and the per unit transactions cost of the most efficient middleman k. The left-hand
                                                                                                       
panel displays the four possible equilibrium regimes that occur for various combinations of the km k pa-
rameters when the search cost is fixed at δ   D 2. The model predicts that no market maker will be present
if km is sufficiently high relative to k (region 1), and that no middlemen will exist if k is sufficiently large
                                                                                   
relative to km (regions 3 and 4). Region 2 represents the intermediate slice of km k values that permit the
coexistence of middlemen and market makers. The right-hand panel shows the share of trade handled by
the market maker. In region 2 this share increases linearly in k for any fixed km or, conversely, declines


                                                      40
linearly in km in for any fixed k. We can conceptualize the steel industry as corresponding to values of
 k  k   in region 1 where entry by a market maker is currently unprofitable. In the securities industry, entry
                                                                                                       
  m

barriers to middlemen and other market makers created by the NYSE correspond to values of km k that
are close to region 3 where the market maker engages in limit pricing; that is, it chooses the largest possi-
ble bid-ask spread subject to the constraint that this spread is not sufficiently high to encourage significant
entry of dealer/brokers into the OTC market.
      We recognize that there are several limitations to our analysis that qualify the types of conclusions we
can draw from it. First, as noted in sections 4 and 5, our model does not account for information asym-
metries or network externalities, which could affect our conclusions about whether entry by middlemen
or competing market makers always benefits buyers and sellers in the market. A richer analysis would be
required to determine whether some intermediaries might free ride on the price discovery provided by a
market maker, so that market fragmentation could occur and raise traders’ search costs and reduce welfare.
If there are network externalities in addition to the information problems, there may be conditions under
which market making has elements of natural monopoly.
      A second limitation is that we assumed that all exchange must be intermediated by either a middle-
man or a market maker. As we noted in the introduction, only half of the volume of trade in steel occurs
through middlemen; the rest does not occur through market makers but through direct transactions be-
tween producers and consumers. Hendershott and Zhang (2001) study an extension of Spulber’s (1996a)
model in which a monopolist producer can sell directly to consumers or through a middleman. Direct sales
involve lower search costs than intermediated sales. In equilibrium, the market segments. In a result anal-
ogous to ours, high-valuation consumers purchase directly from the producer, and intermediate-valuation
consumers choose to search for better prices in the dealer market.
      A third limitation of our analysis is that we constrained supply and demand for the commodity for both
market makers and middlemen to be equal in every period. As a result, these agents have no inventory
holdings in our model. An important function of intermediaries is to hold inventory to provide a buffer
stock that offers their customers liquidity at times when there is an imbalance between supply and demand
(see Spulber, 1996b). In the securities business, liquidity means being able to buy or sell a reasonable
quantity of shares on short notice. In the steel market, liquidity is also associated with a demand for
“immediacy” so that a customer can be guaranteed of receiving shipment of an order within a few days of
placement. Lacking inventories and stockouts, this model cannot be used to analyze the important role of
intermediaries in providing liquidity.


                                                        41
    Although our model is highly simplified and stylized, it provides insights into the organization of a
variety of different asset and commodities markets. Consider the two puzzles raised in the introduction.
One puzzle was to explain how entry could be profitable even if middlemen uniformly undercut the market
maker’s publicly posted bid and ask prices. Our explanation is that even though it is common knowledge
that middlemen offer better prices, the highest-valuation buyers and lowest-cost sellers still find it optimal
to trade immediately at these prices rather than incur the search costs involved in trying to find a better
price in the dealer market.
    The other puzzle was to explain why market makers intermediate a significant share of trade in financial
assets such as bonds and stocks, but virtually none of the trade in steel. Our model suggests that an
explanation for this puzzle is that transactions costs for market making are high for commodities such as
steel but low for financial assets such as bonds. However this explanation may seem tautological. Why
would transactions costs associated with market making be so high for commodities such as steel and so
low for financial assets such as bonds?
    Recall that km can be thought of as including a “rebate” to buyers and sellers to offset any transactions
costs involved in transacting with the market maker. In financial assets such as bonds and agricultural
commodities such as wheat and pork bellies, buyers and sellers (or producers and consumers) may be
relatively sophisticated and may be used to conducting transactions through a market maker at a central
exchange. Thus, their “hassle” or transactions costs may be fairly low, resulting in a low value of km
relative to k. However, in the steel market, traders have little experience in conducting transactions over
an exchange. They may perceive relatively high transactions costs to doing business with a market maker
compared with their local SSC. Thus a new entrant to the steel market may face a different culture than
did the initial entrants to the bond or wheat markets, and this difference in culture could translate into a
higher effective transactions cost km as explained in the beginning of section 3.
    However, the increasing penetration of computers and the World Wide Web seems to be gradually
changing the culture in the steel market, lowering km and creating the possibility for profitable entry. As
we noted, there have recently been several unsuccessful attempts at entry by potential market makers. This
may indicate that technology and associated cultural changes are reducing km relative to k, moving the
market toward the boundary between region 1 (where entry by a market maker is unprofitable) and region
2 (where entry is profitable). From our own observation of the steel market, we think it is only a matter
of time before successful entry does occur. Also, some of the problems experienced by the first wave of
entrants into the steel market may have been due to the general effects of the dot.com crash of 2001-02,


                                                     42
and some of these entrants (such as Enron) might have successed in entering the steel market had it not
been for problems in their other lines of business.
   More generally, our model provides new insights into how the information revolution could affect
the microstructure of a variety of different markets. We expect that improvements in computing and
communications technologies will tend to drive all three parameters δ, k, and km toward zero. In this
case we expect that most markets will ultimately be in a configuration near the origin in region 2 of
figure 8. Our theoretical results predict that middlemen and market makers will coexist, with each handling
approximately half of the total volume of trade.




                                                      43
References
 [1] Bakos, Yannis. “The Emerging Landscape for Retail E-Commerce.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
     tives 15 (Winter 2001): 69–80.

 [2] Battalio, Robert. “Third Market Broker-Dealers: Cost Competitors or Cream Skimmers?” Journal of
     Finance 52 (March 1997): 341–352.

 [3] Battalio, Robert, Greene, Jason, and Jennings, Robert. “Do Competing Specialists and Preferencing
     Dealers Affect Market Quality?” Review of Financial Studies 10 (Winter 1997): 969–993.

 [4] Baye, Michael, and Morgan, John. “Information Gatekeepers on the Internet and the Competitiveness
     of Homogeneous Product Markets.” American Economic Review 91 (June 2001): 454–474.

 [5] Bond Market Association. “eCommerce in the Fixed-Income Markets: The 2001 Review of Elec-
     tronic Transaction Systems” Manuscript. Washington: BMA, December 2001.

 [6] Domowitz, Ian. “Automating the Continuous Double Auction in Practice: Automated Trade Execu-
     tion Systems in Financial Markets.” In D. Friedman and J. Rust (eds.) The Double Auction Market:
     Institutions, Theories, and Evidence (1993): 27–60.

 [7] Easley, David, Kiefer, Nicholas, and O’Hara, Maureen. “Cream-Skimming or Profit Sharing? The
     Curious Role of Purchased Order Flow.” Journal of Finance 51 (July 1996): 811–833.

 [8] Fleming, Michael “Measuring Treasury Market Liquidity.” Manuscript. New York: Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York, June 2001.

 [9] Fong, Kingsley, Madhavan, Ananth, and Swan, Peter. “Why Do Securities Market Fragment?”
     Manuscript. Los Angeles, CA: University of Southern California, November 1999.

[10] Garman, Mark. “Market Microstructure.” Journal of Financial Economics 3 (1976): 257–275.

[11] Gehrig, Thomas. “Intermediation in Search Markets.” Journal of Economics and Management Strat-
     egy 2 (1993): 97–120.

[12] Hendershott, Terrence, and Zhang, Jie. “A Model of Direct and Intermediated Sales.” Manuscript,
     Berkeley: University of California. November 2001.

[13] Caillaud, B. and B. Jullien. “Chicken and Egg: Competing Matchmakers.” Manuscript, Toulouse:
     University of Toulouse. 2001.

[14] Lucking-Reiley, David and Spulber, Daniel F. “Business to Business Electronic Commerce.” Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 15 (Winter 2001): 55–68.

[15] Neeman, Z. and N. Vulkan. “Markets Versus Negotiations: the Predominance of Centralized Mar-
     kets” Manuscript, Bost: Boston University. 2001.

[16] O’Hara, M. Market Microstructure Theory. Oxford U.K.: Basil Blackwell, 1995.

[17] Pirrong, Craig. “Third Markets and the Second Best.” Manuscript. St. Louis: Washington University,
     November 2000.

                                                  44
[18] Radford, R.A. “The Economic Organisation of a P.O.W. Camp.” Economica 12 (November 1945):
     189–201.

[19] Rubinstein, A., and A. Wolinsky. “Middlemen.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (1987): 581–
     593.

[20] Spulber, Daniel F. “Market Making by Price Setting Firms.” Review of Economic Studies 63 (October
     1996a) 559–580.

[21] Spulber, Daniel F. “Market Microstructure and Intermediation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
     10 (Summer 1996b) 135–152.

[22] Spulber, D. Market Microstructure: Intermediaries and the Theory of the Firm Cambridge University
     Press. 1999

[23] Yanelle, M.O. “The Strategic Analysis of Intermediation.” European Economic Review 33 (1989):
     294–301.

[24] Yavas, Abdullah. “Marketmakers versus Matchmakers.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 2
     (1992): 33-58.




                                                 45
