NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF INFORMATION AND SOCIAL INTERACTIONS IN RETIREMENT PLAN
DECISIONS: EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT

Esther Duflo
Emmanuel Saez

Working Paper 8885
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8885

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Orley Ashenfelter, Josh Angrist, David Autor, Abhijit Banerjee, David Card,
Jonathan Gruber, Guido Imbens, Larry Katz, Jeffrey Kling, Botond Koszegi, Michael Kremer, Alan Krueger,
David Laibson, Sendhil Mullainathan, and seminar participants at Berkeley, MIT, Princeton, and UCLA for
very helpful comments and discussions. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National
Science Foundation (SES-0078535). We are especially grateful to all the members of the Benefits Office of
the University for their help and support in organizing the experiment. This paper does not reflect the views
of the university or its benefits office. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Esther Duflo and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement Plan Decisions:
Evidence from a Randomized Experiment
Esther Duflo and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 8885
April 2002
JEL No. D83, I22

ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes a randomized experiment to shed light on the role of information and social
interactions in employees' decisions to enroll in a Tax Deferred Account (TDA) retirement plan within
a large university. The experiment encouraged a random sample of employees in a subset of departments
to attend a benefits information fair organized by the university, by promising a monetary reward for
attendance. The experiment more than tripled the attendance rate of these treated individuals (relative to
controls), and doubled that of untreated individuals within departments where some individuals were
treated. TDA enrollment 5 and 11 months after the fair was significantly higher in departments where
some individuals were treated than in departments where nobody was treated. However, the effect on
TDA enrollment is almost as large for individuals in treated departments who did not receive the
encouragement as for those who did. We provide three interpretations, differential treatment effects,
social network effects, and motivational reward effects, to account for these results.

Esther Duflo
MIT
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu

Emmanuel Saez
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
saez@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Low levels of savings in the United States have generated substantial interest in the question of what determines savings decisions. A vast literature has studied the impact of Tax
Deferred Accounts (hereafter, TDA), such as Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and
401(k)s, on retirement savings decisions,1 and, concurrently, the impact of these plans’
features on enrollment and contribution rates. In addition to the tax savings and economic incentives (such as employer’s match), a number of recent studies emphasize the
role of non-economic factors, such as social interactions, financial education, inertia, and
commitment. Duflo and Saez (2000) study how individual participation in a TDA plan
within a large university is affected by average participation in one’s department. They
obtain suggestive evidence that peer effects have a strong influence on the decision to
enroll in TDA plans. Madrian and Shea (2001) and Choi et al. (2001a, 2001b) show that
default rules have an enormous impact on employees’ participation, contribution, and
asset allocation. When employees are enrolled by default in a TDA, very few opt out and
most employees do not change the default contribution rate or the default allocation of
assets. Thaler and Bernatzi (2001) show that inducing employees to commit to contribute
a large fraction of their pay raises to the TDA (the “Save More Tomorrow” program) has
a dramatic positive impact on savings rates. Bernheim and Garett (1996) and Bayer,
Bernheim, and Scholz (1996), Bernheim, Garett and Maki (1997), among others, study
the role of financial education. They present evidence that financial education tends to
be remedial2 but that it increases participation in savings plans, suggesting that employees may not be able to gather the necessary information on their own. This evidence,
though suggestive, does not provide fully convincing proof that information and financial
education can have a strong impact on TDA participation decisions, because employers’
1

See Poterba, Venti and Wise (1996) and Engen, Gale and Scholz (1996) for a controversial debate

summarizing the literature.
2
Employers resort to it when they fail discrimination testing because the contribution rates of the not
highly compensated employees are too low.

1

decision to provide this information is endogenous. Recently, Madrian and Shea (2002)
studied the effects of benefits seminars within a large firm and showed interesting evidence of self-selection in the decision to attend benefits: employees who attend seminars
are much more likely to be recent enrollees in the TDA plan. They found modest positive
effect of information seminars on TDA participation after a few months.
Financial education is generally recognized as an potentially important avenue to improve the quality of financial decision making. 71% of the fortune 500 companies systematically hold financial information sessions. A further 10% conducts them occasionally.3
The U.S. Treasury (Summers, 2000) outlined a proposal to improve financial literacy and
increase the access to financial services of lower income American households. In particular, the report stressed the importance of information on savings instruments and the role
of social interaction effects in the decision to save. The goal of this paper is to analyze
the evidence from a random experiment to shed light on both the role of information and
social interactions on the employees’ decision to enroll in the employer sponsored TDA
plan of a large university. Our analysis improves upon the studies discussed above because
the source of identification comes directly from the randomized experiment. This allows
us to overcome some of the very difficult identification problems in the presence of peer
effects, described notably in Manski (1993, 1995).4
Each year, the university organizes and invites all its employees to a benefits fair
in order to provide information on benefits. In particular, a stated goal of the fair is
to increase the enrollment rate in TDA, which the university administration feels is too
3
4

This data come from a telephone survey of all 500 companies we conducted in the summer 2001.
In spite of these difficulties, there is a growing empirical literature on peer effects using observa-

tional analysis which essentially focuses on social behavior, and the adoption of new technologies. For
example, Case and Katz (1991) and Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992) on teenagers’ behavior, Bertrand,
Mullainathan and Luttner (1998) on welfare participation, Munshi (2000a) on contraception, and Besley
and Case (1994), Foster and Rosenzweig (1995) and Munshi (2000b) on technology adoption in developing countries. Sorensen (2001) analyzes peer effects within departments of a university in the choice of
Employer sponsored Health Plans using a methodology related to Duflo and Saez (2000).

2

low (around 35%). Obviously, comparing the TDA enrollment decisions of fair attendees
to those who did not attend the fair would not provide convincing evidence of a causal
effect of fair attendance on TDA enrollment, because the decision to attend the fair is
endogenous.5 To circumvent this selection problem, we have implemented the following
experiment. We selected a random sample of employees not yet enrolled in the TDA and
sent them an invitation letter promising a $20 reward for attending the fair. This type
of experiment is a classical encouragement design, often used in medical science, where
treatments are offered to a random group of patients who then decide whether or not to
take the treatment.6 Encouragement designs are rare in economics. An example is the
study by Powers and Swinton (1984) who analyze the effect of hours of study on test
scores by randomly mailing test preparation materials to students to encourage them to
study.
The second objective of our study is to analyze peer effects within departments. We
therefore designed our experiment such that we are able to estimate social interaction
effects. Namely, “treated” individuals who were sent the invitation letter were selected
only from a random subset of departments (the “treated” departments). A number of
recent studies have also used experimental or quasi-experimental situations to study social
interaction effects. Kremer and Miguel (2001) is perhaps the most closely related to our
study. They analyze an experiment design to evaluate own and external effects of a
medical treatment against intestinal worms for children in schools in Kenya, and obtain
evidence of spillover effects. They show that children in treated schools who did not
get the medicine were positively affected. However, in their case, variation in treatment
5

For example, individuals who had already decided to enroll, but are not sure exactly how much they

wanted to contribute, may be more likely to attend the fair (see Madrian and Shea (2002) for evidence
of selection in the decision to attend information sessions.
6
For example, Permutt and Hebel (1989) study the effect of maternal smoking on birth weight using
randomly assigned free smoker’s counseling to encourage mothers to quit smoking. Imbens et al. (2000)
analyze of the effect of flu shots (recommended but not required) to a random subset of patients on flu
outcomes.

3

status within a school was not randomized but occurred because some children were
not present on treatment day. Katz et al. (2001) use random assignment to a housing
voucher program for households living in high poverty public housing projects in the
Boston area and find improvement of treated families in safety, health, and exposure to
crime.7 Sacerdote (2001) uses random assignment of first-year students in Dartmouth
college dorms and finds peer effects strongly influence levels of academic effort as well
as decisions to join social groups. These latter two studies on social interactions differ
from ours mainly because they study the effect of assigning individuals to different peer
groups, whereas in our study, peer groups (departments) are fixed, and we analyze how
individual decisions are affected by an exogenous change on the information set of some
members of the peer group.
The first stage of our study analyzes the effect of the invitation letter on fair attendance. Treated individuals are three times as likely to attend the fair as control individuals. Interestingly, control individuals in treated departments are twice as likely to attend
the fair as control individuals in non-treated departments, despite the fact that only original letter recipient could claim the $20 reward. This shows that the invitation letters not
only increased the fair attendance rate for individuals who received them but had also
a spill-over social effect on their colleagues within departments. The direct effect of the
letter on attendance (purged from the peer effects) can also be estimated by comparing
the attendance rates of treated and control individuals within treated departments only.
The second stage of the study tries to estimate the causal effect of fair attendance
and social effects on the decision to enroll in the TDA. We show that, 5 and 11 months
after the fair, individuals in treated departments are significantly more likely to have
started contributing to the TDA than control individuals. This shows that our experiment, and hence the fair, was successful in increasing TDA enrollment. However, there
is no significant difference in TDA enrollment between those who actually received our
7

Following our previous discussion, the voucher program can be seen as an encouragement design to

leave public housing projects.

4

encouragement letter and those in the same departments who did not. We propose three
different interpretations, not necessarily mutually exclusive, to account for these facts.
First, this might be evidence of differential treatment effects of fair attendance on TDA
enrollment. Employees who come to the fair only because of the financial reward are
different from those who decide to come to the fair because of their colleagues, and it
is plausible to think that the treatment effect is larger for the latter group than for the
former. Second, there might be social network effects within departments. Fair attendees
might be able to spread information obtained from the fair in their departments. Third,
our results might also be explained by motivational reward effects. Paying individuals to
attend the fair might affect their subjective motivation and therefore the perceived value
or quality of the information they obtain at the fair. Such effects have been documented
in the social psychology literature. Our experiment does not allow us to separately identify these three effects but it allows us to conclude that the important decision about how
much to save for retirement can be affected by small shocks such as a very small financial
reward and/or the influence of peers, and thus does not seem to be the consequence of an
elaborate decision process.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the benefits
fair and the design of our experiment. Section 3 discusses the reduced form evidence.
Section 4 develops a simple model to guide the subsequent analysis of our results. Section
5 provides additional evidence from a follow-up questionnaire and a general interpretation
of our results. Finally, Section 6 offers a brief conclusion.

5

2

Context and Experiment Design

2.1

Benefits and Benefits Fair

The university we study has approximately 12,500 employees. About a quarter of the
employees are faculty members. Our study was limited to non-faculty employees only.8
The university provides retirement benefits to its employees through a traditional pension
plan and a complementary Tax Deferred Account (TDA) plan. Part of the traditional
pension plan is a Defined Contribution (DC) plan whereby 3.5% of an employee’s salary is
put into an individual mutual fund account.9 Employees can also voluntary contribute to
a TDA 403(b) plan.10 Every employee can contribute to the 403(b) plan any percentage
of their salary up to the IRS limit ($10,500 per year for each individual in 2001). The
university does not match contributions. In both the DC and the TDA plans, employees
can choose to invest their contributions in any number of four different vendors.
Each year, the university organizes a benefits fair where all employees are invited to
come and learn about all benefits (such as health benefits, retirement benefits, etc...)
provided by the university. The fair is held on two consecutive days in early November
in two different locations, each one close to the two separate main university campuses.
About one week before the fair, every employee receives a letter through university mail
inviting her to attend the fair. This letter also provides a brief description of the event. At
the same time, under separate cover, every employee receives a packet describing in detail
university benefits along with enrollment forms. November is “open enrollment” month
during which each employee may change her benefits choices by submitting the enrollment
form. If the employee does not send back the form, her benefits choices are automatically
carried over from the previous year. However, employees are free to enroll in the TDA or
8

Duflo and Saez (2000) present suggestive evidence that staff employees TDA choices are not influenced

by faculty choices and vice-versa.
9
Non-faculty employees have an additional Defined Benefits plan in addition to the DC plan.
10
403(b) plans are very similar to the better known 401(k) plans but their use is restricted to not-forprofits firms.

6

change their contribution level or investment decision at any time throughout the year.
In both locations, the fair is held in a large hotel reception room. There are a large
number of stands representing the university Benefits Office, and the various health and
retirement benefits service providers. The university Benefits Office offers information on
all benefits through direct conversation with benefits office staff present at the fair, and
through a number of information pamphlets freely available at their stand. The benefits
office also provides information on how the other stands at the fair are organized. These
other stands are run by each of the specialized service providers. For example, each of the
mutual fund vendors has a stand at which they provide information about the TDA plan
and the specific services they offer within that plan. The fair also offers individuals the
chance to use a specially designed computer program to analyze their specific situation.
Employees are free to come anytime during the three and a half hours during which the
fair is held, and visit any number of stands they want.

2.2

Experiment Design

The university organizes the annual fair in order to disseminate information about benefits
and help its employees make better decisions. The university feels the participation rate
among staff (34%) is too low compared to other universities, and that this may be due to
lack of information.
A simple comparison between the benefits choices of those who attend the fair and
those who do not does not provide an unbiased estimate of the effect of the fair. Clearly,
those who plan to change their benefits choices may be more likely to attend the fair.
Therefore, in order to to identify the causal effect of fair attendance on TDA enrollment,
we set up an “encouragement design”, by promising a random subset of employees a
small amount of money for attending the fair. In previous work (Duflo and Saez, 2000),
we have shown that the decisions to participate into the TDA are very correlated among
individuals within departments, which suggests the existence of social effects in enrollment
decisions. Therefore, in order to shed light on social effects within departments, not all
7

individuals within the treated departments received a letter. We can thus measure peer
effects using individuals who didn’t receive a letter, but who had peers that did.
We used a cross-section of administrative data provided by the university on all its
employees as of August 2000. We restricted the sample to staff employees (i.e. nonfaculty employees) aged less than 65 and eligible to participate in the TDA.11 Of the 9,700
employees meeting these criteria, around 3,500 were enrolled in the TDA as of August
2000. From now on, we refer to these individuals as the pre-enrolled individuals. The
remaining 6,200 individuals were not enrolled in the TDA by August 2000. As very few
employees stop contributing to the TDA once they are enrolled,12 we focus on the decision
to start participating into the TDA. Thus the sample of 6,200 non-enrolled individuals is
our sample of primary interest.
In the first step, we randomly selected two thirds of the departments of the university
(220 out of a total of 330) as follows. In order to maximize the power of the experiment
(in a context in which we know there are strong department effects), we first matched
departments according to their size (i.e. number of employees) and participation rate
in the TDA before the fair. We separated department into deciles of participation rates
among the staff. Each decile contains 33 departments. We then ranked them by size
within each decile, and formed groups of three departments by putting three consecutive
departments on these lists in the same triplet. Within each of these triplets, we randomly
selected two departments to be part of the group of treated departments. From now on,
we refer to the treated departments as the T departments and to the control departments
as the 0 departments.
In the second step, within each of the treated departments, any individual not enrolled
as of August 2000 was selected with probability one half. This treatment group is com11

Part time employees working less than 20 hours per week are not eligible for the TDA. Most of these

employees are students of the university.
12
Only 80 of the 3,500 employees enrolled in the TDA stopped contributing during the one year period
we examine. More than five times as many employees started contributing to the TDA during the same
period.

8

posed of 2,039 individuals. We referred to this group as the Treated individuals and denote
them by T 1 (T for Treated department and 1 for being selected). The group formed by
the employees in the treated departments who were not selected contains 2,129 individuals and is denoted by T 0 (T for Treated department and 0 for not being selected). In
total, there are 4,168 individuals in the treated departments. The control group is formed
by employees in the control departments where no treatments were selected; it contains
2,043 individuals and is denoted by 0.
One week before the fair, we sent a letter via university mail to the 2,039 employees
in the treatment group T 1. The letter reminded them of the fair and informed them that
they would receive a check for $20 from us if they were to come to the fair and register
at our desk. This letter is reproduced in facsimile in the appendix.
At the fair, we set up a stand for the employees who received our invitation letter
to register their name. Unfortunately, the benefits office did not authorize us to record
the names of the fair participants who did not receive our letter. However, we recorded
their total number: a student stood at the fair entrance and distributed a coupon to each
person who entered the hall. The coupons had different colors according to the status
of the participant (active or retired), which allowed us to count the number of active
employees who attended the fair. Everybody had to pass through the narrow entrance
enter the fair, and the few people who refused the coupon were carefully counted. We are
thus confident that we accurately recorded the number of participants. In order to collect
information on the TDA status and the department affiliation of all the fair participants,
we organized a raffle. The coupons that were distributed at the entrance of the fair had
two parts, with a number written twice. Each fair attendant who wanted to participate in
the raffle gave us half of the coupon. We asked all the raffle participants their department
affiliation and whether they were currently enrolled in the TDA. The raffle was held
every 30 minutes, and the prize was a $50 Macy’s gift certificate. A total of 1,617 active
employees attended the fair. 573 of them had received our letter. Out of the remaining
1,044 employees, 766 (i.e., about three quarters) came to play the raffle and registered
9

their department affiliation and TDA enrollment status. An important issue that arises is
whether there was selection by T versus 0 departments in who decided to play the raffle
(and hence provide their department affiliation and TDA status). We do not believe this
was the case: most of those who refused to play the raffle did so because they visited our
stand just after the previous raffle had been played, and did not want to stay at the fair
long enough to wait for the next raffle. Therefore, we assume that fair attendants who did
not register their department affiliation are distributed between T and 0 departments as
those who did register. Therefore, in what follows, we scale up the attendance recorded
in each department by a factor of 1, 044/766.13
In order to assess the effects of the experiment and the fair on TDA participation, the
university provided us three waves of data. The first wave was obtained in September
2000, just before the fair. The second wave was from March 2001 (4.5 months after the
fair) and the third wave from October 2001 (11 months after the fair).
Finally, we sent a short questionnaire (reproduced in the appendix) to 917 employees
in April 2001. The questionnaire was designed to assess the intentions and evaluate the
knowledge of employees about retirement benefits. An additional goal of sending out the
questionnaire was to remind those that were not yet enrolled of their TDA status, and
(potentially) provide them a cue to think about enrolling in the TDA. In the questionnaire,
we asked employees whether they were enrolled in the TDA, why they were not enrolled,
whether they saved for retirement through other means, and whether they had attended
the fair. In order to induce employees to send back the questionnaire, we promised a $10
Macy’s gift certificate to any employee who would send back the questionnaire within
6 weeks. We selected 917 employees to receive the questionnaire as follows. First, we
restricted the sample to those who were not enrolled in the TDA by March 2001. Second,
one third of employees (301) were selected among the 573 fair participants who did receive
the invitation letter. The second third (311) of employees were selected among the 1,499
13

We present in Section 5 evidence supporting our non-selection hypothesis. However, we will discuss

how modifying this assumption would affect our result.

10

employees who received the invitation letter but did not come to the fair. The last third
(305) were selected among our control group (those who did not receive the invitation
letter).14 We did not intentionally leave out any departments, but since the number of
questionnaires was not very large, there are a number of departments where we did not
send any questionnaire.15

3

Results: Summary statistics and Reduced form differences

In the presence of social interactions, employees who work in departments where some
people received the letter can be affected by the experiment even if they did not receive the
letter themselves. They may be more likely to come to the fair themselves, because they
are reminded by others of the event, or because employees come to the fair in groups.16
They may also be more likely to enroll in the TDA even if they do not come to the fair
themselves, either because they are directly influenced by the action of those who went
to the fair, or because these individuals share the information they gathered at the fair.
Thus, employees are potentially subjected to two kinds of treatments: they can receive the
invitation letter themselves (group T 1), and they can be in a group where some employees
received the letter (departments T ). Those who receive the letter are, obviously, subject
to both treatments.
The summary statistics are displayed in Table 1, broken down into 4 groups. In
columns (1) to (3), we present the statistics for individuals who belong to treated departments T . Column (1) has the statistics for the entire group (group T ), column (2)
has the statistics for the group of treated individuals (group T 1), and column (3) has the
statistics for the untreated individuals in treated departments (group T 0). In column (4),
14
15

Out of these 305 individuals, 160 are from the T 0 control group and 145 are from the 0 control group.
These departments tend to be smaller, but once we control for the dummy indicating in which group

the department belongs, the difference in size is small.
16
This is something we observed at the fair.

11

we present the statistics for individuals who belong to the untreated departments (group
0). It is important to note that all these statistics (except the first row of Panel A and the
second row of Panel B) focus only on individuals not enrolled in the TDA on September
2000 before the fair. In Table 2, we present differences in the same variables across groups.
The differences are estimated by a regression, which includes a triplet fixed-effect, and
corrects standard errors for clustering at the department level.17 Columns (1), (2), (3),
and (4) present the differences between group T and group 0, group T 1 and group T 0,
group T 0 and group 0, group T 1 and group 0 respectively.
Panel A presents background characteristics. In the first wave (on September 2000
before the fair), a very small proportion of employees started contributing to the TDA
(the first wave is from September 2000, but we used data from August 2000 to construct
the randomization), but there is no apparent difference across groups in these proportions.
Since we are interested in changes caused by the fair, we focus in the remaining of the
analysis on individuals who were still not enrolled in the first wave (i.e. by September
2000). Since the groups were chosen randomly, the mean of observable characteristics
such as sex, years of service, annual salary, and age, are very similar across groups. As
expected, none of the differences are significant.
In panel B, we can see that our inducement strategy had a strong effect on the probability of attending the fair: in treated departments, as much as 21.4% of individuals
attended the fair. In control departments, fewer than 5% of individuals attended the fair.
The difference, 16.5%, is highly significant (Table 2, column (1)). Comparing treated
individuals versus controls in the treated departments in columns (2) and (3) of Table 1
shows that social effects account for a large part of the effect of our experiment on fair
attendance. The fair attendance rate of those who received our letter is 28%, and is 15.1%
for those in the treated departments who did not receive the letter. Thus, the direct effect
17

As it is visible from inspecting Table 1, this does not affect the point estimates of the differences.

However, it reduces the standard errors, by absorbing some unexplained differences across departments
of similar sizes and pre-fair TDA enrollment rates.

12

of receiving the letter (taking out any social effect, which are the same for groups T 0 and
T 1) displayed on column (2) of Table 2 is 13.8%. The difference in the attendance rate
between the T 0 group and the 0 group (which is solely due to social effects) is almost as
high, at 10.2%, and highly significant (see column (3) of Table 2).18
In Panel C, we look at TDA participation. After 4.5 months, relatively few people
have enrolled. However, employees in treated departments are already significantly more
likely to be enrolled than employees in control departments (4.9% versus 4%). This
represents a 24% increase in the enrollment rate. There is no significant difference between
groups T 1 and T 0, however.19 The difference between groups T 0 and 0 is 1.26 percentage
points and significant. Eleven months after the fair, enrollment is higher still, and the
difference between treated departments and control departments is 1.4 percentage point
and significant as well (it represents a 19% increase in TDA enrollment). The difference
between groups T 1 and T 0 is now positive, but still very small and insignificant. The
difference between group T 0 and group 0 is positive, and significant at the 10% level.
Obtaining significant differences between these randomly chosen groups means that our
experiment did have an impact on TDA enrollment. This impact is large in relative
terms (an increase of 20% in the likelihood of enrollment after 11 months). However,
because people update their TDA status very infrequently, it is small in absolute terms
(an increase of only 1.5% points of enrollment, on a base of 36%)). This effect is tiny
compared to interventions that change the default rules for TDA enrollment (such as
in Marian and Shea (2001), and Choi et al. (2001a, 2001b)) or that offer individuals
the option to allocate automatically future pay rises to TDA contributions (Thaler and
Bernatzi (2001)).
18

This result is of course sensitive to the assumption we made about department affiliation of fair

attendants who did not register at our desk. If we make the extreme assumption that all non registered
individuals come from 0 departments, the fair participation rate for T 0 group would fall down to 11%
but still be higher than for group 0 (which would go up to 9%). In addition, we show below that the
increase in fair attendance in the T 0 group is parallelled by an increased in their TDA participation.
19
The point estimate in table 2 is even slightly negative, with a t-statistic of about 1.

13

In summary, the results we present in Tables 1 and 2 suggest that the incentive scheme
had a large effect on fair participation of treated departments (due to a combination of
the direct encouragement effect and the multiplier effect of social interactions), as well
as a significant effect on TDA enrollment. This shows that the fair had an effect on the
decision to enroll in the TDA. However, within treated departments, there is no difference
in TDA enrollment between those who received the letter and those who did not. The
next section presents simple models to interpret these results.

4

Understanding the Effects of the Experiment

4.1

Fair attendance

Let us first analyze the decision to attend the fair. As we have seen, receiving our
invitation letter with its promise of a $20 reward increases the probability of attending
the fair. Denote this increase in the probability of attending the fair by δ. As we have
seen, there are peer effects in the decision to attend the fair because T 0 individuals are
more likely to attend than 0 individuals. A simple way to capture these two effects is to
posit the simple following reduced form specification:

f i = δLi + µDi + i ,

(1)

where f i is the dummy for attending the fair for individual i, i is a random individual
effect, Li is a dummy indicator for receiving the inducement letter, and Di a dummy
indicator for being in a treated department.20 Column (1) of Table 3 presents the estimation parameters δ and µ in (1). Actually, these two parameters were already estimated
in the reduced form results presented in Table 2. Taking the difference of the averages of
20

As f i is a 0-1 variable, equation (1) is not strictly correct. The left-hand-side should be replaced

with the probability of attending the fair for individual i, and restrictions imposed on the parameters and
the distribution of i to ensure that this number is always between 0 and 1. These technicalities can be
taken care of easily and thus are ignored to keep the presentation focused on identification questions.

14

equation (1) across groups T 1 and T 0 shows that δ = f¯T 1 − f¯T 0 where f¯T i denotes average
fair attendance among individuals in group T i, i = 0, 1. Similarly, taking the difference
of the averages of equation (1) across groups T 0 and 0 shows that µ = f¯T 0 − f¯0 .
Peer effects in the decision to attend the fair can take two forms. First, if an individual
in a given department decides to go to the fair, she might talk to her colleagues about the
fair, give them information about the details, or ask them to join her, and thus increase the
probability her colleagues attend the fair. Second, it is also conceivable that an employee
receiving the letter might talk about it to her colleagues, even if she does not go herself
to the fair, and thus also affect their attendance rate. For example, colleagues of those
who received the letter may think that if the benefits office is ready to pay some people
$20 to attend the fair, it must be sufficiently important for them to attend as well. We
model these peer effects by assuming that the average fair attendance rate and the average
“letter rate” (defined as the number of employees who received the letter divided by the
number of employees in the department) in each department influence the individual fair
attendance decision.
Let us denote by f¯ the average attendance rate in the department of individual i, and
by L̄ the letter rate in the department of individual i. The invitation letter effect and
the peer effects on fair participation can be captured by the simple following linear model
(see e.g. Manski (1993))
f i = δLi + ΛL̄ + β1 f¯ + v i ,

(2)

where v i is the random individual effect, and β1 < 1, and Λ are the peer effect coefficients.
This equation states that getting the letter increases the own probability of attending the
fair by δ, and the probability of everybody in the department of attending by Λ/N (N
being the number of employees in the department), and that an exogenous direct increase
in fair attendance of 1 percent translates into a final increased fair attendance of 1/(1−β1 )
percent through the multiplier peer effect.
Obviously, our experiment does not allow us to identify all three parameters δ, Λ,
15

and β1 because we have only two instruments: receiving the letter Li and the dummy
indicator Di for being in a T (versus 0) department. However, the following semi-reduced
form of equation 2 is identified,
i

f i = δLi + δ R L̄ + v 0 ,

(3)

Equation (3) can be easily derived from (2) by first averaging equation (2) by department to obtain an expression for f¯, and then plugging this expression for f¯ in (2). Simple
algebra shows that δ R = −δ + (Λ + δ)/(1 − β1 ). The parameters δ and δ R of equation (3)
are identified with our experiment21 and can be estimated with an IV regression using Li
and Di as instruments.22 Column (2) of Table 3 presents the estimate of equation (3).
The coefficient of the average number of letters is 0.28, and is significant: an increase
in 10% in the proportion of people who received a letter in the department lead to an
increase of 2.8% in participation of those who did not themselves receive the letter.
It is perhaps reasonable to impose the additional restriction on equation (2) that
Λ = 0, i.e., a person receiving a letter can influence her colleagues fair attendance only
if she decides to go to the fair. In that case, equation (2) is identified and β1 can be
estimated by running the IV regression (2) on the sample of individuals not enrolled in
the TDA by September 2000, using Li and Di as instruments. The results are reported on
column (3) of Table 3. The estimate we obtain for β1 is large and precisely estimated: a
10% increase in attendance increases the probability that an individual attends the fair by
7.5%. Put another way, the multiplier peer effect is 1/(1 − β1 ) = 4, that is, an additional
person induced to go to the fair because of the letter will induce, through a trickle-down
effect, on average four additional individuals to attend the fair.
21

This specification is similar to that of Acemoglu and Angrist (1999), who seek to estimate human

capital externalities on earnings.
22
The average L̄ is not exogenous because it is computed over all employees (enrolled or not in the
TDA by September 2000).

16

4.2
4.2.1

TDA Participation
The Model

We showed in Section 3 that individuals in group T 1 are more likely to attend the fair
than individuals in group T 0 but only equally likely to enroll in the TDA after the fair.
Individuals in groups T 1 and T 0 are in the same departments and thus exposed to the
same network effects at the department level. The only difference between the T 1 and
T 0 groups is that T 1 individual received the inducement letter and hence are more likely
to have attended the fair. This suggests that the direct fair effect is zero for those who
attend the fair just because of the $20 reward. Reduced form evidence from Section 3 also
showed that individuals in group T 0 are more likely than individuals in group 0 both to
attend the fair and to enroll in the TDA afterward. Three phenomena can explain these
results.
First, as individuals in group T 0 are more likely to attend the fair than group 0 individuals, it is plausible to think that for this group, attending the fair has had a positive
effect on their TDA participation. It is important to note that this positive treatment
effect for group T 0 individuals (compared to group 0 individuals) is not necessarily contradictory with the zero treatment effect for group T 1 individuals (compared to group T 0
individuals) because these treatment effects are not measured for the same population.
The latter effect is the treatment effect of the fair for those individuals who come because
of the inducement letter while the former effect is the treatment effect of the fair for those
individuals who are induced to come to the fair because they have been influenced to
attend by their colleagues. It is plausible to think that individuals who attend the fair
just for the $20 might not be very interested in the content of the fair and thus do not
get much out of it. In contrast, individuals induced to come by their colleagues (with no
financial reward) are likely to be more interested by the event and thus end up being more
influenced by what they learn at the fair. We will develop and formalize this differential treatment effect below using the theory of Local Average Treatment Effects (LATE)

17

developed by Imbens and Angrist (1994), and Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996).
The second reason why group T 0 individuals are more likely to enroll in the TDA
than group 0 individuals is that, because of our experiment, T departments are different
from 0 departments and individuals may be influenced by social network effects. Peer
effects within departments could influence TDA enrollment through two channels. First,
individuals who attend the fair might share the information obtained on the TDA with
their colleagues and thus increase the enrollment rate in their department.23 Second,
an individual who decides to enroll in the TDA might also discuss her decision with
colleagues, and induce some of them to enroll as well.
Third and more subtle, it is conceivable that, even for an individual who would have
come to the fair with no external inducement, receiving the letter offering the $20 reward
modifies her psychological motivation for attending the fair. Because the individual is
now paid to attend the fair, she might convince herself that she is coming just for the $20
and thus that she is not really interested in the content of the fair. This type of effect
is not standard in economic models but there is substantial evidence in the psychology
literature on the motivational consequences of rewards. This literature is summarized
in Ross and Nisbett (1991) (pp. 65-67). Festinger and al. (1959) and Cooper et al.
(1978) showed that providing people with small financial incentives for acting as if they
hold a given belief promotes greater change in the “rewarded” direction than providing
them with large incentives. Perhaps most closely related to our setting, Lepper et al.
(1973) showed that school children who are rewarded to play with magic markers are less
likely to enjoy it than children who are not, as if “play” had subjectively turned into
“work”. These results generated a substantial amount of interest because they go against
the conventional reinforcement theory that would appear more intuitive.
These three effects, namely the differential treatment effect, the social network effect,
23

We assume, however, that only fair attendees who are not enrolled in the TDA, can induce their

colleagues to start enrolling in the TDA. Individuals already enrolled in the TDA presumably influence
their colleagues directly through the second channel and not through the information collected at the
fair.

18

and the motivational reward effect can be captured the following simple linear model as
follows.24 Let us assume that fair attendance increases the probability of TDA participation of individual i by γ i . Let us denote by y i the dummy for individual participation in
the TDA. We posit the following specification
y i = γ i f i + Γf¯ + ui .

(4)

The fact that γ i can vary from individual to individual captures the potentially differential
treatment effect. The social network effect is captured by the average fair participation
rate f¯ in the department. Finally, the motivational reward effect can be captured by
assuming that the treatment effect γ i is potentially (negatively) correlated with the letter
treatment Li . In order to simplify the presentation, let us assume that γ i takes to following
simple form

γ i = γSi − νLi ,

(5)

where γSi is independent of Li (this is the standard treatment effect component), and
ν represents the motivational reward effect. Assuming no motivational reward effect
amounts to simply assuming that ν = 0 and thus that γ i is independent of Li .
Each individual belongs to one of the groups T 1, T 0, or 0. In order to define treatment
effects of fair attendance on TDA enrollment, it is useful to introduce the notion of
potential outcomes for fair attendance. For each individual, we denote by f i (T 1), f i (T 0),
and f i (0) the fair attendance decision of individual i, had he been in group T 1, T 0, or
0. Obviously, for each individual i, we observe only one of the three potential outcomes
for fair attendance. As the literature on differential treatment effects has recognized (see
Imbens and Angrist (1994)), in order to be able to identify parameters of interest, we
need to make the following assumption:
24

It would be possible to develop a more general non-linear model but this would not change our

estimation strategy and interpretation. Therefore, we consider only the simple linear framework.

19

Assumption 1 Monotonicity Assumption: for each individual i, f i (T 1) ≥ f i (T 0) ≥
f i (0).
This assumption states that receiving the letter can only encourage individuals to
attend the fair (and in no case deter them), and that having one’s colleagues receive the
letter can also only encourage an individual to attend the fair (relative to the situation
where no colleagues receive the letter). This assumption sounds very plausible in the
situation we analyze. The Monotonicity assumption implies that the population can be
partitioned into four different types.
First, the never takers are individuals such that f i (T 1) = f i (T 0) = f i (0) = 0. These
individuals do not attend the fair and would not attend regardless of the group to which
they belong. Second, we define the financial reward compliers type as individuals such
that f i (T 1) = 1 > f i (T 0) = f i (0) = 0. These individuals attend the fair only if they
receive the letter with the financial reward promise. Third, we define the social interaction
compliers as individuals such that f i (T 1) = f i (T 0) = 1 > f i (0) = 0. These individuals
would not attend the fair if nobody in their department receives the letter, but attend the
fair if they are in a treated department (whether or not they themselves receive the letter).
Finally, we define the always takers as individuals such that f i (T 1) = f i (T 0) = f i (0) = 1.
These individuals attend the fair regardless of the group to which they belong.
We make the following additional assumption.
Assumption 2 Exclusion restriction assumption: ui is independent of Li
The assumption that the error term ui is independent of the letter assignment status
Li means that the letter inviting the employee to the fair has no direct effect on TDA
participation decisions of those who do not attend the fair (beyond its effect on individual
and departmental fair attendance).25 The letter we sent did not mention TDA but only
25

However note that assumption 1 does not rule out the possibility that the letter can affect the TDA

status of those who attended the fair, by reducing the fair’s effectiveness (through the motivational reward
effect described above).

20

benefits in general, and did not contain any mention of the employee’s TDA status (see
the facsimile in appendix).
To assess the extent to which written communication could affect decisions, we send
the questionnaires described in section 2, which asked detailed questions about TDA status (see appendix). There is no significant difference in TDA participation after 6 months
between departments to which we sent the questionnaire and departments to which we
did not (the difference is actually negative at -0.093 percentage points with a standard
error of 1.3 percentage points). Within departments to which the questionnaire was sent,
the difference is only 0.90 percentage points (with a standard error of 0.94 percentage
points) and not statistically significant either. Therefore, the targeted questionnaire on
TDA did not seem to affect individuals’ participation to the TDA. It is thus is plausible
to think that, as stated in Assumption 1, a fair invitation letter does not directly affect
TDA enrollment. This echoes the results in Choi et al (2001a), who sent two versions of
a questionnaire to randomly selected employees, and found that employees who received
a questionnaire with more questions about retirement savings were no more likely to subsequently enroll in the TDA than those who received a version without those questions.26
Taking the average of equation (4) over groups T 1 and T 0, and taking the difference,
we obtain
ȳT 1 − ȳT 0 = E[y i |T 1] − E[y i |T 0] = E[γSi f i − νf i + Γf¯ + ui |T 1] − E[γSi f i + Γf¯ + ui |T 0].
Using the exclusion assumption stating that ui is independent of Li , we have
ȳT 1 − ȳT 0 = E[γSi (f i (T 1) − f i (T 0))] − νE[f i |T 1].
Using the monotonicity assumption, we then obtain
ȳT 1 − ȳT 0 = E[γSi |f i (T 1) − f i (T 0) = 1] · P (f i (T 1) − f i (T 0) = 1) − νP (f i (T 1) = 1)
As P (f i (T 1) = 1) = f¯T 1 and P (f i (T 1) − f i (T 0) = 1) = f¯T 1 − f¯T 0 , we finally obtain
26

This is also evidence that information conveyed through mailing may not have a great impact on

final decisions.

21

ȳT 1 − ȳT 0
f¯T 1
i
i
i
=
E[γ
|f
(T
1)
−
f
(T
0)
=
1]
−
ν
·
.
S
f¯T 1 − f¯T 0
f¯T 1 − f¯T 0

(6)

Thus comparing individuals T 1 and individuals T 0 provides an estimate of the sum of
the direct average treatment effect for financial reward compliers and the motivational
reward effect. Note that the social network effects (term Γf¯) cancel out in the comparison
of groups T 1 and T 0 because they are common to both groups.
Individuals in group T 0 and individuals in group 0 do not receive the inducement
letter but some of the peers of individuals in T 0 do receive the letter. As we have seen in
Section 3, because of network effects, individuals in T 0 are more likely to attend the fair
than individuals in T 0. As none of the individuals in groups T 0 and 0 receive the letter,
there is no motivational reward effect involved in this comparison. More precisely, taking
the average of equation (4) over groups T 0 and 0, and taking the difference, we have
ȳT 0 − ȳ0 = E[y i |T 0] − E[y i |0] = E[γ i (f i (T 0) − f i (0))] + Γ[f¯T − f¯0 ].
Hence, we finally obtain
ȳT 0 − ȳ0
f¯T − f¯0
i i
i
=
E[γ
|f
(T
0)
−
f
(0)
=
1]
+
Γ
·
.
f¯T 0 − f¯0
f¯T 0 − f¯0

(7)

Thus comparing group T 0 to group 0 provides an estimate of the sum of the direct average
treatment effect for social interaction compliers and the social network effect.
Our analysis has shown that there are four parameters of interest in the model: the
average treatment effect for financial reward compliers, the average treatment effect for
social interaction compliers, the social network effect parameter Γ, and the motivational
reward effect ν. Our experiment provides us with only two instruments Li and Di , thus it
is clear that we cannot identify all four parameters together. Only if we make additional
assumptions about two of these four parameters can we estimate the remaining two parameters. In the next subsection, we discuss three alternative assumptions under which
the remaining parameters of the model could be estimated. We proceed not with the
22

intention of claiming any particular set of assumptions is correct, but rather to explore
the implications of each assumption.
4.2.2

Interpretation under Alternative Identification Assumptions

• No motivational reward and no social network effects
In that situation, both parameters Γ and ν are equal to zero, and we can identify both
average treatment effects for financial reward compliers and social interaction compliers.
Under these assumption, equation (6) reduces to:
ȳT 1 − ȳT 0
= E[γ i |f i (T 1) − f i (T 0) = 1].
f¯T 1 − f¯T 0

(8)

Thus, the average treatment effect for financial reward compliers can be obtained by a
simple IV regression of TDA enrollment on fair attendance on the sample of individuals
in treated departments using Li as an instrument. Similarly, using (7), we have
ȳT 0 − ȳ0
= E[γ i |f i (T 0) − f i (0) = 1].
¯
¯
fT 0 − f0

(9)

The average treatment effect for social interaction compliers can be obtained by an IV
regression of TDA enrollment on fair attendance on the sample of individuals in T 0 or
0 groups using Di as an instrument. Column (2) and (3) in Table 4 present these IV
estimates, for TDA enrollment 4.5 months and 11 months after the fair. Consistent with
the reduced form evidence, the IV estimates suggest a positive treatment effect on social
interaction compliers, and no effect on financial reward compliers. The results in column
(3) can be thought of as an upper bound on the effects of the fair itself for the population
of social interaction compliers. These individuals are not affected by the motivational
reward, but if peers effects are present, the IV estimate in (9) would be an upper bound
of the direct effect of the fair. This upper bound is 13.5 percentage points after 4.5
months, and 14.8 percentage points after 11 months. These effects are of comparable size
(slightly higher) than those estimated by Madrian and Shea (2002) in a non-experimental

23

set-up.
• Constant Treatment Effects with no motivational reward effect
If there is no motivational reward effect (ν = 0) and the standard treatment effect γ i
is the same across individuals and equal to γ, both parameters, γ and Γ of the structural
equation (4) are identified and equation (6) reduces to
ȳT 1 − ȳT 0
= γ.
f¯T 1 − f¯T 0

(10)

This ratio is the IV estimate presented in column (2) in table 4, which we discuss
above. Therefore, under these restrictive assumptions, we can conclude that the direct
effect of the fair is zero for everyone. Taking the average of equation (4) over departments
0 and T , we obtain
ȳ0 = (γ + Γ)f¯0 + ū,

ȳT = (γ + Γ)f¯T + ū.

(11)

Therefore the overall effect of fair attendance on TDA participation, taking into account
all the social effects, is the ratio
ȳT − ȳ0
= γ + Γ.
f¯T − f¯0

(12)

This overall effect of one additional person attending the fair on TDA participation is the
sum of the direct causal effect γ of the fair, and the social effects Γ from equation (4).
These estimates (for participation after 4.5 months and after 11 months) are presented in
column (1) in table 4. In both cases, the overall effect of the fair is positive and significant.
Under the assumptions made here, the difference of columns (1) and (2) gives an estimate
of the social effect parameter. The implied estimates of Γ are 10.14% and 6.7%, after 4.5
and 11 months respectively.27
27

Estimates of the direct and social effects parameters (and their standard errors) can also be directly

obtained by an IV estimation of equation (4) (where γ i = γ), using Di and Li as instruments.

24

• Constant Treatment Effects and no social network effects
In this case, the standard treatment effect γS (for those who did not receive the letter)
can be obtained directly from (7), since Γ = 0. In turn, equation (6), with the first term
set to γS , can be used to recover ν. Using the estimates of f¯T 1 , and f¯T 0 from table 2, we
obtain an estimate of ν of 0.0927 after 4.5 months, and 0.0620 after 11 months. Under
these assumptions, receiving the letter reduces the treatment effect of the fair by 69% for
TDA participation after 4.5 months, and 42% for TDA participation after 11 months.
The distinction between differential treatment effects, social network effects, and motivational reward effects is clear conceptually but our experiment does not allow us to tell
them apart. Thus, it is useful to describe what type of alternative experimental designs
would be needed to separate these effects. Differential treatment effects arise in our setting because there is a first stage in our experiment where individuals decide whether or
not to attend the fair. As a result, only a self-selected fraction of individuals attends the
fair. Motivational reward effects arise because individuals receive a monetary payment
for attending the fair.
Social network effects could be identified with the following experiment. Within a
subsample of the “treated” departments, a subsample of employees would all attend automatically an information session. This could be done by making attendance a job
requirement of employees. One could then test whether the TDA participation rises
among the colleagues of the treated relative to that of individuals in untreated departments. Motivational reward effects could be estimated by paying people for attending an
information session in a situation where everybody is supposed to attend. For example,
in many firms, new hires are often invited to attend information sessions about benefits.
In some departments, this information session could be presented as a normal process
through which all new employees go. In other departments, attending this information
session could be presented as voluntary but a financial reward could be offered for attendance (large enough to induce virtually everybody to attend). If everybody attends

25

in both cases, the average treatment effect would be expected to be the same in both
groups in the absence of a motivational reward effect.28 Evidence of differential treatment effects could potentially be obtained by using non-monetary incentives of various
intensity to attend the fair. For example, some employees could be sent a letter simply
reminding them of the benefits fair. Others could be sent a more pointed letter telling
them that important information can be obtained at the fair. One could also use emails,
personal phone calls or even remind them in person to attend the fair. These different
encouragement designs are associated with different groups of compliers and may thus
allow estimation of different fair treatment effects.

4.3

Direct and Overall effects of the fair: comparisons with
naive estimates

The model developed clarifies the errors that can be done when ignoring social effects in
experimental data. The data also allow us to compare experimental results with observational results. Table 6 presents alternative estimates of the effect of the fair.
Columns (1) and (2) are, respectively, the IV and the OLS estimates of the direct
effect on TDA participation of attending the fair after 11 months; they are limited to
employees in T departments.29 The OLS estimate is 0.052 and significant. As we explained
above, the direct effect of the fair can be estimated by running an IV regression of TDA
participation on fair attendance in treated departments, using the dummy for receiving
the letter as instrument. Given the lack of precision of the IV estimate, the two estimates
are statistically indistinguishable, but the OLS estimate is more than three times as large
as the IV estimate. This is not surprising, given that one would expect those who are
more interested in benefits to be more likely to attend the fair.30
28

Note that this setting would be close to the experiments carried out in the social psychology literature

reviewed in Ross and Nisbett (1991).
29
Since we do not know the identity of those who came to the fair except for those who received the
invitation letter, the OLS estimate is obtained in the sample of those who received the letter.
30
For example, as we noted earlier, the fraction of TDA participants is much higher among the sample

26

Columns (3) and (4) present alternative IV estimates of the overall effect of the fair on
TDA participation using the full sample (treated and control departments) of employees
not enrolled in the TDA by September 2000. In column (3), we estimate the overall effect
of the fair by an IV regression of TDA participation on average fair participation in each
department, using the dummy for whether the department is treated as an instrument
for average participation. The coefficients are 0.057 and 0.082 after 4.5 and 11 months
and are significant. In column (4), we present the “naive”, IV estimate that uses the
letter dummy as an instrument, in the complete sample. This estimate lies between the
estimate of the overall effect and the effect based on the T 1 versus T 0 comparison. The
naive estimate would underestimate the overall effect of the fair (since part of the “control”
group is actually treated) and overestimate the direct effect on those who received the
letter. Ignoring the analysis we have developed in this paper would lead to a misguided
causal interpretation of the effect of the fair on TDA enrollment.

5
5.1

Interpretation and Additional evidence
Interpretation: Why did the experiment influence TDA participation?

The striking results of the experiment are the large spillover effects at the fair attendance
stage, and the fact that, despite the large remaining difference in fair attendance, there is
no difference in TDA participation between the treated and untreated individuals within
treated departments, while there is a significant difference in TDA participation between
treated and untreated departments. As we discussed above, the first stage results are a
clear indication of social effects in the decision to attend the fair, while the interpretation
of fair attendees who did not receive the letter than among all employees (above 50% versus around 30%).
This shows that TDA participants are more likely to attend the fair, probably because they are more
interested in benefits information on average than non TDA participants (see Madrian and Shea (2002)
for evidence of self-selection).

27

of the TDA participation results is more delicate: they could be due to social effects,
differential treatment effects, motivational reward effects, or a combination of the three.
These three different explanations have, however, a common feature. They suggests that
an individual’s decision to participate in the TDA is affected by small changes in the
environment, and not only by the information content of the fair.
If the results can be entirely explained by social effects, they suggest very strong peer
effects, compared to the direct effect of the fair. This could be true in two models. In
the first model, the fair conveys useful information, but any information obtained by a
fair participant is completely diffused to the entire department he belongs to. This would
explain why group T 1 individuals do not participate in the TDA any more than group T 0
individuals (γ = 0), who in turn participate more than group 0 individuals (Γ > 0). This
model has an additional testable implication: the effect of being in a treated department is
entirely due to the increase in the probability that at least one member of the department
attends the fair. Indeed, according to the registration data we collected at the fair, the
probability that at least one department member attends the fair is much larger in treated
departments (93%) than in untreated departments (55%). An implication of the model
is thus that if, as one would expect, the difference in the probability that at least one
member of the department attends the fair is larger in small departments than in large
departments, the difference in TDA participation after 4.5 or 11 months between treated
and control departments should also be larger within the smaller departments. Indeed,
the difference between treated and untreated departments in the probability that at least
one person attends the fair is 59% in the department of 81 employees or less (department
size for the median employee), and 16% in the departments with more than 81 employees.
However, as we show in panel A of table 5, the reduced form differences after 4.5 and 11
months are virtually identical in the two sets of departments. This rejects the hypothesis
of complete diffusion of information.
Under the second model when individuals see more people attending the fair (or receiving a letter inviting others to attend the fair), they are directly induce to enroll in

28

the TDA (irrespective of what those who went to the fair learnt at the fair or decided
to do). Those peer effects thus do not seem to stem from a rational herd behavior in an
environment where information is scarce or difficult to obtain (as in the models of Banerjee (1992) or Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer and Welch (1992)). At the same time, there is
clearly no strong social pressure to conform to the decisions of the majority regarding the
TDA (as is the case, for example, in the decision of adopt contraception for Bengladeshi
women, as in Munshi (2000b)).
Another explanation for the results is that the treatment effects are different for different groups of compliers: it is positive for social interaction compliers, but zero for
the financial reward compliers. In Table 5, we explore various observable characteristics
which may lead to variations in the effect of the treatment. Column (1) reports average
fair participation in each subgroup, among those who received the letter (we know the
identity of those who attended the fair only for this group). Fair participation was larger
in small departments than in large departments, and for women than for men. In column
(2) and (3), we show the difference in TDA enrollment between treated and control departments after 4.5 and 11 months, respectively. After 4.5 months, the treatment effect
seems somewhat larger in departments where the participation rate before the experiment
was high (panel B) and average salaries are high (panel D). However, after 11 months,
this difference shrunk (in panel B) or disappeared (in panel D). This suggests that it
takes more time for those in departments with low initial participation and those with
lower salaries to adjust their TDA participation. Panel C shows that the effects are the
same for men and women. Overall, there is no evidence that treatment effects are widely
different across groups defined by observables. Any differential treatment effect between
financial reward and social interaction compliers is thus not attributable to observable
characteristics. Of course, it could be due to an unobservable attribute uncorrelated with
these observable characteristic (like interest in the benefits). Importantly, even if the
results are entirely due to differential treatment effects, and social interactions take no
part in explaining the second stage results, they are responsible for the variation in fair

29

attendance among the untreated individual in treated departments. Thus, in this case
as well, social network effects caused some people to take steps which ultimately led to
change their TDA participation decision.
If the results are in part explained by the motivational reward effect, this would also
provide evidence that individuals’ decisions are influenced by small non-economic factors:
when attending the fair on their own, they are influenced by it, but are not when they
have been induced to go by the $20 reward. A small perturbation in their motivation to
attend the fair thus influences their final decision. Again, this suggests that individuals’
process of decision making is influenced by small changes in the environments.
In summary, a common thread to all these potential explanations is that the participation decision is influenced by things other than new information about costs and
benefits of the TDA. This, combined with the fact that the effect of the information fair
itself was modest in absolute terms (the upper bound of the effect of the fair on the
social interaction compliers, assuming no peer effects at the TDA participation stage is
an increase of 14.8 percentage points in the participation rate after 11 months) suggests
that an individual’s decision to participate in the TDA is not taken as the outcome of a
sophisticated decision process of information gathering and careful considerations of the
alternatives. This is consistent with a growing body of evidence on retirement savings
behavior, showing that individuals believe that their savings rate is too low (Choi et al.
(2001a)), but that their project to increase it are rarely followed by action (Choi et al.
(2001a), Madrian and Shea (2002)), and that retirement decision are characterized by
very strong inertia and adherence to default rules (Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi et
al. (2001b)). Thaler and Bertazi (2001) show that savings rates increase dramatically
when individuals are offered to enroll in a program in which they commit now to save
a portion of their future increase in earnings. We now directly examine the relationship
between information and decision-making in our experiment, by examining responses to
a follow-up questionnaire we sent to a sample of employees. We find results consistent
with the above-mentioned literature.

30

5.2

Follow up questionnaires

A follow up questionnaire sent to 917 employees after the fair included two questions
designed to measure the employees’ knowledge of the retirement benefits system in the
university, as well as questions to elicit alternative retirement savings options available to
employees and to measure the extent of procrastination.
Analysis of survey data presents an additional challenge, as the response rate to our
questionnaire was less than 50%.31 Clearly, people who respond form a selected group:
for example, people who respond to the questionnaires are 8 percentage points more likely
to enroll in the TDA after 6 months than those who received it but did not return the
survey (the standard error is 0.017). As we have shown in section 4.2, the questionnaire
itself had no causal effect on participation: thus this difference is entirely due to selection.
Moreover, those who received the questionnaire and did not respond are less likely to enroll
in the TDA after 6 months than those who did not get the questionnaire.32 In addition,
the selection seems different in treated versus control departments. The response rate in
treated departments is 45% (Table 1, panel D), while it is only 35% in control departments.
It may thus not be very informative to compare the responses across samples. On the other
hand, network effects within departments seem to have played an important role here too:
the response rates among treated and untreated individuals within treated departments
are essentially identical. A plausible explanation is that those who had received the fair
invitation letter were able to tell their colleagues that we had delivered on our promise
of sending the reward. Since the response rates are the same, the assumption that the
selection process is the same is reasonable. Thus, we can compare the response among
treated and untreated individuals within treated department. These responses are not
representative of the population in general, but representative of the segment of the
31

This is a common problem: the survey on savings intention by Choi et al. (2001a) had a response

rate of 33%
32
Since we have shown above that the questionnaire had no causal effect on enrollment, this is a sign
of selection.

31

population that tends to respond to this type of questionnaires.
The results are presented in Table 7. People who answered the questionnaire are more
likely to have attended the fair than people who did not: in the treated group, 43% of the
respondents to the questionnaire attended (while 28% of the entire treated population attended), and in the control group, 29% of the respondents attended (compared to 15.1%).
The difference in attendance (14%) is similar to the difference in fair attendance between
the two groups as a whole (13.1%), which we had recorded at the fair.33 Respondents report very high satisfaction rates with the fair. Yet, the satisfaction is significantly higher
for the control group than for the treatment group (95% against 85%). This difference is
almost as large as the difference in fair attendance in this sample: it suggests either that
the marginal fair participant induced by our reward was less likely to find the fair useful
(thus supporting the hypothesis of differential treatment effects), or that having received
the letter reduces fair satisfaction (supporting the motivational reward effect hypothesis).
In panel B, we report the response to the question “why are you not enrolled in
the TDA?”, for those who report that they are not enrolled (none of them are actually
enrolled). They could check as many answers as were applicable. Individuals in the
treatment group are less likely to report that they lack information (20% versus 30%).
The difference is significant at the 10% level. They are more likely to say that they
want to enroll soon, but have not found the time yet (45% versus 36%), although the
t-statistic is just 1.3.34 All the other reasons for not contributing are mentioned equally
often in both groups. The reason “plan to enroll soon” is the single most often cited
reason for not contributing in both groups. In panel C, we match this answer with
33

This similarity suggests that there was no systematic bias in the way we recorded departments at

the fair–even though we recorded them for only 75% of the participants.
34
The difference is 9%, almost as large as the difference in fair participation: a simple IV on the
probability to report that one want to enrol on whether an individual went to the fair, using the letter
as instrument, would thus give a coefficient very close to 1, which is also what Madrian and Shea (2002)
obtain: virtually all seminar attendee who were not yet enrolled in the plan were intending to enroll soon
after the seminar.

32

their future behavior. Actual behavior is correlated with intention (virtually nobody
who did not declare that they intended to enroll did so) but falls well short of intention.
Among untreated individuals, 16.7% of those who planned to enroll do so. Among treated
individuals, 10% do so.35 Thus, letter individuals are more likely to have good intentions,
but are also more likely to procrastinate.
Panel D shows the answer to the question “where do you obtain information about
the TDA?” Not surprisingly, those in the treatment group are more likely to say that
they obtain it from the fair (and the difference, 11%, is close to the 14% difference in fair
attendance). However, they are less likely to obtain information from the benefits fair
information packet (77% versus 93%). Those two sources of information thus appear to
be substitutes. The other sources of information seem to be used equally by both groups.
Panel E reports answers to the knowledge questions. The first question is whether the
employee is or is not enrolled in the TDA (when we sent the letter, none of them were).
Second, we asked them whether they know the number of vendors with whom their
Defined Contribution (DC) benefits are invested. Employees are automatically enrolled
in the DC plan and can choose to invest their contributions with four different vendors.
Many employees have more than one vendor. If they do not make a choice, the benefits
office randomly allocates them to one vendor.
Treatment and control groups are about as likely to know the number of vendors with
whom they are contributing: 74% and 71%, respectively, ventured to answer the question,
and, in total 60% of each group gave the right answer.36 However, those who received
the letter are significantly less likely to report knowing their TDA status (94% versus
99%), and less likely to give the correct answer (89% versus 94%).37 This could reflect
35

This is in the ballpark of other studies. Following the survey conducted by Choi et al. (2001a), 14%

of those who intended to enroll in the TDA did. Following the financial education session in Madrian
and Shea (2002), 14% of the attendees (who all intended to enroll) did.
36
Those who did not answer are counted as having given the wrong answer.
37
Incidentally, this level of misclassification underscores the importance of working with administrative
data when studying TDA savings behavior.

33

some over-confidence on their part, since this letter was sent only to those who were not
contributing. This lends some support to the motivational reward hypothesis: in this
group where the fair attendance was high, the treated group has less knowledge than the
group that was not directly treated.
In summary, participation in the fair did not seem to have a large impact on the
information set of those who received the letter: they seem to have substituted fair attendance for individual research. In fact, they are more likely to be unsure about their
actual TDA status, and to wrongly report themselves as contributing even though they
are not. However, they are less likely to think they they suffer from a lack of information,
and more likely to plan to enroll soon. Of course, it does not imply that the fair did not
have an impact on the information set of those who went to the fair without the letter
(used here as the control group).

6

Conclusion

This paper has attempted to identify the causal effects of information and social interaction on employee decisions to enroll in an employer sponsored Tax Deferred Account
retirement plan.
Our encouragement strategy successfully induced treated employees to attend a benefits fair. The experimental design allowed us to demonstrate that peer effects are an
important factor in determining whether employees attend the fair. In the second stage
of the study, we presented evidence that individuals affected by the experiment are indeed
more likely to enroll in the TDA after the fair. Interestingly, we find that the direct causal
effect of fair attendance on an attendee among those whom we directly induced to attend
the fair by means of a financial reward seems to be very small compared to the effect of
being in a department with high fair participation. We proposed three different interpretations, differential treatment effects, social network effects, and motivational reward
effects, to account for these findings. Our experiment does not allow us to distinguish

34

unambiguously among these interpretations, thus illustrating how the analysis of a simple
experiment in a social and economic context may be substantially more complicated than
expected.
We are, nevertheless, able to provide an upper bound to the effect of the benefits
fair on enrollment: attending the fair increases TDA participation 11 months later by a
maximum of 15% (in a sample of people who were initially not enrolled). Average TDA
participation after 11 months is only 7.5% in the control group (of which 5% attended
the fair). Mandatory fair participation might thus produce a non-negligible increase in
the enrollment flow, comparable to the effect of introducing a 25% employer matching
contribution (Choi et al. 2001a). However, it remains small compared to changing default
enrollment rules (Madrian and Shea (2001)) or offering delayed enrollment, as in the
enrollment the “Save More Tomorrow” program (Thaler and Bernatzi, 2001).
This paper also provides experimental evidence that social interactions are a powerful
mechanism in the process of information acquisition (i.e., the decision to seek additional
information). Individuals do not instantly learn about economic opportunities, and their
informational environment has a strong effect on their economic decisions. Low household
savings levels in the United States have concerned academics and policy makers. Recognizing that savings decisions are influenced by peers’ savings decisions could improve
our understanding of why individuals enroll in TDAs, and may provide a rationale for
organizing 401(k)s through the workplace. The large effect of a small reward on fair attendance, amplified by social effects, also suggests that individuals do not optimally seek
out and process information on their own. While the motivational reward effect must be
addressed, encouraging employees to attend benefits fairs may be a useful complement to
automatic enrollment.
Finally, this study has shown that it is relatively simple and inexpensive to carry
out an experiment within a large firm to study important economic research questions.
Moreover, organizational divisions within a firm provide an excellent structure in which
to study the effects of social interaction in the workplace. We hope that our study will

35

encourage this research process and induce more economists to tackle questions in labor
economics using experiments. In particular, our analysis raised more questions than we
were able to answer. Using results from this experiment as a first step, one could think of
several alternative experimental designs that could precisely identify the effects we have
described.

36

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, 1999. “How Large are Human capital Externalities: Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws”. Mimeo, MIT.
Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin, 1996, “Identification of Causal Effects using Instrumental Variables.”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444-455.
Banerjee, A.V., 1992. A simple model of herd behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics
107, 797-817.
Bayer, Patrick B., Bernheim, B.D., Scholz, K., 1996. “The Effects of Financial Education
in the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers.” NBER Working Paper
No. 5655.
Bernheim, B.D., Garrett, D.M., 1996. “The Determinants and Consequences of Financial Education in the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households.” NBER
Working Paper No. 5667.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Daniel M. Garrett and Dean M. Maki (1997). “Education and
Saving: The Long-Term Effects of High School Financial Curriculum Mandates.”
NBER Working Paper No. 6085. Forthcoming Journal of Public Economics.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., Luttner, E., 2000.“Network Effects and Welfare Cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 1019-1057.
Besley, T., Case, A., 1994. “Diffusion as a Learning Process: Evidence from HYV
Cotton.” Discussion Paper 174, RPDS, Princeton University.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., Welch, I., 1992. “A theory of fads, fashion, custom,
and cultural change as informational cascades” Journal of Political Economy, 100,
992-1026.
37

Case, Ann and Lawrence Katz, 1991. “The Company you Keep: The Effect of Family
and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths.” NBER Working Paper No. 3705.
Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. and Metrick A., 2001a “For Better or for Worse:
Default Effect and 401(k) Savings Behavior”, NBER Working Paper No. 8651.
Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. and Metrick A., 2001b “Defined Contributions Pensions: Plan Rules, Participants Decisions, and the Path of Least Resistance”, NBER
Working Paper No. 8655.
Cooper, J., M. P. Zanna, and P. A. Taves, 1978, “Arousal as a Necessary Condition
for Attitude Change Following Induced Compliance.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 1101-1106.
Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, 2000. ”Participation and Investment Decisions in
a Retirement Plan: The Influence of Colleagues’ Choices.” NBER Working Paper
No. 7735, forthcoming Journal of Public Economics.
Engen, E.M., Gale, W.G., Scholz, J.K., 1996. “The Illusory Effect of Saving Incentives
on Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspective 10, 113-138.
Evans, W., Oates, W., Schwab, R., 1992. “Measuring Peer Group Effects: A Model of
Teenage Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 966-991.
Festinger, L. and J. M. Carlsmith, 1959. “Cognitive Consequences of Forced Compliance.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58, 203-210.
Foster, A.D., Rosenzweig, M.R., 1995. “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy
103, 1176-1209.
Imbens, Guido, and Joshua Angrist, 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica, 62, 467-476.
38

Imbens, G., Irano, K., D. Rubin, A. Zhou, 2000. “Estimating the Effect of Flu Shots in
a Randomized Encouragement Design”, Biostatistics, 1(1), 69-88.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman, 2001. “Moving to Opportunity
in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116(2), 607-654.
Kremer, Michael and Edward Miguel, 2001 “Worms: Education and Health Externalities
in Kenya.” NBER Working Paper No. 8481.
Lepper, M. R., D. Greene, and R. E. Nisbett, 1973. “Undermining Children’s Intrinsic Interest with Extrinsic Reward: A Test for the Overjustification Hypothesis.”
Journal of Psychology and and Social Psychology, 37, 688-714.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis F. Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 11491187.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis F. Shea, 2002. “Preaching to the Converted and Converting those Taught: Financial Education in the Workplace.” Mimeo Graduate School
of Business, University of Chicago.
Manski, C., 1993. “Identification of Exogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.”
Review of Economic Studies 60, 531-542.
Manski, C. 1995 Identification Problems in the Social Sciences. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge.
Munshi, K., 2000a. “Social Learning in a Heterogenous Population: Technology Diffusion in the Indian Green Revolution.” University of Pennsylvania Mimeo.
Munshi, K., 2000b. “Social Norms and Individual Decisions During a Period of Change:
An Application to the Demographic Transition.” University of Pennsylvania Mimeo.
39

Permutt, Thomas, and J. Richard Hebel. 1989. “Simultaneous Equation Estimation in
a Clinical Trial of the Effect of Smoking on Birth Weight.” Biometrics 45, 619-22.
Poterba, J.M., Venti, S.F., Wise, D.A., 1996. “How Retirement Saving Programs Increase Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 91-112.
Powers, Donald E., and Spencer S. Swinton, 1984. “Effects of Self-Study for Coachable
Test Item Types,” Journal of Educational Psychology 76, 266-278.
Ross, Lee and Richard E. Nisbett, 1991 The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of
Social Psychology, Temple University Press: Philadelphia.
Sacerdote, Bruce, 2001, “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 681-704.
Sorensen, Alan, 2001, “Social Learning in the Demand for Employer-Sponsored Health
Insurance.” UCSD Mimeo, 2001
Summers, Lawrence, 2000, “Helping America to Save More. Remarks by Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers”. Treasury News Press Release LS-524, April 4th.
Thaler, Richard H. and Shlomo Bernatzi, 2001, “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral
Economics to Increase Employee Saving.” Mimeo Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago.

40

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, by groups
Treated departments
All
Treated
Untreated
(group T) (group T1) (group T0)
(1)
(2)
(3)
PANEL A: BACKGROUND CHARACTERISTICS
TDA participation
0.010
0.009
0.011
before the fair (Sept. 2000)
(.0015)
(.0021)
(.0022)
Number of observations
4168
2039
2129
Sex (% male)

0.418
(.011)
6.008
(.157)
38213
(416)
38.7
(.24)
2018

PANEL B: FAIR ATTENDANCE (REGISTRATION DATA)
Fair attendance
0.214
0.280
0.151
among non-TDA enrollees
(.0064)
(.01)
(.0078)
Number of observations
4126
2020
2106

0.049
(.0048)
2018

Fair attendance
for all staff employes
Number of observations

0.063
(.0103)
3311

Salary
Age
Number of observations

0.400
(.0109)
5.864
(.161)
38807
(438)
38.4
(.24)
2020

0.012
(.0024)
2043

0.396
(.0107)
5.930
(.16)
38297
(422)
38.2
(.24)
2106

Years of Service

0.398
(.0076)
5.898
(.114)
38547
(304)
38.3
(.17)
4126

Untreated
Departments
(group 0)
(4)

0.192
(.0132)
6687

PANEL C: TDA PARTICIPATION (ADMINISTRATIVE DATA)
TDA participation after
0.049
0.045
0.053
4.5 months
(.0035)
(.0049)
(.0051)
Number of observations
3726
1832
1894

0.040
(.0045)
1861

TDA participation after
11 months
Number of observations

0.075
(.0065)
1633

0.088
(.005)
3246

0.089
(.0071)
1608

0.088
(.007)
1638

PANEL D: RESPONSE RATE TO THE ADDITIONAL QUESTIONNAIRE
Response rate
0.452
0.440
0.464
0.352
(.018)
(.0201)
(.0405)
(.0402)
Number of observations
765
612
153
142
Notes:
1-Standard errors in parentheses.
2-The first part of Panel B includes all individuals not enrolled in the TDA by
September 2000. The second part includes all employes (enrolled or not in the TDA)
3-The average fair participation in the non-treated department was obtained from the registration information
collected at the fair. Since only 75% of the participants
registered, the participation was adjusted by a proportionality factor.
4-Demographic information and TDA participation are all obtained from administrative data

Table 2: Differences in background characteristics, fair attendance and TDA participation, by treatment status
Treated depts.
Treated vs Untreated Untreated in treated depts.
Treated
vs untreated depts.
in treated depts.
vs untreated depts.
vs untreated depts.
XT-X0
XT1-XT0
XT0-X0
XT1-X0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
PANEL A- BACKGROUND CHARACTERISTICS
Sex (% male)
-0.023
0.003
-0.027
-0.017
(.024)
(.015)
(.022)
(.025)
Years of Service
-0.169
-0.061
-0.089
-0.205
(.386)
(.252)
(.384)
(.362)
Salary
524
369
208
760
(964)
(561)
(847)
(1002)
Age
-0.56
0.16
-0.52
-0.48
(.53)
(.33)
(.52)
(.49)
Number of observations
6144
4126
4124
4038

PANEL B: FAIR ATTENDANCE
Fair attendance
Number of observations

0.158
(.021)
6144

0.138
(.019)
4126

0.090
(.02)
4124

0.231
(.022)
4038

PANEL C: TDA PARTICIPATION
TDA participation after
4.5 months
Number of observations

0.0097
(.0043)
5587

-0.0068
(.0063)
3726

0.0126
(.0053)
3755

0.0075
(.0048)
3693

TDA participation after
11 months
Number of observations

0.0141
(.0063)
4879

0.0023
(.0103)
3246

0.0133
(.0082)
3271

0.0153
(.007)
3241

0.0070
(.0519)
765

0.1655
(.0521)
295

0.1465
(.0376)
754

PANEL D: RESPONSE TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE
response rate to the questionnaire
0.1516
(.0366)
Number of observations
907

Notes:
1-Regression adjusted differences in means: departments were matched according to size and participation,
and triplets of departments of similar contribution rate and size were formed.
The regressions control for the triplet to which the department belongs.
2-Standard errors (reported in parentheses below the coefficient) are corrected for clustering at the department level
3-The average attendance or participation in the non-treated department was obtained from the registration information
collected at the fair. Since only 75% of the participants
registered, the participation was adjusted by a proportionality factor.
4-Demographic information and TDA participation are all obtained from administrative data
5-The sample is restricted to individuals who were not enrolled in the TDA before the fair.

Table 3: Individual and social effects on fair attendance
Attended the fair

Dummy for received letter
Dummy for treated
department

OLS
(1)

IV
(2)

IV
(3)

0.138
(.019)
0.090
(.022)

0.132
(.019)

0.133
(.019)

Average number of
letters in the department

0.285
(.072)

Average participation to the
fair in the department
Observations

0.753
(.094)
6144

6144

6144

Notes:
1- All regressions control for the triplet to which the department belongs
2-Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are adjusted for clustering at the department level
3-In the IV regressions, the instrument set consists of a dummy for whether the department
is treated, a dummy for whether the individual received the letters, and the triplet to which
the department belongs.

Table 4: IV regressions: Effect of fair attendance on TDA participation
T depts.
vs 0 depts.
(yT-y0 )/(fT-f0 )
(1)

Letter vs non-letter Non-letter in T depts.
in T depts.
vs 0 depts.
(yT1-yT0)/(fT1-fT0)
(yT0-y0 )/(fT0-f0 )
(2)
(3)

Letter indiv.
vs 0 depts.
(yT1-y0 )/(fT1-f0 )
(4)

TDA participation after
4.5 months
Number of observations

0.0568
(.0257)
5587

-0.0446
(.0402)
3726

0.1348
(.0625)
3755

0.0300
(.0195)
3693

TDA participation after
11 months
Number of observations

0.0817
(.0399)
4879

0.0142
(.0641)
3246

0.1488
(.102)
3271

0.0599
(.029)
3241

T1, T0, 0
Treated department

T1,T0
Received letter

T0,0
Treated department

T1,0
Received letter

Sample
Instruments

Notes:
1- Dependent variables are individual enrollment in the TDA 4.5 months and 11months after the fair
2- Independent variable is individual fair attendance
3- All regressions control for the triplet of the department
4- Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the department level

Table 5: Fair attendance and treatment effect in different groups

Fair attendance in T1
(letter recipients)
(1)

Difference Group T-Group 0
TDA participation
TDA participation
after 4.5 months
after 11 months
(2)

(3)

PANEL A: DEPARMENT SIZE

Below median (81)

0.328
(.015)
985

0.009
(.0071)
2797

0.013
(.0106)
2403

Above median (81)

0.235
(.0132)
1035

0.009
(.0047)
2790

0.015
(.0079)
2476

PANEL B: DEPARTMENT AVERAGE PARTICIPATION IN THE TDA BEFORE THE EXPERIMENT

Below median (34%)

0.259
(.0134)
1062

0.006
(.0059)
2929

0.013
(.009)
2523

Above median (34%)

0.304
(.0149)
958

0.013
(.0064)
2658

0.016
(.0094)
2356

Women

0.320
(.0134)
1213

0.012
(.0071)
3298

0.014
(.0112)
2843

Men

0.221
(.0146)
807

0.007
(.0071)
2289

0.011
(.0086)
2036

Below Median ($34021)

0.269
(.0141)
983

0.001
(.006)
2745

0.015
(.0088)
2291

Above Median ($34021)

0.291
(.0141)
1037

0.018
(.0065)
2842

0.015
(.0104)
2588

PANEL C: GENDER

PANEL D: SALARY

1-The sample in column 1 is composed of individuals in group T1
2-Columns 2 and 3: Regression adjusted differences in means: department were matched according to size
and participation, and triplets of departments of similar contribution rate and size were formed.
The regressions control for the triplet to which the department belongs.
3-Standard errors (reported in paretheses below the coefficient) corrected for clustering at the department level

Table 6: Comparison with naive estimates: effect of the fair on TDA enrollment
Individual effect
Overall effect
IV
OLS
IV
"Naïve" IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Participation after 4.5 months
Fair attendance
-0.045
0.016
0.057
0.001
(.04)
(.011)
(.026)
(.026)
3726
1832
5587
5587
B. Participation after 11 months
Fair attendance
0.014
0.052
0.082
0.042
(.064)
(.018)
(.04)
(.039)
3246
1608
4879
4879
Sample
Treated
individuals who
Complete
Complete
departments
received the letter
sample
sample
Instrument
Received letter
NONE
Treated department Received letter
Notes:
1- Dependent variables are individual enrollment in the TDA 4.5 months and 11 months after the fair
2- Independent variable is individual fair attendance
3- All regressions control for the triplet of the department
4- Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the department level
5- The sample in column (1) is limited to individuals (not enrolled in the TDA by Sept. 2000) in Treated
departments. The sample in column (2) is limited to individuals who received the letter (not enrolled in the
TDA by Sept. 2000). The sample in column (3) and (4) is limited to individuals not enrolled in the TDA
by Sept. 2000.

Table 7: Effect of the fair on attitudes and knowledge
Treated departments
Treament
Control
(Received invitation)
(1)
(2)
A. Fair participation and impressions
Fair participation

(3)

0.286
(.054)
70
0.950
(.05)

0.140
(.064)
371
-0.101
(.047)

B. Response to the question "Why are you currently not enrolled in the TDA?"
Not enough information
0.200
0.306
(.025)
(.059)
Cannot afford to save for retirement
0.328
0.371
(.029)
(.062)
Plan to enroll soon but no time to do it yet
0.446
0.355
(.031)
(.061)
Other ways to save for retirement
0.220
0.242
(.026)
(.055)
255
62

-0.107
(.063)
-0.043
(.075)
0.091
(.07)
-0.022
(.063)
317

C. Enrollment 6 months after the questionnaires
Individuals who report that
they plan to enroll soon
Individuals who did not report that
they plan to enroll

-0.067
(.096)
0.020
(.01)

Number of observations
Fair satisfaction (for those who
attended the fair

0.425
(.029)
301
0.849
(.027)

Difference

0.099
(.029)
0.020
(.013)

0.167
(.09)
0.000

D. Response to the question "where do you obtain information about benefits?"
Benefits fair
0.370
0.254
(.028)
(.052)
Benefits information packet
0.771
0.930
(.024)
(.031)
Personal visit to the BO
0.123
0.085
(.019)
(.033)
Other information seminar
0.204
0.211
(.023)
(.049)
Colleagues
0.252
0.310
(.025)
(.055)
Family or friends
0.265
0.239
(.026)
(.051)
Administrative officer
0.049
0.014
(.012)
(.014)
300
71
E. Knowledge about benefits
Reported that she knew her TDA status
0.938
0.986
(.014)
(.014)
Reported that she knew the
0.738
0.714
number of vendors with which she
(.029)
(.061)
Gave the correct answer about TDA status
0.887
0.944
(.018)
(.028)
Gave the correct answer about pension plan
0.603
0.607
(.032)
(.066)
235
56
Notes
1-All statistics are weighted by population weight
2-Standard errors of the difference corrected for clustering at the department level
3-Sample is restricted to treated deparments

0.117
(.054)
-0.158
(.039)
0.038
(.05)
-0.007
(.049)
-0.058
(.053)
0.026
(.051)
0.035
(.025)
371
-0.048
(.022)
0.024
(.058)
-0.056
(.033)
-0.004
(.069)
291

October 31, 2000
Name
Line 1
Line 2
City state zip
Dear Name:
You have just received your Open Enrollment packet from the Benefits Services Group, inviting you to the
Benefits Fair 2001.
The Fair will be held in two locations:
November 7, 11am– 2:30pm
ADDRESS ERASED

November 8, 11am – 2:30pm
ADDRESS ERASED

This year, as part of a study (conducted jointly by the Benefits Services Group and economics researchers)
to better understand the impact of the Fair on benefits choices, we are offering a reward of $20 to 2,000
employees, just for attending the Fair. Funding for these rewards was contributed from a research grant.
We selected those employees by a simple lottery, and your name was among those drawn.
In order to receive this $20 reward, all you have to do is to come to the Fair with this letter, and give your
name at the registration table that will be located in the main hall. You will receive a check within the two
weeks following the Fair.
We hope that you will find the Fair helpful in making your benefits choices. However, we want to
emphasize that the reward is completely independent of your benefits decisions.
Make a note of these dates (November 7 or November 8) in your calendar, and we look forward to seeing
you there.
Sincerely yours,
Name of the Benefits Office
Associate Director

April 1st , 2001
Name
Line 1
Line 2
City state zip
Dear Name:

We are currently studying whether benefits fairs, along with other way of obtaining
information, convey the necessary information to members of the university community.
In the context of our study, we would like to ask you a few questions about your
experience in obtaining information on the university retirement plans. If you could take
a few minutes to complete the questionnaire attached to this letter, your response would
be greatly appreciated. Your responses will be strictly confidential and will not be used
for any purpose other than the study. You may mail your responses in the envelope
provided.
As a token of our appreciation, we will send you a $10 Macy’s gift certificate when
we receive the completed questionnaire. Please return the questionnaire on or before May
15.

Sincerely,

First name, Last name
Please answer the following 6 simple questions. You can check the “don’t know” answer
if you are not sure of an answer. Your answers will remain strictly confidential and will
be used for no purpose other than this study.
(1) In addition to your Basic Retirement Account, the university makes a monthly
contribution of 3.5% of your monthly salary to an Individual Investment Account(s). You
decide how this contribution should be invested from a list of four investment companies.
Through how many investment companies are you currently investing this contribution?
-One….
-Two….
-Three…..
-Four……
-Don’t know……

(2) The university offers a supplemental retirement plan called the Tax-Deferred Account
(TDA) program. Through the TDA program, you can add to your retirement savings by
contributing a portion of your salary on a pre-tax basis. You pay no taxes on these
savings or the investment income until you withdraw your funds. You decide how much
to contribute and the university deducts your contributions from your paycheck. You
choose how to invest your savings from a wide range of funds offered by four different
vendors
You are not automatically enrolled in the TDA program.
Are you currently enrolled in the Tax-Deferred Account (TDA)?
-Yes ….. (go to question 4)
-No …..
-Don’t know……..

(3) [To be filled out only if you are not currently enrolled in the TDA]
Why are you currently not enrolled in the TDA (check all answers that apply)?
-You do not have enough information on the TDA: ……
-Right now, you cannot afford to save for your retirement: ……..
-You plan to enroll soon, but did not have the occasion to do it yet: ……
-You save for your retirement through other means: ……

(NEXT PAGE, PLEASE)

1

First name, last name.
(3b) If you check the last answer, which other means are you using to save for
retirement:
-TDA through spouse’s employer: ……..
-Individual Retirement Account (IRA): ……
-Employer provided pension plan (own): ……
-Employer provided pension plan (spouse): ……
-Other mutual funds: …….
-Other……

(4) [To be filled out by everybody]
From which of the following sources do you get information about the retirement plans
(check all that apply)?
-The benefits information fair: …….
-Benefits information packet: …………
-You came in person to the Benefits office: …….
-You attended an information seminar: ……..
-Colleagues:…….
-Family or friends:………
-The Administrative Officer of your department: ……..
-None……
(5) Did you attend the benefits information fair in the fall?
-Yes: …..
-No: ……
(6) If you did, did you find it useful?
-Yes:……..
-No: ……..

2

