NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKE-UP RATES AND TRADE OFFS AFTER THE AGE OF ENTITLEMENT:
SOME THOUGHTS AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FOR CHILD CARE SUBSIDIES

Ann Dryden Witte
Magaly Queralt

Working Paper 8886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8886

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
The work reported in this paper was supported by a grant from the Rhode Island Department of Human Services (DHS)
to the Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership and by grant #90YE0032 from the Child Care Bureau, Administration
for Children and Families (ACF), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to the National Bureau of
Economic Research through the Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership. The support of DHS and DHHS for this
work does not indicate their concurrence with our results nor are DHS or DHHS in any way responsible for errors that
we may have made. This project would not have been possible without the support of many people at DHS in Rhode
Island. Sherry Campanelli, Randy Rosati, Donalda Carlson, Reeva Murphy, Carol Ponto and Nancy Tikkanen provided
invaluable guidance. They provided us with data, and they helped us to understand both the state administrative data we
use and the way in which the cash assistance and child care subsidy programs operated before and after welfare reform.
We would also like to thank Nancy Burstein, Sherry Campanelli, Ann Collins, Patricia Divine, Joanna Grymes, Annie
George, Linda Giannarelli, Julia Isaacs, Jean Layzer, Ivelisse Martinez-Beck, Madelyn Schultz, David Stevens, Helen
Tauchen, and Karen Tvedt for very valuable comments on an earlier draft of the paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Ann Dryden Witte and Magaly Queralt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Take-Up Rates and Trade Offs After the Age of Entitlement:
Some Thoughts and Empirical Evidence for Child Care Subsidies
Ann Dryden Witte and Magaly Queralt
NBER Working Paper No. 8886
April 2002
JEL No. I38, H40, J22, I20

ABSTRACT
In this paper we develop a model of an eligible family’s decision to take or not to take child care
subsidies. This decision depends on the net benefits the family expects to derive from the subsidies over
their expected duration. We contend that such a demand-side model for the take-up of child care
subsidies and use of the term “take-up” rate are only appropriate for programs that guarantee services to
all eligible applicants. After welfare reform, most states do not offer such guarantees. For states that do
not guarantee subsidies, the proportion of the eligible population that receives subsidies is better called
a service rate than a take-up rate. Modeling service rates requires consideration of both governments’
decisions (the supply side) and families’ decisions (the demand side) regarding child care subsidies.
We survey the general literature on take-up rates for social welfare programs and review existing
estimates of the take-up rates and service rates for child care subsidy programs in various states. Using
administrative data and survey data for states that guarantee subsidies for all eligible families, we estimate
the family-level take-up rate for child care subsidies to be around 40% in early 2000. For states that do
not guarantee subsidies, service rates range from 14% in Minnesota to 50% in Massachusetts.
Finally, we suggest indicators to assess the trade offs that governments are making when
designing and funding their child care subsidy programs. We use the percent of federally eligible families
that receive child care subsidies and public expenditures per subsidized child to discern the relative
importance that states place on using child care subsidies (1) to facilitate parental work and (2) to prepare
its future work force by improving services to low-income children. For Rhode Island, we find increasing
emphasis on the latter between 1996 and 2000. We also find that the Illinois subsidized child care
program places relatively more emphasis on parental work facilitation, while Minnesota’s program makes
a more substantial investment in children through relatively more comprehensive and in-depth services.

Ann Dryden Witte
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
awitte@wellesley.edu

Magaly Queralt
Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership
155 Ocean Lane Dr., Suite 812
Miami, FL 33149
mqueralt@wellesley.edu

In the human services, the term “take-up rate” generally refers to the
proportion of the population eligible for a particular social welfare program that
participates in the program. The reasonably large literature on take-up rates suggests
that they vary considerably across programs. Specifically, recent surveys indicate that
take-up rates range from 43% for the Qualified Medicare Beneficiary program to 99%
for Medicare Part A. Take-up rates also vary as a result of using different estimation
methodologies. For example, the estimated take-up rate for programs such as AFDC,
Food Stamps and Medicaid, while consistently above 45%, shows a 20% to 25%
variation across studies depending on methodologies used (Craig, 1991; Remler, Rachlin
and Giled, 2001; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001).
In recent years, researchers have reported take-up rates for child care subsidies
that are substantially below the rates typically found for other social welfare programs.
For example, the U. S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) estimates that,
in an average month during April through September 1998, only 15% of eligible children
or about 1.5 million of the 9.9 million low-income and moderate-income children eligible
for CCDF child care subsidies actually received help through this program. This HHS
report goes on to state that the gap between eligibility and receipt of child care
subsidies would have been even greater if states had chosen to define the eligible
population to include all the low-income and moderate-income working families that are
potentially eligible under Federal law. If all states had set eligibility limits at the
maximum levels allowed under Federal law (i.e., 85% of state median income [SMI]), an
estimated 14.7 million children would have been eligible for child care subsidies in fiscal
year 1998, of which only 10 % were served (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 1999).
Why is the take-up rate for child care subsidies so much lower than the take-up
rate for other social welfare programs? In this paper, we seek to provide an answer to
this question. To this end, we provide new estimates of the take-up rate for child care
subsidies and provide indicators of the trade offs that governments are making between
using child care subsidies to facilitate work and using subsidies to improve care for lowincome children. To structure our thinking, we begin by developing a simple model of
take-up rates for child care subsidies. We discuss some implications of this model for
estimation of take-up rates for child care subsidies. Next we briefly review and

5

summarize studies that estimate take-up rates for social welfare programs other than
child care subsidies, followed by a review of existing estimates of take-up rates for child
care subsidies. We present our own estimates of take-up for child care subsidies in
Rhode Island for 1996 through 2000. In the final section of the paper, based on insights
gained through this work, we present tentative answers to the questions: (1) What is
the take-up rate for child care subsidies? and (2) What relative importance do
governments place on using child care subsidies to facilitate work and using subsidies to
improve care for low-income children? In brief, our answers to the above questions are
as follows. At the family level, we estimate that the take-up rate for child care subsidies
in late 1999 was around 40%. This is substantially higher than estimates previously
reported. We suggest that published estimates of the “take-up” rate for child care
subsidies are low because, for most states, they are estimates of service rates, not takeup rates. We find that states make, often implicitly, very different trade offs between
facilitating work and improving the care offered to low-income children. For example,
Illinois places relatively more importance on facilitating work, while Minnesota places
more emphasis on improving the care received by low-income children.
Modeling the Take-up Rate for Child Care Subsidies
To structure our thinking and provide context for the literature survey that
follows, we begin by developing a model of the take-up rate for child care subsidies.
Most existing models of take-up rates were developed for entitlement programs. For
entitlement programs, the supply of services available to eligible families is infinitely
elastic. Accordingly, these models see take up as fully determined by the decisions of
eligible applicants, given that all eligible applicants are guaranteed benefits. The number
of families served under entitlement programs is fully determined by the number of
eligible families that apply. We begin our conceptualization of the take up for child care
subsidies using insights from such demand-side models.
Building on Anderson and Meyers (1997) and Heckman, Lalonde and Smith
(1999), we see those eligible to receive child care subsidies as using them if they see
their use as improving their well-being (including the well-being of their children) by
more than their costs (including transaction costs and stigma), subject to the
information available and to the initiative of potential applicants. That is, we see
potential subsidy applicants as weighing the benefits and costs of remaining without a

6

subsidy or of applying for and receiving a subsidy given the information they have
available.
As noted by Craig (1991), there may be a lag in the take up of social benefits,
even after families realize that taking them would be advantageous. This is due to the
time it takes to learn about the program, to apply and to be accepted. A lag in take up
may also occur because of inertia, the all too present human tendency to put things off.
Formally speaking, we see potential child care subsidy applicants as comparing,
over the expected duration of subsidy receipt (denoted d),1 the utility (denoted U) they
expect to receive without subsidies versus the utility they expect to receive with
subsidies. We assume that a potential subsidy recipient’s utility depends upon earned
income (E) net of child care and other costs of working (wc), how many leisure hours
the person has (L) and the well-being of the potential recipient’s children (C). The
individual evaluates her or his utility using the information available, denoted I. If she
does not receive child care subsidies (denoted by the superscript ns) over the expected
duration of the subsidy, the expected utility is

d

∑U ( E
i =1

ns
i

− wci , Li , Cins ) | I

Let the expected benefits of receiving a subsidy to cover child care expenses
potentially be both monetary and non-monetary. Net monetary benefits,2 denoted b,
may decrease the costs of working. A non-monetary benefit may be, for example, a
parent-perceived increase in child well-being (C) when the child is in subsidized child
care ( C s ). Transaction costs/stigma of subsidy receipt, denoted c, may also be either
monetary, denoted cm, or non-monetary, denoted cnm. If the parent receives a child
care subsidy over the duration of the subsidy, the expected utility is
d

∑U ( E
i =1

s
i

− ( wci − (bi − cim )), (li − ci , nm ), Cis ) | I

Possibly with a lag, the potential subsidy applicant will take subsidies if
d

d

i =1

i =1

∑U ( Eis − (wci − (bi − cim )), (li − ci,nm ), Cis ) | I > ∑U ( Eins − wc i , li , Cins ) | I
1

Studies find median durations of child care subsidy receipt of between 3 months and 7 months (Witte and
Queralt, 1999; Meyers, et al., 2001).
2
Net monetary benefit is the decrease in child care costs net of any required payment by the parent.

7

Note that under this simple model, there are a number of potential reasons why
parents eligible for subsidies may not take them. They may not know about the subsidy
program. Or the family may fail to use subsidies because their expected period of
receipt is too short to allow discounted benefits to overcome the transaction cost/stigma
of obtaining the subsidy.3 This reason for failure to take a child care subsidy may be
common. For instance, many activities of cash assistance recipients eligible for child
care subsidies (e.g., Job Club) are of short duration. Another reason for failure to take
child care subsidies may be irregular employment, a common problem experienced by
low-income families which may, in some cases, make the expected transaction costs of
applying for subsidies exceed their benefits.4 The family may fail to use subsidies
because it has formal care available (e.g. through Head Start or public-school pre-K) or
informal care available (e.g. through relatives or neighbors) at little or no cost.5 Or the
family may fail to use subsidies because it is unable to find a care provider that is both
acceptable to the family and willing to accept child care subsidies.
In addition to the reasons discussed above as to why eligible families may not
use child care subsidies, the prices that subsidy programs pay for care, called
reimbursement rates, can substantially affect the child care choices available to subsidy
recipients and can render the choices more or less attractive. Reimbursement rates to
child care providers vary greatly across states and local areas. Federal regulations
require that reimbursement rates be set to provide “equal access” to care for poor
children. However, in some areas they may be set below the average cost of market
care, while in other areas they may be set high enough to make it possible for most
providers across the quality/price spectrum to offer subsidized care.
While reimbursement rates are a major factor determining whether or not a
provider will accept the vouchers/certificates issued by child care subsidy program,

3

Note that the transaction costs or stigma of receipt act as fixed costs. For modeling purposes, we need not
distinguish between the two. However, to estimate a take-up model, it would be important to identify
distinct empirical measures likely to be associated with transaction costs and stigma. For example, stigma
might be much higher for a family that has never previously received social welfare benefits than for a
family that has received such benefits in the past. Transaction costs would be much higher in a child care
subsidy system that was poorly administered or that required that a family come to a remote office to
qualify.
4
For example, Witte, Queralt, & Tauchen (2001) find that current and former cash assistance recipients
work on average one quarter in every four.
5
Child care subsidies may require no parental payments. However, in many states, subsidies do require that
the parent pay part of the cost of care.

8

providers may refuse to accept child care subsidy vouchers for other reasons, such as
the administrative hassle of participating in the program (e.g. long delays in being paid,
paper work) or because they fear that having too many low-income children may lessen
their ability to retain and attract more economically-advantaged children.6
Besides provider reimbursement rates, the age and health status of the children
and the hours and days of work of the parents’ jobs will impact the availability to the
parents of child care facilities willing to accept subsidies.
The level of payment that a parent must make for care when receiving a child
care subsidy (generally referred to as the parental co-payment) is another important
factor that parents consider in deciding whether or not to accept a subsidy for which
they are eligible. Under a co-payment system that depends exclusively on family
income and size, parents face the same price for each type of care.7 That is, the
highest-priced center willing to accept vouchers will cost an eligible parent the same
amount of money as the lowest-priced care available in the market. Such system
increases the relative benefits of choosing the highest-priced subsidized care available,
as opposed to a co-payment system that reflects the actual market prices of each type
of care. This helps to explain, at least partially, the often-noted tendency of subsidized
parents to disproportionately use center-based care, which is generally more expensive
than other types of care available.
Most co-payment systems also require lower co-payments for the second and
subsequent children in subsidized care. This makes the monetary benefits of subsidy
receipt greater than they would otherwise be for families that need care for more than
one child.
As noted earlier, the model developed above is a demand-side model. It only
provides a meaningful conceptualization for the percent of eligible families served in
states that provide child care subsidies to all eligible applicant families, such as Illinois
and Rhode Island. Most states set budgets and eligibility rules for child care subsidies
that result in more eligible families applying for subsidies than the state can serve.
Meaningful conceptualizations of the percent of eligible families served (i.e., service
6

In the work that we have done in Massachusetts, we have found that providers tend to have either
predominately subsidized children (i.e., 80% or more of the children enrolled being subsidized) or
predominately private-pay children (i.e., 80% or more of the enrolled children are unsubsidized).
7
Besides co-payments, in some states, parents are allowed to make payments to providers over and above
the reimbursement rate.

9

rates) for states that do not guarantee services to all applicants require consideration of
government decisions regarding funding levels and of the rules that determine which
families are eligible. For such states, supply as well as demand factors influence the
percent of the eligible population that receive child care subsidies.8
When eligibility rules are set so that more families qualify for subsidies than are
awarded a subsidy, some families may decide not to apply, some may apply and may be
put on a waiting list for services, and some will actually receive subsidies. In such states,
the number receiving subsidies divided by the total number eligible is the service rate.
Calculating take-up rates under such conditions would be more difficult. The
numerator of the take-up rate would be the sum of: (1) those receiving subsidies + (2)
those waiting for subsidies + (3) those discouraged from applying because they do not
think they have a good chance of receiving subsidies (it would be very difficult to obtain
an accurate estimate of the number of families that do not bother to apply for subsidies
under these circumstances). The denominator of the take-up rate would be the same as
for an entitlement program, that is, the number eligible for services.
A Brief Survey of the Literature on Take-Up Rates
Most existing estimates of take-up rates for entitlement programs are based on
caseloads, for example, the proportion of those eligible for services that apply and
receive benefits. Estimates are generally done at the adult or family level, since it is the
adults in the family that decide to take or not to take subsidies.
Comparisons of the take-up rates for child care versus the take-up rates for
other programs require that all the estimates to be compared be of take-up rates (i.e.,
only for states that guarantee subsidies to all eligible applicants) and that they all be
calculated at the decision-making level, that is, at the family-level. For child care
subsidies, however, most estimates to date have been a mixture of take-up rates and
service rates. Moreover, some estimates have been calculated at the child level, while
others have been calculated at the family level. Estimates at both levels may be useful
since the child care subsidy program seeks to provide child care so parents can work

8

State and local governments can shift the aggregate demand for services by changing the eligibility rules.
For example, they can lower the maximum level of income that a family can receive to qualify for subsidies
and thus decrease the demand for subsidies, as those who do not qualify under the income guidelines are
unlikely to apply. Similarly, governments can increase the aggregate supply of subsidies by increasing the
budget for such subsidies.

10

and also seeks to provide care that enhances children’s intellectual, social and emotional
development.9
Some estimates of take-up rates for entitlement programs are based on
expenditures. Expenditure-based estimates of take-up rates give the proportion of
aggregate dollar value of an entitlement that is claimed or awarded. Expenditure-based
estimates generally provide higher estimates of take-up rates than caseload-based
methods. This is because, consistent with the model outlined in the previous section,
the monetary value of benefits awarded to recipients is higher than the monetary value
of benefits that are not claimed by those eligible.10 An eligible family will only use a
program if the expected benefits of using the program exceed the fixed costs
(transaction costs and stigma) of applying for the program. For example, as reported by
Craig (1991), the mean benefit awarded under the British Family Income Supplement
program was 11.7 British Pounds Sterling, while the mean unclaimed benefit was 8.9
pounds.
Remler, et al. (2001) note that the source data that are used to estimate take-up
rates have a large effect on estimates. Estimates that are based solely on survey data
generally produce imperfect assessments of take-up rates. This is because surveys are
unlikely to contain sufficient detail on income sources to accurately establish eligibility.
Further, survey data is subject to response and non-response biases and it is not
generally verified. In contrast, administrative data can yield more accurate estimates of
take-up rates. Specifically, programs such as the child care subsidy program have
multiple screens for eligibility (e.g., age of child, number of hours of work of the parent
and level of family income). Such programs also have detailed rules regarding what
types of income will and will not be counted for the purpose of determining income
eligibility. At the time of eligibility determination, the potential recipient must provide
documentation to prove eligibility (e.g., pay stubs, time sheets, birth records).
Administrative data, unlike survey data, reflects the application of all these screens.
However, administrative data has weaknesses for measuring take-up rates. For
example, studies have shown that administrative agencies sometimes provide benefits

9

There is a tradition of measuring service rates at the child level for early care and education programs like
Head Start.
10
A person who is eligible to receive a benefit of $600 is more likely to claim it than a person who is
eligible to receive only $50.

11

to those who appear not to be eligible and fail to qualify those who appear eligible.
Often individuals appear ineligible when they are eligible or vice versa because they
happen to be in transition from one status to another at the time the data are recorded.
For example, while receiving child care subsidies, a parent may have lost her job, but
her child may not be immediately dropped from care when she becomes unemployed. In
fact, most child care subsidy programs allow for a transition period of 4 to 6 weeks
before terminating subsidies. Also, the quality of administrative data depends upon the
ability and conscientiousness of the staff and administration (including database
management staff) of the social service agency.
Another issue that may result in the provision of benefits to those who are not
eligible is the length of the eligibility re-determination period. Other things being equal,
the longer the period between determinations of eligibility, the larger will be the
proportion of ineligible families receiving benefits. While families using most social
welfare programs are required to report promptly any changes in status that would
affect their eligibility, many choose not to do so until their next eligibility redetermination interview, which may not take place for a few months. Eligibility for child
care subsidies is generally reassessed every six month. This re-determination period is
long, relative to that for other programs such as cash assistance.
Most studies of take-up and service rates have used cross sectional data. Such
data provides no information about the dynamics of subsidy receipt, which may fluctuate
a great deal during a period of several month or years.11 As the model presented in the
previous section makes clear, dynamics can be very important at the individual and
aggregate levels since it provides information on impacts of administrative and funding
changes. For example, HHS’s annual report to congress on take-up rates for Food
Stamps, TANF and SSI has provided very valuable longitudinal data regarding the
impact of welfare reform (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001).
Survey of the Literature on Take-Up Rates for Child Care Subsidies
The earliest estimates of take-up and service rates for child care subsidies that
we are aware of appeared in a 1999 study done by HHS researchers (U.S. Department
11

Since the late 1990s, HHS has provided longitudinal estimates of take-up rates for Food Stamps, TANF
and SSI. See, for example, U.S. Department of Health and Human Service (2001). Calculations of take-up
rates for TANF will become increasingly difficult as the 5 year time limits affect larger numbers of
families. Families that have exhausted their 5 years of eligibility for TANF will need to be excluded from
estimates of the number of TANF-eligible families (the denominator of take-up rates).

12

of Health and Human Services, 1999). HHS combined administrative data on the number
of children served with federal and state funds directly allocated or transferred to the
Child Care & Development Fund (CCDF)12 with estimates of the number of children
eligible for child care subsidies from the Urban Institute.13
The HHS report estimated that, in an average month in 1998, only 15% of lowincome and moderate-income children eligible under state rules for CCDF child care
subsidies actually received help through this program. The report also estimated that
only 10% of eligible children would have been served if states had chosen to set
eligibility limits at the maximum levels allowed under Federal law (i.e., 85% of SMI)
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999).
Neither of the HHS estimates described above are take-up rates as
conventionally defined. First, both estimates are child-level estimates, while, as noted
earlier, most estimates of take-up rates for social welfare benefits are done at the family
level, not at the child level. Second, both estimates consider only CCDF subsidies, that
is, they are estimates of the proportion of eligible children that were receiving a CCDFfunded child care subsidy. Several other sources of child care and education subsidies
were not included in the estimates, such as the number of children served directly
through TANF, through state-funded subsides, through public-school pre-K programs,
and through Head Start Programs.14
HHS estimates of the proportion of children served if all states were to set
income-eligibility at 85% of SMI may best be considered measures of federal and state
commitment to serve federally--eligible families under the CCDF program. This depends

12

The funding for CCDF is complicated. CCDF requires that the states maintain a certain level of funding
(i.e., maintenance of effort [MOE] requirement) to obtain some federal funding for child care subsidies. To
obtain additional federal funding for child care subsidies, states must provide matching funds. To provide
additional child care subsidies, many states also transfer funds from TANF to CCDF. The HHS estimates
of the number of children served included children funded by both state and federal CCDF funding and
through funds transferred to CCDF from TANF. However, the estimates did not include the number of
children served by state spending above the federally required MOE and match nor did they include the
children that received funds directly through TANF. See U.S. Department of Health and Human Service
(1999) for a discussion of the methodology used and Loprest et al. (2000) for a discussion of funding for
CCDF.
13
To obtain estimates of the number of eligible children, Urban Institute researchers used information on
the characteristics of state CCDF programs from state CCDF plans for 1997-1999, the Urban Institute’s
TRIM3 micro-simulation model and March CPS data for 1996-1998 (U. S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 1999; Giannarelli, et al. 2001).
14
HHS researchers are aware of these omissions, but did not have data to allow inclusion of all types of
subsidies.

13

on state and local revenue-raising capacity, on the level of provision of other types of
care and education programs and on public attitudes toward public-sector spending in
general and toward public-sector spending on CCDF subsidies for the low-income
population in particular.15
HHS estimates of the proportion of children eligible under state rules that
actually receive subsidies are closer to standard estimates of take-up rates for some
states. For example, the HHS estimates that 27% of eligible children in Illinois received
a CCDF subsidy and 26% of eligible children in Rhode Island received a CCDF subsidy
respectively. Both Illinois and Rhode Island guarantee CCDF subsidies to families eligible
under state rules. However the HHS estimates from Illinois and Rhode Island differ from
standard take-up rates because they are calculated at the child level, rather than at the
family level.
For states that do not guarantee subsidies to eligible applicants, the HHS
estimates are best considered service rates, for example, 4% in California and 11% in
Florida. These service rates under-estimate take-up rates because the numerator used
in calculating them does not include the children of families on the waiting list (e.g.,
both California and Florida have waiting lists) or the children of applicants that have
been discouraged from applying because of a scarcity of subsidies.
Building upon HHS’s work, the National Study of Child Care in Low-Income
Families provided child-level estimates of take-up rates and service rates for April 1999
for 17 states (Collins, et al., 2000). Like the HHS study, the National Study provides
estimates of the proportion of federally eligible and of state-eligible children that
received subsidies. The National Study worked directly with states and, thus, was able
to refine its estimates of state rules for eligibility and of the number of children served.
The National Study included not only children receiving CCDF subsidies, but also children
receiving subsidies directly through TANF and children receiving subsidies funded
completely by state sources.16 As with the HHS study, results emphasize the proportion
of federally eligible children who were receiving subsidies.
We focus on the proportion of state-eligible children receiving subsidies because
it is closer to standard estimates of take-up rates. In April 1999, according to Collins et
15

For a discussion see Tannenwald (2001).
The National Study also updated the estimates of the number of children eligible under state rules by
using the 1999-2001 state plans.

16

14

al., (2000), the estimated take-up rate for CCDF, TANF and state-provided child care
subsidies in Illinois was 47%, while the estimated service rate in Minnesota (a state with
a waiting list) was 14%.
In recently completed work, researchers at the University of Chicago’s Chapin
Hall Center for Children provide family-level estimates of take-up rates for child care
subsidies in Illinois (Lee, George and Reidy, 2001). This study also provides information
about the dynamics of child care subsidy receipt and how take-up rates vary across
time. The study follows seven cohorts of single-parent recipients of cash assistance
(i.e., TANF) from the time they begin receiving cash assistance through the fourth
quarter of 1999. The researchers use administrative data for the cash assistance
program, for the child care subsidy program and for the Unemployment Insurance (UI)
program. They count cash assistance families as eligible for child care subsidies if they
have earnings according to UI records and a child less than 13 years of age.
For the Chapin Hall study described above, the richest information on the
dynamics of child care subsidy take up is available for those recipients who came into
the cash assistance program during the first quarter of 1997. These recipients are
tracked over a three-year period. Based on data in their report, we constructed Figure 1
to show the take-up rates for child care subsidies over the three-year period for this
cohort. During the first quarter of 1997, all members of the cohort were, by design, new
entrants to the cash assistance program. Eleven percent of these new entrants with UI
earnings and with a child less than 13 years of age received child care subsidies. The
estimated take-up rate for those remaining on cash assistance increases continuously
and rapidly until 57% of those still receiving cash assistance in the fourth quarter of
1999 also receive child care subsidies.
We use the lower line in Figure 1 to illustrate Chapin Hall’s estimates of the takeup rates for child care subsidies for those in the 1997 Quarter 1 entrants cohort who exit
the cash assistance system. The estimated take-up rate for this group is set at zero in
the first quarter of 1997 because no one has yet left cash assistance. During the second
quarter of 1997, when approximately 14% of the cohort have left cash assistance, the
estimated take-up rate for child care subsidies is 13%, higher for leavers than for cash
assistance recipients in the first quarter of their eligibility. From this point on, the

15

estimated take-up rate for leavers decreases to 11% and then increases gradually to
24% in the last quarter of 1999.
We use the middle line in Figure 1 to illustrate the overall take-up rate for child
care subsidies for both current and former cash assistance recipients who were part of
the 1997 Quarter 1 entrants cohort. The estimated take-up rate for both current and
former cash assistance recipients in this cohort goes from 11% in the first quarter of
1997 to 41% in the last quarter of 1999.
Estimates of Take-Up Rates for Child Care Subsidies in Rhode Island
To date none of the estimates of take-up rates for child care subsidies can easily
be compared to estimates of take up for other social welfare programs. To allow such
comparisons and to provide insights on trends in aggregate take-up rates for current
and former cash assistance recipients, we use unusually comprehensive administrative
data for the cash assistance program, the child care subsidy program and the
Unemployment Insurance (UI) program17 in Rhode Island.
To make our work comparable to Chapin Hall’s work, we consider only femaleheaded, single-parent households. The administrative records we use include all current
and former cash assistance recipients (n=29,253 families) in Rhode Island from the
second quarter of 1996 through the second quarter of 2000. We determine whether or
not each family was receiving child care subsidies during each of the 17 quarters of our
study by checking the administrative records of the child care subsidy program in Rhode
Island.
For those currently receiving cash assistance in Rhode Island, we define child
care eligibility based on hours of work18 (minimum required 20 hours per week),
earnings from UI records,19 participation in approved non-work activities (e.g., education
and training) as reflected in the cash assistance administrative records, and the
17

As in the Chapin Hall study, we use UI records to obtain earnings since no other administrative source of
earnings is available for those who have left cash assistance. However, from 10% to 24% of those who
appear in the child care subsidy records as working more than 20 hours per week do not appear to be
working in the UI records.
18
For cash assistance clients, hours of work were obtained from cash assistance administrative records. For
former cash assistance clients, estimates of hours of work were obtained by dividing UI earnings by the
estimated wage rate. The estimated wage rate was obtained from a model of wages for former cash
assistance clients that were receiving child care subsidies.
19
We use both family size (from cash assistance records) and UI earning to determine income-eligibility
since income-eligibility varies by family size in Rhode Island. We include only earnings and not other
sources of income because we do not have other sources of income for those who have left cash assistance
and are not receiving child care subsidies.

16

presence of one or more age-eligible children in the family, which was calculated using
birth dates for the children in the cash assistance administrative records.20 For former
recipients, we define eligibility based on hours of work, UI earnings and the presence of
one or more age-eligible children in the family.
Figure 2 provides our estimates of the family-level take-up rates for child care
subsidies in Rhode Island. As can be seen in Figure 2, we estimate that, overall, from
44% to 53% of eligible current and former cash assistance recipients received child care
subsidies in Rhode Island between the second quarter of 1996 and the first quarter of
2000.21 Figure 2 also shows that the take-up rate for those receiving cash assistance
was higher than the take-up rate for those who had left the program in the early part of
our study period, while the take-up rate for leavers was consistently higher than for
those on cash assistance after the first quarter of 1998.22
By combining administrative data from Rhode Island with Urban Institute
estimates of the number of eligible children in Rhode Island, we are able to provide
estimates of both the child-level and family-level take up rates for all eligible families
(i.e., low-income families never on cash assistance as well as current and former cash
assistance recipient). We estimate that in the fall of 1999 the child-level take-up rate for
all eligible children was 32% and the family-level take up rate for all eligible families was
40%.23
Should the Take-Up Rate for Child Care Subsidies Be Measured at the
Family Level or at the Child Level?
One reason that researchers have provided estimates of take-up rates and
service rates at both the family-level and the child-level is the dual purpose served by
the child care subsidy program. The child care subsidy program provides child care
subsidies to allow parents to work and to improve the child care available to low-income
children. If one sees child care subsidies as primarily facilitating work, then
20

Rhode Island increased the maximum eligibility age for able-bodied children from 12 to 15 years during
the period of our data and increased income eligibility from 185% of FPL to 225% of FPL. Our estimates
of the number of eligible families reflect these changes.
21
While the take-up rate increased by only 9% during our study period, the number of current and former
cash assistance families receiving child care subsidies almost doubled.
22
The Family Independence Program (FIP), which is Rhode Island’s welfare reform program, began in
May 1997. In June 1998, Rhode Island began a major reform of the child care subsidy program, called
Starting RIght.
23
To obtain the family-level take up rate, we divided the child-level take-up rate by .8. We used .8 because
on average RI families used subsidized care for 80% of their eligible children.

17

measurement of take-up rates at the family level seems most appropriate. If one sees
child care subsidies as primarily benefiting children, then measuring take-up at the childlevel may be most appropriate. If child care subsidies are expected both to facilitate
parental work and to benefit children, estimates of take-up at both the family-level and
the child-level can be useful. However, in order to compare rates across states and
across time, they must be measured consistently at either the family level or the child
level.
For the purpose of understanding family decision making, a strong case can be
made that take-up rates should be measured at the family level. After all, it is the
parents who decide whether or not to apply for a child care subsidy and for which of
their children to apply for a subsidy.24 The benefits of receiving child care subsidies
increase as the number of children in the family for whom subsidies will be used
increases. The increase in the benefit of child care subsidies with the number of children
in the family who are subsidized is magnified in states where the dollar amount of copayments for each additional child declines as the number of children receiving subsidies
increases.25 Despite such benefits, many families will want subsidies for some of their
eligible children, but not necessarily for all the children in the family.26 In Rhode Island,
for example, 60% of families with two eligible children used care for both eligible
children, but 40% did not. As the number of subsidy-eligible children in the family
increases, the proportion of eligible children for whom a family uses subsidies declines.
This means that take-up rates measured at the child level should be consistently below
take-up rates measured at the family level.
Consider the implications of a 100% take-up rate measured at the child level.
This would mean not only that every eligible family received a child care subsidy but
that the family received a subsidy for every one of its eligible children. Estimation of
take-up rates at the child level provides additional useful information about family
24

In the Rhode Island data, 57% of single-parent families had one child receiving subsidies and 43% had
more than one child receiving child care subsidies. The median number of children with subsidized care per
family was 1 and the mean was 1.6. Families with child care subsidies had from 1 to 8 children in
subsidized care.
25
In Rhode Island the dollar amount of co-payments parents make declines rapidly with each additional
child in care and ceases to increase after the fourth child in subsidized care. This means, for example, that,
having 7 children in subsidized care costs the family exactly the same as having 5 children in care.
26
Alternative sources of formal care and early education, often free, generally are more available for
children over the age of 4 and may be preferred by some families. Informal care by relatives, friends or
neighbors may be preferred for infants and toddlers.

18

decision-making. However, it mixes information about the families’ overall decision to
apply for subsidies with their individual decisions regarding which of their qualifying
children they wish to enroll in the subsidized child care program.
Measurement of take-up rates at the child-level can provide an indication of how
many more subsidies are needed. However, these estimates need to adjust for the fact
that larger families often will not want subsidies for all of their eligible children.
Measurement at the family level allows comparisons with take-up rates for other
programs. For example, estimates of family-level take-up rates (for states with
entitlements) could be a useful addition to the annual Indicators of Welfare Dependency
report that HHS makes to Congress (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
2001). However, it would probably require that the report be renamed. A possible title
might be Welfare Dependency and Availability of Services to Enhance Two-Generational
Self Sufficiency.

What Types of Data Are Best Used in Estimating Take-up Rates?
Craig (1991) makes a strong case that either surveys designed specifically to
measure take up or rich administrative data are best suited to measuring take-up rates.
We agree, but we suggest that work that combines survey and administrative data can
provide better estimates. HHS has pursued this approach with the estimates of take-up
rates and service rates that it has produced to date. However, we would suggest that
greater use of administrative data could improve future estimates.
General-purpose surveys like the CPS are not well suited to the task of
estimating the eligibility for child care subsidies of cash assistance recipients. For
example, current HHS estimates assume that an unemployed person who is a student is
eligible for child care subsidies (Giannarelli, et al., 2001). However, in many states,
education per se is not an activity that would qualify a cash assistance recipient for child
care subsidies. In addition, education generally is not an activity that would qualify nonrecipient families for child care subsidies. Better estimates of eligibility for child care
subsidies may be obtained by having states report the number of cash assistance
recipients who are working or participating in approved activities (other than work). For
low-income families that are not cash assistance recipients, however, in the absence of
special surveys, a general purpose survey may be the only way of estimating the
number who are eligible for child care subsidies.

19

Should Caseload or Expenditure Estimates of Take-Up Be Used?
Expenditure-based estimates of take up calculate the approximate proportion of
aggregate dollar value of an entitlement that is claimed or awarded. We believe that
such estimates of take-up rates may be more useful than caseload measures, although
few such measures exist at present. The reason for our preference for expenditurebased estimates is that caseload estimates based on eligibility figures are likely to
overestimate the proportion of the population that would avail themselves of child care
subsidies. Families make their cost-benefits analyses, and they are unlikely to apply for
a benefit unless the value of the benefit exceeds their estimated transaction costs and
stigma of applying for it. Many who are eligible for benefits decide that it is not worth
their time and effort to apply for a public subsidy.27 Those families who decide to take
subsidies are likely to be eligible for benefits of higher monetary value than those who
decide not to take subsidies. Thus, expenditure-based estimates generally provide
higher estimates of take up than caseload-based methods.

What Is the Take-Up Rate for Child Care Subsidies?
As shown in the sections above, there is no easy or consistent answer to this
question. Take-up rates vary across states, across time and across estimation methods.
They also vary depending upon whether they are measured at the family level or at the
child level.
In light of the discussion above, consider the multiple estimates of take-up rates
available for Rhode Island (RI) and Illinois (IL). HHS estimates that 26% of children
eligible under the Rhode Island child care subsidy program received CCDF-funded
subsidies in an average month during April through September 1998. Using RI
administrative data and revised Urban Institute estimates of the number of eligible
families, we estimate that 32% of eligible children received subsidies in the fall of 1999.
Using administrative data, we estimate that slightly more than 50% of eligible, singleparent families that were current or former recipients of cash assistance received child
care subsides in RI during 1998 and 1999. For all eligible families (those never on cash
as well as those on cash and two-parent as well as single-parent families), we estimate
that the family level take-up rate for child care subsidies was 40% in the fall of 1999.

27

Others, of course, may not be aware that subsidized care is available, or they may not be able to get it
together to apply for care.

20

Our estimates for Rhode Island also indicate that the take-up rate for child care
subsidies has been increasing, from 44% in the second quarter of 1996 to 52% in the
second quarter of 2000 (see Figure 2). This increase in take-up rates has come in the
face of an approximate doubling of the number of families eligible for child care
subsidies in RI.
HHS estimates that 27% of children eligible under the Illinois child care subsidy
program received CCDF-funded subsidies in an average month during April through
September 1998. Researchers conducting the National Study estimate that 47% of
children eligible under the Illinois subsidy program received subsidies in April 1999.28
Chapin Hall researchers estimate that between 28% and 31% of eligible families in their
1997 Quarter 1 cohort of single-parent cash-assistance recipients received child care
subsidies during the second and third quarters of 1998. They further estimate that 40%
of the members of this cohort received subsidies in the second quarter of 1999. By the
last quarter of 1999, 47% of eligible families in the cohort were using child care
subsidies. Lags in take up are apparent in the Chapin Hall study. Documenting this is
one of the major contributions of the study.
Given all the above, what is the take-up rate for child care subsidies in Illinois
and Rhode Island? The simple answer is that there is no single take-up rate. The takeup rate varies widely across methodologies and samples. It also varies across time, as
the number of eligible families changes due to changes in social welfare programs (e.g.,
welfare reform) and in the economy.
Overall, our best estimate is that the family-level take-up rate for child care
subsidies in IL and RI in early 2000 was between 40% and 50%. For Rhode Island, we
estimate that the family-level take up rate for all families was approximately 40% in late
1999. These family-level take-up rates approach lower-end estimates of take-up rates
for other means-tested social welfare benefits, such as cash assistance, Food Stamps
and Medicaid.29 This seems reasonable, given the availability of informal child care (e.g.,
kith and kin) and of other subsidized formal child care and early education (e.g., Head
Start and public-school pre-K).
28

The National Study provides no estimate of take-up for Rhode Island.
At this point, we are not aware of any estimates of the take-up rate for low-income families that have not
been on cash assistance. One would suspect that the take-up rate for such families would be below that for
current and former cash assistance recipients. Thus, overall take-up rates that include this group are likely
to be lower than the rates we report.

29

21

What about take-up rates for states that do not guarantee subsidies? Such
estimates would be useful, but like expenditure-based estimates of take-up rates, they
are simply not available. They would require compilation of state waiting lists and
specialized surveys to determine how many families know about and would apply for
subsidies if subsidies were guaranteed.

What Do Service Rates Tell Us?
For states that do not guarantee child care subsidies to all eligible families that
apply, we have only estimates of service rates. These estimates are useful, but they
should not be compared to take-up rates because they are determined both by
governments’ decisions and by families’ decisions regarding the child care subsidy
program. That is, service rates are determined by both the demand for subsidies by
families and by the supply of subsidies made available by federal, state and local
governments).
Service rates provide valuable information about the consistency of state
budgetary and eligibility policies. For example, by lowering its income-eligibility and
guaranteeing subsidized care to all eligible applicants, Illinois was able to make its
income eligibility and budgetary policy consistent. By way of contrast, states like Virginia
(with income-eligibility up to 85% of SMI) and Minnesota (with income-eligibility up to
75% of SMI) have very generous income eligibilities, but they are not able to budget
sufficient subsidy dollars to serve all eligible applicants. See Table 2. For example, the
National Study indicates that Virginia had a service rate of 27% and Minnesota had a
service rate of 14% (Collins, et al., 2000). The inconsistency between the eligibility rules
and the budgets in these states is reflected in their lower service rates and in their
waiting lists.30

Indicators of Trade Offs in Child Care Policies
It is important to understand and to evaluate the trade offs that federal, state
and local governments make between providing subsidized care so that low-income
30

States with waiting lists for child care subsidies have explicit or implicit systems for allocating scarce
subsidies across eligible applicant families or they allocate subsidies on the basis of the queue (e.g., who
applies first). For example, Florida has an explicit priority system that it uses to allocate child care
subsidies (see Queralt, et al., 2000 for a description), while Massachusetts has an implicit set of priorities
that give preference to current and former cash assistance recipients over income-eligible families who
have not participated in the cash assistance program (see Lemke, et al., 2001). The equity of some priority
systems could be challenged. Further, some priority systems do not meet the federal regulatory requirement
that eligible ”very-low-income” families be given priority for receipt of child care.

22

parents can work and providing child care services that enrich children and prepare
them for school. To do this one requires both a measure of the extent to which lowincome families can obtain child care subsidies and a measure of the comprehensiveness
or depth of services provided to low-income children in subsidized child care.31 We have
data to provide such an assessment only for Rhode Island.
Table 1 provides estimated family-level take up rates32 for all eligible RI families
for state fiscal year (SFY)33 1996 through SFY2001 and real average expenditures per
subsidized child. While the real average expenditure per subsidized child is not a perfect
measure of the child care environment, it is not an unreasonable one. Further, it is a
measure that most states should be able to calculate on an ongoing basis. During the
course of Rhode Island’s welfare reform, which made child care subsidies an entitlement
for all low-income families, and through its major early care and education initiative, the
Starting Right program, real expenditures per subsidized child in RI increased by 77%
(from $2858 per subsidized child in SFY1996 to $5064 per subsidized child in SFY2001).
During this period the family-level take-up rate for child care subsidies increased by 35%
(from 32% to 43%). The increase in the take-up rate is particularly noteworthy because
during this period RI also increased the income-eligibility for subsidized care (from
185% of FPL to 225% of FPL) and the age-limit for subsidized care (from 12 to 15
years).
The National Study provides information to allow a partial assessment of the
trade offs being made by 16 additional states. For Illinois, the National Study estimates
that the child-level take-up rate is 47%. For the 16 other states, the study estimates
child-level service rates that range from 14% in Minnesota to 50% in Massachusetts.34
31

The importance of this trade off for states was pointed out to us by Sherry Campanelli, Associate
Director of the RI Division of Individual and Family Support.
32
To estimate the family-level take-up rate for the fourth quarter of 1997 and the fourth quarter of 1999, we
started by using the actual number of children receiving child care subsidies each year from all funding
sources (state, Title XX, TANF, IV-A, CCDBG and CCDF) as the numerator of the child-level take-up rate
and the Urban Institute’s estimates of the number of children eligible under state rules in October 1997 and
October 1999 as the denominator. Then we divided this rate by .8 to obtain a family level take-up rate. We
used .8 because on average RI families use subsidized care for 80% of their eligible children. We estimated
take-up rates for all other quarters by interpolating between October 1997 and October 1999 and
extrapolating for periods before October 1997 and after October 1999. We used a trend variable for this
interpolation and extrapolation.
33
RI’s SFY runs from July 1 through June 30.
34
The Massachusetts child-level service rate seems high given the substantial waiting list in that state. The
high number may result from the inclusion of protective service child care in the number of children
receiving subsidies.

23

Table 2 provides our best estimates of the extent to which low-income families
can obtain child care subsidies in the states covered by the National Study. To obtain
our estimates, we multiply the number of state-eligible children by the estimated childlevel take-up rate for child care subsidies for each state. The result is the percent of
state-eligible likely applicant children who were served in 1999. We present these
estimates in column 3 of Table 2. As can be seen in column 3, by this measure, Illinois
and Massachusetts, despite their relatively low income eligibility, make child care
subsidies more available to low-income children than do states such as New Mexico and
North Carolina that have income eligibility levels closer to the maximum allowed by
federal regulation. Estimates of the percent of federally eligible likely applicant children
served by each state are presented in column 4 of Table 2.
Table 2 also provides a measure of the comprehensiveness and depth of services
received by children in subsidized care in the 16 states included in the National Study.
To provide a measure of comprehensiveness and depth of services, we use real
expenditures per child served and per state-eligible likely applicant child. Estimated real
expenditures per state-eligible likely applicant child range from $1330 in Virginia to
$4153 in Massachusetts. Real expenditures per child served (column 5 of Table 2) range
from $2692 in New Mexico to $5913 in Minnesota. Thus, we can see, for example, that
Minnesota serves only 30% of state-eligible likely applicants, but the state spends
relatively generously on the children it serves. One could interpret this as indicating that
Minnesota has decided to limit the availability of subsidies in order to provide children in
subsidized care with more comprehensive or in depth care. By way of contrast, Illinois
chooses to serve more families (greater availability of subsidies) but the state spends
substantially less per child.
The trade off between the availability of subsidies for low-income families and
expenditures per child is a difficult one for states to make. By providing both a measure
of the extent to which eligible families that are likely to apply for subsidies will receive
subsidies and a measure of the comprehensiveness of subsidized care, the trade offs
made by the states become clearer.
Conclusion

24

We develop a model of an eligible family’s decision to take or not to take child
care subsidies. This decision depends on the benefits the family expects to derive from
the subsidies and on the information the family has about the availability of subsidies.
We contend that a demand-side model of child care subsidy use and the term
“take-up” rate are only appropriate for programs that guarantee services to all eligible,
applicant families. After welfare reform, most states do not offer such guarantees. For
states that do not guarantee child care subsidies to all eligible families, both government
decisions (the supply side) and family decisions (the demand side) should be considered
in modeling take-up rates. For states that do not guarantee subsidies, the proportion of
eligible families that receive subsidies is a service rate not a take-up rate.
We survey the general literature on take-up rates for social welfare programs
and review existing estimates of the take-up rates and service rates for child care
subsidy programs in various states. We conclude that take-up rates vary considerably
across methodologies and samples, as well as across time periods. Based on our review
and our own estimates of take-up rates, we suggest that in the year 2000 take-up rates
for child care subsidies, measured at the family level, were around 40%. Take-up rates
appear to be higher for current and former cash assistance recipients than for other lowincome families, at least in Rhode Island.
We conclude by suggesting indicators that illustrate the trade offs that
governments make when providing child care subsidies. Child care subsidies serve the
dual purpose of allowing parents to work and preparing their children for school. To
facilitate parental work, some governments choose to focus on providing child care
subsidies to as many families as possible. To provide more comprehensive child care
services, other governments focus on the type of care received by low-income children.
Most states would like to both facilitate the work of low-income parents and to provide
comprehensive and enriching child care experiences for low-income children. However,
achievement of both goals simultaneously would require substantial commitment of
funds.
We suggest that the percent of federally eligible families (i.e., those with
incomes <= 85% of SMI) that receive child care subsidies is one possible indicator of
the degree to which a child care subsidy program is facilitating parental work. Real
expenditures per child provide an indicator, however imperfect, of the investment the

25

state is making on preparing its future work force. Using these two indicators, we find
that Illinois has designed its program primarily to facilitate parental work, while
Minnesota has decided to put greater emphasis on the future of its children by providing
them with more comprehensive or in-depth services. During the last 5 years, Rhode
Island has increased both the availability of child care subsidies and expenditures per
child. This was only possible because the State committed substantial additional funds to
the child care subsidy program.
Given the recent decline in revenue, states are currently making important
changes in the child care subsidy program. Using indicators such as those suggested
above, one can more clearly discern the trade offs that are being made. Documentation
of the trade offs made when setting child care policies can result in more informed
public debate and possible in better child care policies.

26

Figure 1
Take-Up Rate For Child Care Subsidies in Illinois
TANF Entrants 1997Q1
n=6153

60%

50%
Combined--On & Off TANF

On TANF

40%

30%

Not on TANF

20%

10%

0%
97 Q1

97 Q2

97 Q3

97 Q4

98 Q1

98 Q2

98 Q3

98 Q4

99 Q1

99 Q2

99 Q3

99 Q4

27

Figure 2
Rhode Island Take-Up Rates for Child Care Subsidies
All Current and Former TANF Recipients--Q2 1996-Q2 2000
n=29,253

60%

Combined--On & Off AFDC/TANF
55%

On AFDC/TANF
50%

45%

Not on AFDC/TANF

40%
1996
Q2

1996
Q3

1996
Q4

1997
Q1

1997
Q2

1997
Q3

1997
Q4

1998
Q1

1998
Q2

1998
Q3

1998
Q4

1999
Q1

1999
Q2

1999
Q3

1999
Q4

2000
Q1

28

Table 1
Rhode Island: Take-Up Rate For Child Care Subsidies and Dollars Spent per Child
Total Budget (real
Number of
Real Average
Family-Level
Year
Children Dollars per Child
Take-up rate
dollars)*
SFY1996
$14,242,958
4983
$2,858
32%
SFY1997
$16,681,338
6066
$2,750
33%
SFY1998
$20,831,992
6830
$3,050
36%
SFY1999
$28,426,532
8206
$3,464
38%
SFY2000
$46,649,104
10553
$4,420
41%
SFY2001
$62,178,426
12279
$5,064
43%
*Following Collins, et al. (2000), we deflate the budget by a child care cost index
based on the relative average hourly wage rate for a child care worker.

29

Table 2
Income-Eligibility and Real Expenditures per Child Eligible under State Rules

Income
Eligibility
(% of SMI,
State June 1999)
Alabama
43%
California
73%
Indiana
53%
Illinois
54%
Louisiana
91%
Massachusetts*
42%
Michigan
54%
Minnesota
70%
New Jersey
48%
New Mexico
83%
New York
60%
North Carolina
75%
Ohio
55%
Tennessee
56%
Texas
51%
Virginia
54%
Washington
59%

Percent of
Federally
Eligible
(<=85% of
SMI) LowIncome
Children
50%
87%
64%
53%
95%
46%
66%
84%
53%
100%
72%
81%
59%
63%
63%
70%
86%

Percent of Percent of
State- Federally
Real Annual
Eligible
Eligible
Likely
Likely
Expenditure
Real Annual
Applicant Applicant
(per StateExpenditure
Children
Children Eligible Likely
Served,
Served, Applicant Child,
per Child
1999**
1999
1999) Served, 1999)
63%
31%
$1,782
$2,839
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
42%
27%
$1,572
$3,713
100%
53%
$2,934
$2,934
43%
41%
$1,530
$3,567
107%
49%
$4,153
$3,890
70%
46%
$2,744
$3,925
30%
25%
$1,800
$5,913
40%
21%
$2,231
$5,664
32%
32%
$833
$2,692
60%
43%
N.A.
N.A.
40%
33%
$2,056
$3,446
55%
33%
$1,371
$3,323
32%
20%
$1,875
$3,435
32%
20%
$1,326
$4,108
57%
40%
$1,330
$2,321
47%
40%
$1,351
$2,933

* The National Study's child-level take up rate for Massachusetts seems high, perhaps because
protective services children have been included in the number of children served.
**We assume a child-level take-up rate of 47%, which is the take up rate for IL.
Source: Data used to construct this table are from Collins, et al. (2000)

30

References
Anderson, P. M. and Meyer, B. D. (1997). Unemployment Insurance Take-up Rates and
the After-Tax Value of Benefits. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 913-937.
Committee on Ways and Means, US House of Representatives (2000). 2000 Green Book
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.
Collins, A., Layzer, J., Kraeder, L., Werner, A. and Glantz, F. (November 2000). National
Study of Child Care For Low-Income Families: State and Community Sub-study
Interim Report. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
Craig, Peter (1991). Costs and Benefits: A Review on Take-up of Income-Related
Benefits. Journal of Social Policy, 20, 537-565.
Giannarelli, L. Phillips, K. and Oliver, H. (2001). How TRIM3 Models Eligibility for CCDF
Subsidies. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Memo.
Heckman, J. J., LaLonde, R. J. and Smith, J. A. (1999), The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs. In Orley C. Ashenfelter and
David Card (eds). Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lee, Bong, George, R. and Reidy, M. (2001), “Estimates of Take-Up of Cash Assistance
and Child Care Subsidies in Illinois,” Presented at the 2001 Child Care Bureau
Research Conference, Washington, DC
Lemke, R., Witt, R. and Witte, A. (2001). Child Care and the Welfare to Work
Transition. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley College, Department of Economics Working
Paper 2001-02. Available at:
http://www.wellesley.edu/Economics/wkpapers/index.html.

31

Loprest, P., Schmidt, S. and Witte, A. (2000). Welfare Reform under PRWORA: Aid to
Children with Working Families?, Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 14, 157-203.
Meyers, M. et al. (2001). The Dynamics of Child Care Subsidy Use: A Collaborative
Study of Five States. Paper presented at the NICHD and Russell Sage
Conference “From Welfare to Child Care: What Happens to Infants and Toddlers
When Single Mothers Exchange Welfare for Work, Washington, DC, May17-18.
Oliver, H. K. Phillips, L. Giannarelli, and Chen, A. (2002). “Eligibility for CCDF-Funded
Child Care Subsidies under the October 1999 Program Rules: Results from the
TRIM3 Microsimulation Model. Washington, DC: Urban Institute, forthcoming.
Queralt, M., Witte, A.D., and Griesinger, H. (2000). Changing Policies, Changing
Impacts: Employment and Earnings of Child-Care Subsidy Recipients in the Era
of Welfare Reform. Social Service Review, 74, 588-619.
Remler, D., Rachlin, J. and Flied, S. (March 2001). What Can the Take-Up of Other
Programs Teach US about How to Improve Take-Up of Health Insurance
Programs? Working Paper 8185. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Tannenwald, R. (2001). Fiscal Capacity, Fiscal Need, And Fiscal Comfort: New Evidence
And Its Relevance To Devolution, http://www.ntanet.org/Fiscal_Capacity.htm.
Accessed: December 23, 2001.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and
Families, Child Care Bureau (1999). Access to Child Care for Low-Income
Working Families.
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/research/ccreport/ccreport.htm#1.
Accessed: December 23, 2001

32

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2001). Indicators of Welfare
Dependence, Annual Report to Congress,
http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/indicators01/index.htm. Accessed: March 6, 2002.
Witte, A.D. and Queralt, M. (1999). Duration of Subsidized Child Care Arrangements in
Five Areas of Massachusetts. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley Child Care Research
Partnership.
Witte, A.D., Queralt, M. and Tauchen, H. (2001). Evaluation of Rhode Island’s Family
Independence Program. Working Paper 2001-08, Wellesley, MA: Wellesley
College Department of Economics. Available at:
http://www.wellesley.edu/Economics/wkpapers/index.html.

33

