                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               GLOBAL CAPITAL FLOWS AND FINANCING CONSTRAINTS


                                          Ann E. Harrison
                                            Inessa Love
                                        Margaret S. McMillan


                                         Working Paper 8887
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8887


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2002




Inessa Love acknowledges support from Social Science Research Council Program in Applied Economics
with funds provided by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Ann E. Harrison, Inessa Love and Margaret S. McMillan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Capital Flows and Financing Constraints
Ann E. Harrison, Inessa Love and Margaret S. McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 8887
April 2002
JEL No. F2



                                               ABSTRACT


        Firms often cite financing constraints as one of their primary obstacles to investment. Global
capital flows, by bringing in scarce capital, may ease host-country firms' financing constraints. However,
if incoming foreign investors borrow heavily from domestic basnks, direct foreign investment (DFI) may
exacerbate financing constraints by crowding host country firms out of domestic capital markets.
Combining a unique cross-country firm-level panel with time-series data on restrictions on international
transactions and capital flows, we find that different measures of global flows are associated with a
reduction in firm-level financing constraints. First, we show that one type of capital inflow--DFI--is
associated with a reduction in financing constraints. Second, we test whether restrictions on international
transactions affect firms' financing constraints. Our results suggest that only one type of restriction--those
on capital account transactions--negatively affect firms' financing constraints. We also show that
multinational firms are not financially constrained and do not appear to be sensitive to the level of DFI.
This implies that DFI eases financing constraints for non-multinational firms. Finally, we show that DFI
only eases financing constraints in the non-G7 countries.




Ann E. Harrison                       Inessa Love                       Margaret S. McMillan
University of California              The World Bank                    Tufts University
329 Giannini Hall                     1818 H St. NW                     Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720                    MC3-300                           Medford, MA
and NBER                              Washington, DC 20433              617-627-3137
510-643-9676                          202-458-0590                      mmcmilla@tufts.edu
harrison@are.berkeley.edu             ilove@worldbank.org
                                                                "Not all direct foreign investment around the world
                                                                represents net capital flows. Often such
                                                                investments are financed in local markets."


                                                                                     Martin Feldstein (2000)

                                                                “There is now broad agreement about the value of
                                                                direct foreign investment, which brings not just
                                                                capital but also technology and training.”

                                                                                     Joseph Stiglitz (1998)




1.       Introduction



         Firms in developing countries typically cite financing constraints as one of their primary

obstacles to investment. Some argue that countries should eliminate restrictions on international

transactions and encourage incoming capital flows, especially direct foreign investment (DFI). DFI

may ease these firms' financing constraints by bringing in scarce capital. This is one reason why

policy makers in developing countries have eased restrictions on inward DFI and in many instances

provide special incentives for DFI. Yet if foreign firms borrow heavily from local banks, they may

exacerbate domestic firms' financing constraints by crowding them out of domestic capital markets.

Foreign investors may borrow on domestic capital markets for a variety of reasons, including as a

hedging device against exchange rate fluctuations or in response to artificially low domestic interest

rates. 1 Yet most observers assume that DFI is accompanied by significant capital inflows.2 There


1
 Sometimes they borrow domestically as a hedging device against foreign currency debt; other times, they borrow
domestically if local interest rates are low. In many developing countries, interest rates have historically been set at
artificially low levels, leading to credit rationing in cases where the interest rate is set below the market clearing level.


                                                                                                                                2
has been almost no previous research examining the impact of DFI on host-country firms' financing

constraints.



         One reason for the limited empirical evidence is the difficulty in obtaining detailed firm-level

data across countries. In this paper, we combine a firm-level panel data from Worldscope with cross-

country time-series data on restrictions on international transactions and capital flows to test whether

different measures of global flows are associated with a reduction in firm-level financing constraints.

First, we show that one type of capital inflow—DFI--is associated with a reduction in financing

constraints. Second, we test whether restrictions on capital movement affect firms' financing

constraints. Our results suggest that one type of capital control—restrictions on capital account

transactions—negatively affects firms' financing constraints. The results are robust to the inclusion of

other factors that could affect the firm’s financing constraints--such as availability of domestic credit,

business cycle effects, the country’s level of GNP per capita, and the level of financial development.

Our results suggest that one type of capital inflow—DFI--plays a beneficial role and improves on

capital allocation by diminishing the firm’s financing constraints.3



         Our work is related to the large body of literature on capital market imperfections and firm

investment; an excellent survey of this literature is in Hubbard (1998). A number of papers have used

2
  For example, Stiglitz in an address to the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations (1998) argues that there is broad
agreement about the fact that direct foreign investment brings additional capital. Feldstein (2000) argues that this is not
necessarily the case. Helleiner (1989) in a survey for the Handbook of Development Economics suggests that it is unlikely
that much new equity capital will result from expanded DFI flows.
3
  Our results are in contrast to Harrison and McMillan (2001) who find that financing constraints of firms in Cote d’Ivoire
were exacerbated by the entrance of foreign firms, which borrowed heavily on domestic credit market and crowded out
the local firms. However, this paper only includes two low-income countries, India and Pakistan, and it does not include
any countries from Sub-Saharan Africa. This may be important because we would expect the domestic firms in the very




                                                                                                                         3
the Euler equation methodology to estimate the effect of financing constraints on investment, with

most studies concentrating on firms in developed countries.4 Surveys suggest that financing

constraints are an even more important deterrent to investment in developing countries. 5

Theoretically, capital market imperfections are likely to be more severe in these countries, which will

result in stronger financing constraints due to unavailability of external financing.6



         Most empirical evidence of financing constraints in developing countries comes from studies

on individual countries, which are difficult to generalize.7 Research that links the level of financial

development to financing constraints across countries includes; Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic

(1998), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Love (2001). Dimirguc-Kunt (1998) finds that firms grow

faster than they could have using only internally generated funds in more financially developed

countries. Rajan and Zingales (1998) demonstrate that industries that require more external finance

grow faster in more developed capital markets; and Love (2001) shows that firm’s investment is less

sensitive to the availability of internal funds in more financially developed countries. Recent evidence

also links financial market liberalization to investment and financing constraints across countries. For

example, Laeven (2002), finds that financial liberalization reduces firms financing constraints,

especially for small firms. Galindo, Schiantarelli and Weiss (2001) find that financial reform has led


poorest countries to be the most credit-constrained and at the same time it is likely that governments in the poorest
countries implement policies to help ease these constraints such as interest rate controls.
4
  See for example, Whited (1992), Hubbard and Kashyap (1992), Hubbard, Kashyap and Whited (1995), and Calomiris
and Hubbard (1995) for work on US firms, Bond and Meghir (1994) for the UK firms, and Bond et al. (1996) for
comparison of four developed countries: Belgium, France, Germany and the UK.
5
  For example, in a recent survey of executives in 20 African countries, financing constraints were cited as a major
obstacle to business expansion, see Africa Competitiveness Report (1998). However, these surveys could overestimate the
degree of constraints because they are typically administered by institutions in a position to make loans, such as the World
Bank.
6
  See for example, Aghion et al. (1999) and Banerjee and Newman (1994).




                                                                                                                          4
to an increase in the efficiency with which investment funds are allocated. Bekaert and Harvey (2001)

and Henry (2000) find that the cost of equity capital decreases significantly after financial

liberalizations. In addition, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001) find that equity market

liberalizations increase real economic growth by approximately 1% per year. Yet none of these

studies examines the impact of restrictions on international transactions or capital flows on firm-level

financing constraints. Since domestic financing is highly constrained in many developing countries,

this is an extremely important and overlooked issue. This paper seeks to fill this gap.



         To test whether capital inflows affect firm-level financing constraints we use augmented

investment Euler equations. We modify the investment model by introducing a constraint on external

financing, which generates a shadow cost of external funds. This provides a theoretical justification

for our measure of financing constraints. In the absence of financing constraints, investment should

respond only to investment growth opportunities, which we control for with a measure of the

marginal product of capital. Therefore, the availability of internal funds should not affect current

investment. We interpret the sensitivity of investment to the availability of internal funds (measured

by the stock of liquid assets) as a proxy for the degree of financing constraints. We find that firms in

countries with greater DFI inflows have less investment-cash sensitivity, after controlling for other

factors.8




7
  See for example Jaramilo et al. (1996) for Ecuador; Harris, Schiantarelli, and Siregar (1994) for Indonesia; Gelos and
Werner (1999) for Mexico; Patillo (2000) for Ghana; Harrison and McMillan (2001) for Cote d’Ivoire; and Bigsten et al
(2000) for several African countries.
8
  Since we are not able to identify the firms that are getting the DFI, our results suggest that the average constraints are
decreasing in the country-year with high DFI. We partially address this problem in section 5 with the sample splits on
domestic vs. multinational firms.


                                                                                                                               5
We also test for the impact of restrictions on international transactions on firm-level financing

constraints. Lewis (1997) explores the relationship between income and consumption growth, using

aggregate data in a cross-country framework. Using an Euler equation for consumption, she argues

that the relationship between domestic income and consumption should be weak if individuals are not

credit constrained. In particular, she shows that individuals are more credit constrained in countries

with restrictions on international transactions. Our framework tests for the impact of restrictions on

international transactions on firms (as opposed to individuals). Our results for firms support her

results for individuals. Firms are more financially constrained in countries that impose controls on

capital account transactions. Unlike Lewis (1997), however, we find that other types of controls--

such as import surcharges or surrender requirements for exporters--have no impact on individual

firm’s financing constraints.



       We also focus on which types of firms are most likely to benefit from capital inflows.

Although we are unable to directly identify which firms receive DFI, we address this question by

splitting the sample into firms with foreign assets abroad (multinationals) and domestic enterprises

with no foreign assets. We find that multinational firms, which are more likely to have access to

international capital markets, are not financially constrained and are not affected by the level of DFI.

We also examine whether our results vary across different countries. We show that DFI only eases

firm-level financing constraints in non-G7 countries. This is not surprising. We would expect DFI to

have the largest effects in countries where credit market imperfections are most important, which are

likely to be countries outside the G7.




                                                                                                         6
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the general approach used for

testing for financing constraints and the impact of DFI. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4

presents results of the estimation of the basic model, focusing on DFI inflows, and does robustness

checks. Section 5 examines the impact of restrictions on international transactions on credit

constraints and Section 6 presents extensions and Section 7 concludes.



2.     Testing for Financing constraints and the Impact of Global Flows: The Framework



       Numerous studies have used the Q-theory of investment to study financing constraints (see,

for example, Hubbard, Fazzari and Peterson (1998)). Although the Q-theory and Euler model of

investment come from the same optimization problem (the two models are just different ways to

rearrange the first order conditions), the assumptions required to estimate the Q-model are stronger

then those required to estimate the Euler equation model. The main difficulty with implementing the

Q-theory is finding a proxy for the unobservable marginal q. Average q is equal to marginal q under

perfect competition and linear homogeneity in technology (see Hayashi (1982)). However, even if

these conditions are met, imperfections in capital markets will cause the divergence between stock

market valuations and the true manager’s valuation of the marginal return on capital. The assumption

of perfect capital markets is the most problematic in our cross-country study as our countries are

significantly different in their levels of financial development (and therefore the degree of market

imperfections). In addition, numerous recent papers highlight additional problems with the Q-

methodology such as severe measurement error and identification problems ( see Kaplan and

Zingales (2000), Erikson and Whited(2000), Bond and Cummins (2001) and Gomes (2001)).

Therefore we choose to use the Euler equation methodology.




                                                                                                        7
2.1       The Optimization Problem



          A dynamic model of firm value optimization is reproduced in this section. This model is

similar to models estimated in previous studies (see references in footnote 4) and follows closely the

specification in Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998).9 In this model shareholders (or managers)

maximize the present value of the firm, which is equal to the expected discounted value of dividends

subject to the capital accumulation and external financing constraints. The firm value is given by:




                                            ∞                
      Vt ( K t , ξ t ) = max∞ D t + E t  ∑ β t + s −1 Dt + s                                 (1 .a )
                         {I t + s }s = 0    s =1             
      where :
      Dt = Π ( K t , ξ t ) − C ( I t , K t ) − I t                                              (1.b)
      K t +1 = (1 − δ ) K t + I t                                                                (1.c)
      Dt ≥ 0                                                                                     (1.d)


Here Dt is the dividend paid to shareholders and is given by the "sources equal uses" constraint (1.b);

ßt+s-1 is a discount factor from the period t+s to period t. In the capital accumulation constraint (1.c),

Kt is the beginning of the period capital stock; It is the investment expenditure and δ is the




9
  The resulting Euler equation for investment (given in (2) below) is identical to the Euler equation for investment in
Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998). However, we estimate this Euler equation directly instead of implementing the VAR
methodology of Gilchrist and Himmelberg. Our model does not include the possibility of debt financing. Formally
including debt into the problem results in a separate Euler equation for debt. However, the Euler equation for investment,
which is the focus of our paper, is not affected by adding debt into the model, and so we ignore debt financing for the sake
of simplicity.


                                                                                                                          8
depreciation rate.10 The restricted profit function (i.e. it is already maximized with respect to variable

costs) is denoted by Π(Kt, ξt), where ξt is a productivity shock. The adjustment cost of investment is

given by the function C(It, Kt), and is assumed to result in a loss of a portion of investment. The

financial frictions are introduced via a non-negativity constraint on dividends (1.d), and the multiplier

on this constraint is denoted λt in the discussion below. This multiplier is interpreted as a shadow cost

associated with raising new equity, which implies that external (equity) financing is costly and this

extra cost is due to information or contracting costs.11 This shadow cost is used in defining financing

constraints, which are discussed below.



2.2      The Euler Equation



      The first-order conditions to the above maximization problem are rearranged to obtain the

following Euler equation:




     ∂C          ∂Π                ∂C  
1 +   = β t Et Θ t    + (1 − δ )1 +                                                         (2)
     ∂I  t       ∂K  t +1         ∂I  t +1 
               1 + λt +1
where Θ t =
                1 + λt

Here, (∂C/∂I) is the marginal adjustment cost of investment, (∂Π/∂K) is the marginal profit of capital,

i.e. the contribution of an extra unit of capital to the firm's profits, further referred as MPK. Ignoring

Θt, the intuition behind this Euler equation is that the marginal cost of investing today on the left hand

10
   We ignore the price of investment, which is replaced by fixed and time effects in the estimation. We also ignore tax
considerations due to data constraints.
11
   Several influential papers addressed the sources of information- or contracting-related frictions in detail (for example,
Jensen and Meckling (1976), Myers and Majluf (1984), Hart (1995) and others). Here, these frictions are exogenous to the
firm and are represented by the shadow value of external finance. Another possible way to introduce financial frictions is




                                                                                                                          9
side (given by the adjustment cost and the price of investment goods, normalized to one) is equal to

the discounted marginal cost of postponing investment until tomorrow, on the right hand side. The

latter is equal to the sum of the foregone marginal benefit of an extra unit in capital, given by MPK,

plus the adjustment cost and price of investment tomorrow (again normalized to one).



         To arrive at the empirical model, one must identify empirical measures for financing

constraints and MPK, specify a functional form for adjustment costs, linearize the Euler equation and

eliminate the expectation operator. These issues are addressed in the subsections below.



2.3      Financing Constraints



         At the heart of the financing constraints theory is the factor Θt, which is the relative shadow

cost of external finance in periods t and t+1. If the shadow cost of external funds is higher in period t

than it is expected to be in period t+1 (i.e. λt>λt+1), then Θt <1 and it acts as an additional discount

factor which makes current period funds more expensive to use than the next period funds and

therefore induces the firm to postpone or reduce its investment. In this case we say that the firm is

"financially constrained," and Θt is the (degree of) financing constraints.12 With perfect capital

markets λt=λt+1=0 for all t and hence Θt =1 and the firm is never constrained. With capital-market

imperfections, λt depends on a vector of state variables, including the productivity shock ξt.

Therefore, λt is time-varying and could be identified with some observable firm characteristics.




by exogenously limiting the amount of debt that the firm can raise at any point in time, as in Whited (1992). This will
create a shadow value of debt, which has the same effect in the investment equation as the shadow value of equity.




                                                                                                                          10
         Several observable characteristics of the firm's financial health have been used as proxies for

financing constraints. The most commonly used variable is cash flow. The problem with cash flow is

that it is closely related to operating profits and therefore also to MPK and will measure investment

opportunities rather than, or in addition to, measuring the availability of internal funds.13

         As an alternative measure of internal funds, we use the stock of liquid assets, specifically the

stock of cash and marketable securities scaled by total assets (hereafter referred to as cash stock).14

The cash stock has an intuitive interpretation as "cash on hand" that firms can use for investment if

the opportunity presents itself. One theoretical justification for the cash stock measure appears in the

Myers and Majluf (1984) model, where the amount of cash holdings, which the authors call "financial

slack," has a direct effect on investment in the presence of asymmetric information. This slack allows

firms to undertake positive NPV projects, which they would pass up if they did not have any internal

funds. This implies that if external financing is costly, there will be a positive relationship between

investment and cash stock. This is the relationship explored in this paper.



         Unlike the cash flow measure, the cash stock proxies for future growth opportunities only in

the presence of financing constraints. Since holding cash is costly to firms (because it diverts

resources from productive use and offers zero return), firms will accumulate cash stock only if they




12
   If, on the other side, Θt >1, the firm expects to be more constrained tomorrow (time t+1) than it is today and at time t its
investment will be unconstrained. In this case the firm is more likely to invest at time t, since the discount factor β is
increased by the amount Θt (i.e. the interest rate is lowered).
13
   See for example Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998) and Hubbard (1998) for a discussion.




14
   Similar measures of financing constraints have been used before: Calomiris, Himmelberg and Wachtel (1995) used
financial working capital and Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998) used cash equivalents. Alternatively, Whited (1992) used
debt to assets and interest coverage as proxies for financing constraints.


                                                                                                                            11
expect to be financially constrained in the future. Evidence consistent with this hypothesis is

presented in Opler et al. (1999), among others.15



         We measure financing constraints by the sensitivity of investment to cash stock. We argue

that the larger this sensitivity, the more constrained the firm is because it has to rely on its internal

funds to finance its investment. The primary goal of this paper is to determine whether capital

inflows (in particular, DFI) or restrictions on international transactions have an impact on firm-level

financing constraints. This will be reflected in the effect of capital inflows or controls on the

investment-cash sensitivity. For example, to test the hypothesis that financial constraints are affected

by DFI, we allow the investment-cash sensitivity to depend on the country-year inflows of DFI, and

hence our proxy for financing constraints is given by:



Θit =a0i+(a1+a2DFIct)Cashit-1 = a0i+a1Cashit-1 +a2DFIctCashit-1                                         (3)



Here a0i is a firm-specific level of financing constraints (which enters into the fixed effects) and

Cashit-1 is the cash stock scaled by the total assets.16 The focus of our paper is on the interaction of

DFI and Cash, i.e. coefficient a2. A negative sign suggests that direct foreign investment reduces the

sensitivity of investment to the availability of internal funds (i.e. financing constraints) and a positive

sign would be an indication of "crowding out".




15
   Kim et al. (1998) and Calomiris, Himmelberg and Wachtel (1995) also find that firms with lower costs of external
finance maintain lower levels of financial working capital. Despite the growing empirical evidence on the "precautionary
savings" by financially constrained firms, this hypothesis still remains controversial, see for example Kaplan and Zingales
(1997); their view is disputed in Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (2000).
16
   We assume that the firm makes its decision for period t investment at the beginning of that year (or, equivalently, the
end of previous year). Therefore the appropriate timing of the cash stock is t-1, because the investment decision depends
on how much cash a firm has before starting the investment.


                                                                                                                        12
2.4      Measuring MPK, Adjustment cost and Linearization



      To formulate the empirical model we define the proxies for the MPK and adjustment costs. We

use a measure of MPK that is derived from profit maximization under the assumption of the Cobb-

Douglas production function, given by

                     αk S
         MPK =                                                                  (4)
                     µ K

where (S/K) is a sales to capital ratio, αk is the capital share in the production function and μ is a

markup. We prefer to use the sales-based measure because it is less correlated with cash flow than

the alternative operating profits measure.17



         We assume a quadratic adjustment cost function, which results in a linear marginal adjustment

cost of investment:

∂C         I       I
      = α(      −g         −ν i )                                                                          (5)
∂I it      K it    K it −1

This adjustment cost function is slightly more general than the one used in the traditional models

because it includes the lagged investment to capital ratio with an additional parameter g which is

added to capture strong persistence in investment to capital ratios present in the data.18




17
   See Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998) for derivation of the sales-based MPK measure and the arguments against using
the operating profits measure of MPK. Unfortunately we do not have direct measures for αk and μ on the firm level,
however we rely on the fixed effects to capture these important firm-dependent characteristics.
18
   This extended functional form allows for the more common form with g=0, which could be tested empirically. The
intuition for this added term is that it may be easier for the firm to continue investment at some fraction g of the previous
period ratio, since, for example, it has hired workers or made some other arrangements which would be costly to cancel.
Parameter νi could be interpreted as some firm-specific level of investment at which adjustment costs are minimized.


                                                                                                                            13
         To simplify the estimation and interpretation of the coefficients, we linearize the product of βt,

Θt and the marginal benefit of investment (expression in curly brackets in (2), here denoted as {.}t)

using a first-order Taylor approximation around the means given by (ignoring constant terms):



         βt Θt {.}t = bγΘt + b{.}t + γβt                                                                       (6)



where γ is the unconditional mean of the expression in curly brackets, and b is the average discount

factor. 19

     Finally, we assume rational expectations, which allows us to replace expectations with realized

values plus an expectation error eit, which is orthogonal to any information available at the time when

the investment decision is made.



2.5      Empirical Model and Estimation



      We substitute (3), (4) and (5) into Euler equation (2) use linearization in (6) and replace the

expectation with the realization plus an error term to obtain the empirical model:

I         I            I            S
     = β1         + β2         + β3      + β 4Cashit −1 + β 5Cashit −1 DFI ct + β 6 DFI ct + f i + eit   (7)
K it      K it +1      K it −1      K it




Here, fi denotes fixed effects, which capture firm-specific parameters for adjustment cost νi , MPK,

and for financing constraints a0i.20 We focus on the coefficient β5, the interaction of the level of cash



19
  Since Θt could be above or below one we assume that its mean is equal to one.
20
  In addition, fixed effects capture the omitted terms that contain prices of investment goods and the conditional
covariance of financing constraints and marginal benefit of investment are replaced by the combination of time and fixed
effects. Third, the fixed effects capture a sample selection bias if the firms included in the sample have different


                                                                                                                      14
stock (a firm-level variable) with the level of DFI inflows, other inflows or restrictions on

international transactions (all are country-level variables). If DFI reduces firms’ financing constraints,

this coefficient should be negative, which implies that the total sensitivity of investment to cash stock

(given by the sum of β4 +β5DFI ) is reduced with DFI inflows. The coefficient β4 measures the

sensitivity of investment to cash stock in an average country-year. With zero DFI inflows, it is

expected to be positive.



        We use the same framework to test for the effect of restrictions on international transactions

by replacing the DFI measure in (7) with measures of restrictions on international transactions. We

also add additional interactions of the cash stock with the control variables of interest (such as

financial development, GDP growth, GNP per capita, and M2) to the model in (7) to test if the DFI

effect (on the cash coefficient) is robust to controlling for other potential effects on financing

constraints.



        The first issue in estimating this model concerns the presence of fixed effects. The fixed

effects are correlated with the regressors because the model contains lags and leads of the dependent

variable, therefore they need to be removed before the estimation. Because the regressors are not

strictly exogenous (as discussed above), the commonly used mean-differencing procedure will result

in biased estimates. To remove fixed effects we use a forward mean-differencing transformation,

which removes only the forward mean, i.e. the mean of all the future observations available for each

firm-year. This transformation is otherwise known as orthogonal deviations or the Helmert

transformation and is described in Arellano and Bover (1995) and Bond and Meghir (1994). Unlike


investment policy than the rest. In some robustness checks we also experimented with including country-time dummies
(and dropping FDI in levels) and obtained similar results.


                                                                                                                      15
the first-differencing, the forward mean-differencing preserves the error structure and therefore does

not require any correction for the serial correlation in the error terms. We use heteroskedasticity

robust estimates of the standard errors, which are “clustered” by the firm (i.e. do not require an

assumption of the independence of errors within the firm).



         As discussed above, the expectation error eit is orthogonal to the information available at the

time when the investment decision is made. We assume that the investment decision for year t is

made at the beginning of that year (which is equivalent to end of year t-1). Therefore, the information

available at the time of decision is dated t-1 since year t information does not arrive until the end of

year t. Then, the orthogonality conditions for this model are given by E[eit|xit-s]=0 for s≥1, which is

equivalent to the assumption that the regressors are predetermined, rather then strictly exogenous.21



         After the forward mean-differencing, the transformed errors are still orthogonal to the

untransformed original variables dated t-s, where s≥1. Therefore, we use the GMM procedure,

implemented as IV (instrumental variables), with t-1 and t-2 lags of instruments.22 The instruments

are all the variables in the regression, plus cash flow, cost of goods sold, and the interactions of cash,

sales and investment with DFI and other variables of interest (see Table A2 for variable definitions).

Our instruments include lagged DFI, and we also allow for the endogeneity of current DFI. This is

important if current flows and current investment are simultaneously determined.



3. Data

21
   This means that the future values of the regressors are allowed to be correlated with the current realization of the error
term, (for example sales to capital is clearly related to the current realization of investment error term), while the past
realization are strictly orthogonal to the current error term.




                                                                                                                            16
         All firm level data come from the Worldscope database, which contains data on large publicly

traded firms in which there is an investor interest. The firm data are available for 40 countries and

cover over 7000 firms for the years 1988-1998 (however, the years before 1991 and the year 1998

have fewer observations). Details are given in Appendix 1. The coverage within countries varies

widely from as little as 1% of all listed domestic firms included (for India) to as many as 82% (for

Sweden), as calculated by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997). Table A.1 gives

the list of countries in the sample with the number of firms and observations per country.



         The number of firms in each country varies widely across the countries, and the less

developed countries are under-represented. This creates a problem with pooled cross-country

estimation as over-represented countries may influence the coefficients in a non-systematic way. To

correct for this problem we rerun all main results including only the150 largest firms in each

country.23 In addition we also employ a weighting procedure with each observation assigned a weight

inversely proportional to the number of observations available for that country. This weighting is

used as an alternative way to balance the sample and it produces similar results.




22
   Using GMM with efficient weighting matrix instead of identity weighting matrix (which is equivalent to an IV
procedure) produces similar results. However, the advantage of IV procedure is in allowing the “cluster” option for
calculation of the standard errors, which controls for the free-form heteroskedasticity on the firm level.
23
   We rank companies by their relative size of PPENT (fixed capital) in each year for each country (using total assets in
US dollars produces similar results). This procedure creates firm ranks that are different for each year. We use these ranks
and in addition we use the ranks that are averaged across all years for each firm, which creates an average firm rank that
does not change from year to year. Both ranks produce similar results. We also experimented with different cutoff points,
such as 50, 100, 200 or 300 firms and all the sub-samples produced results equivalent to the ones reported.


                                                                                                                         17
         The main firm-level variables are investment and sales, scaled by the beginning of the period

capital,24 and cash stock, which is the stock of cash plus marketable securities scaled by total assets.

Variable definitions are given in Table A2. We supplement the firm-level data with country-level

data on capital inflows, including portfolio investment, private capital flows, and direct foreign

investment. The capital flow data are taken from the IFS publication Balance of Payments Statistics.

Our main capital flow variable is inflows of DFI, which we scale by aggregate gross domestic

investment (GDI) and alternatively by GDP. In addition we look at net DFI, defined as inflows minus

outflows; portfolio investment (both inflows and net flows); and “other” flows. Other flows consist

mainly of commercial bank loans but also include any other private flows which are neither portfolio

investment or DFI. Our data on restrictions on international transactions are described in section 5.

For robustness checks we add the growth rate in real GDP, real GNP per capita, the stock of liquid

liabilities scaled by GDP (M2) and credit to private sector by deposit money banks and non-financial

institutions; all supplementary data come from IFS. As an additional robustness check we add a

country-level measure of financial development, constructed using indicators developed by

Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1996). This measure combines five indicators of financial development:

market capitalization over GDP (i.e. the size of the stock market), total value traded over GDP, total

value traded over market capitalization, the ratio of liquid liabilities to GDP and the credit going to

the private sector over GDP. Each indicator is standardized to have mean zero and variance one, after

which the indicators are averaged to produce a standardized index with mean zero and variance one.




24
  The model requires one to use the beginning of the period capital stock as a scaling factor for calculating adjustment
costs and MPK. One alternative is to use lagged capital stock (i.e. period t-1 used as the beginning of the period t capital
stock). However, this would not be appropriate if there are mergers, acquisitions, divestitures or other capital-changing
events, which are hard to identify. We use the approximate value given by the ending period capital, minus investment
and depreciation in that year, which is more robust to the capital-changing events, as discussed in Love (1999).



                                                                                                                           18
       Table A.3 reports means of the key variables over the sample period 1988-1998. The first

three columns are capital flow variables scaled by gross domestic investment. All three variables are

taken from the International Monetary Fund's publication International Financial Statistics. Direct

foreign investment occurs when foreign ownership exceeds ten percent of the total equity of the firm.

Investments of less than ten percent are considered portfolio investment. Inflows other than DFI and

portfolio include primarily bank loans (public and private). GNP per capita is in U. S. dollars in 1994

from the World Development Report, 1996. The remaining three variables are also from the IFS and

are defined as follows:M2 is the stock of liquid liabilities of the financial system scaled by GDP,

domestic credit is the ratio of credit allocated to the private sector by depository institutions scaled by

GDP and GDP growth is the annual real growth rate of GDP.



       The means in Table A.3 indicate that the countries with the highest amount of DFI in our

sample are Singapore, New Zealand, Chile, and Belgium. Countries with the lowest amount of DFI

are Japan and South Korea. These countries have traditionally been closed to direct investment.

More recent data would show an increase in direct investment in South Korea, but these data end in

1998. As a share of gross domestic investment, countries with the highest shares of portfolio

investment are Belgium, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela. Table A.3 also reports other summary

measures for the sample, including GNP per capita and the Financial Development (FD) indicator

developed by Levine. According to this measure, Japan, Germany, the US and the UK have the

highest level of financial development; Pakistan and Indonesia have the lowest.



       Table A.4 reports means of the components of the capital control index and the mean of the

index itself. The measures of restrictions on international transactions are taken from the International




                                                                                                         19
Monetary Fund’s annual report, Trade and Exchange Restrictions. The IMF assigns a value of 1 if

the country has a control, and zero otherwise. Historically, the IMF has collected information on five

types of controls: (1) restrictions on capital account transactions (2) restrictions on current account

transactions (3) surcharges on imports (4) requirements for advanced import deposits and (5) export

taxes, in the form of repatriation and/or surrender requirements for export revenues. The first control

includes any kind of restriction on the capital account, while the second restriction includes

restrictions on trade in goods and services. Interestingly, use of restrictions on international

transactions is not confined to the poorest countries. Conversely, all of the countries that did not

implement restrictions on international transactions (Canada, Hong Kong, the U.K., the U.S.,

Singapore, the Netherlands and New Zealand) are high-income countries. This suggests that the

correlation between income and use of restrictions on international transactions is positive but not

perfect. In aggregate, 31 out of 38 countries used some type of capital control during our sample

period. The most common types of restrictions on international transactions are restrictions on capital

transactions and repatriation and surrender requirements for exports.



       Summing across all types of restrictions on international transactions, the evidence in Table

A.4 suggests that the most open countries are Canada, Hong Kong, the Netherlands, New Zealand,

Singapore, the US, and the UK. The most closed economies are Pakistan and South Africa, followed

by Columbia and India. These rankings correspond with anecdotal evidence concerning the openness

of the current and capital account across our sample countries.



       Table A.5 reports correlation coefficients, p-values and number of observations for the

relationship between DFI and restrictions on international transactions and the relationship between




                                                                                                          20
DFI and our macroeconomic indicators. As expected, the correlation between DFI and restrictions on

international transactions is strongly negative and significant (-0.32). The two controls most

correlated with DFI are restrictions on capital transactions and repatriation and surrender

requirements for exports. The latter is not surprising as much of DFI goes to the export sector. The

former directly affects DFI and so we would expect this measure to be negatively correlated with

DFI, since a restriction on capital transactions could be a direct restriction on incoming or outgoing

DFI. One must be cautious in assigning causality. Although restrictions on international transactions

do affect DFI inflows, it is equally plausible that restrictions on international transactions are

(negatively) correlated with income level and that income levels determine (among other things) DFI

flows. However, in the lower panel of Table A.5, we see that DFI and our macroeconomic variables

are not very strongly correlated. Although DFI is not correlated with GNP per capita or M2, it is

strongly correlated with GDP growth. In addition, DFI is not significantly correlated with either a

country's level of financial development (proxied by FD) or the magnitude of private credit.


4.     Investment Equation Estimates



       Table 1 reports the GMM results for equation 7. The basic specification is reported in column

(1).   Direct foreign investment (DFI) is scaled by gross domestic investment (GDI).                 This

specification imposes no cut-offs on DFI and includes all firms with non-missing observations. The

results indicate that on average, firms in the sample are credit-constrained. The coefficient on lagged

cash stock is positive and statistically significant. As expected, the coefficients on lagged and future

investment and the sales to capital ratio are also positive and significant. The coefficient on DFI

alone is positive and significant, indicating a positive correlation between country-level DFI and

firm-level investment.



                                                                                                         21
       The focus of this section is the coefficient on DFI*Cash. The coefficient is negative and

statistically significant. This indicates that high levels of foreign investment are associated with a

reduction in the financing constraints faced by firms. The coefficient on cash stock is equal to 0.13,

which we interpret as investment-cash sensitivity in an average country in a year with zero DFI

inflow. The distribution of DFI across country-years has mean of 0.09 and standard deviation of 0.08,

therefore a one standard deviation increase in DFI inflows implies a 0.08 decrease in the cash

sensitivity, that is a change from 0.13 to 0.05, almost a 60% decline in cash sensitivity. These

numbers imply that DFI inflows have a large and economically significant influence on the

investment-cash sensitivity, which we interpret as a reduction in the firm’s financing constraints.



       The remainder of this section is devoted to showing that this result is robust to a variety of

alternative specifications. In column (2), we restrict the sample to the largest 150 firms in each

country. Since most of the firms in the sample are from the largest countries, such as the United

States, this restriction is introduced to see if data for the United States is driving the results.

Restricting the sample to the largest 150 firms in each country has very little impact on the results.

The interaction between DFI and cash stock remains large and statistically significant. The only

difference is that DFI no longer has an independent, statistically significant impact on investment.



       Column (3) restricts the sample to all observations where country-level inward DFI is greater

than zero and less than fifty percent of gross domestic investment (GDI). This allows us to exclude

extreme country observations where DFI may account for the major share of domestic investment.

This only removes 12 enterprises from the sample. Excluding the extreme observations on DFI leads




                                                                                                         22
to even larger effects of DFI on financing constraints. Further restricting the sample to the largest

150 firms in each country has no significant impact (column (4)) on the results.



       In columns (5) and (6), we scale DFI by gross domestic product (GDP) instead of gross

domestic investment. Although the point estimates change due to the different scaling factor, the

results are unaffected: firms in countries with high levels of DFI are less credit constrained. Column

(7) further restricts the sample to observations where DFI values are not extreme, and also weights

the observations. The weighted regression approach assigns a country-specific weight, which is equal

to the inverse of the number of observations in each country. Countries with a lot of observations get

a smaller weight and countries with fewer observations get a larger weight, so that the number of

observations is equalized across all countries. We also experimented with country-year specific

weights (ie each year in each country is assigned a weight proportional to the number of o bservations

in that year and country) and obtained similar results. Introducing weights does not affect the results.



       Table 2 redoes the specification reported in Table 1, but includes a number of robustness

checks. Direct foreign investment is likely to be correlated with a number of country-level measures

of economic well-being, including GDP growth and the general level of financial development.

Another possibility is that foreign investment responds to domestic policies which expand the

availability of domestic credit. In this case, the results could simply arise from omitted variable bias,

where DFI proxies for the expansion of domestic credit.



       The results in Table 2 indicate that this is not the case. If we add a variety of additional

controls, the coefficient on DFI*cash stock is unaffected. The first two columns add the interaction




                                                                                                        23
of cash stock and financial development (FD). The FD index is equal to the sum of the (standardized)

indices of the stock market development, STKMKT, and financial intermediaries development,

FININT, which come from Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1996) (they refer to these indices as Index1

and Findex1 respectively). The STKMKT is the sum of three standardized measures: market

capitalization over GDP (i.e. the size of the stock market), total value traded over GDP, and total

value traded over market capitalization (two measures of liquidity of the market). The FININT is the

sum of two standardized measures: the ratio of liquid liabilities (M3) to GDP (i.e. the overall size of

the credit market) and the credit going to the private sector over GDP (the amount of credit th at is

relevant to the firm's financing)25. Thus, the measure is a country-level measure, with no time

variation. We add FD*cash to check whether DFI is essentially a proxy for financial development.

However, the inclusion of FD, which varies across countries but not over time, does not affect the

coefficient on DFI*cash. As expected, in countries with more financially developed markets, firms

appear to be less credit constrained.



       In columns (3) through (6), we add the interaction of cash stock and GDP growth. Since

foreign investment is attracted to fast-growing countries, DFI may simply be capturing the fact that

fast-growing countries experience a reduction in financing constraints. The results in Table 2 indicate

that GDP growth has no impact on financing constraints. Inclusion of GDP growth interacted with

cash stock has no impact on the DFI*cash coefficient. However, one puzzling result is that GDP

growth by itself is negatively associated with investment. In column (6), we show that the negative

coefficient on GDP growth is driven by the presence of I(t+1). If we remove forward investment,

then the coefficient on GDP growth becomes positive.


 The original indicators were standardized to have mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Since
25

my sample does not have all the countries included in the Demirguc-Kunt and Levine's sample, the


                                                                                                    24
               In columns (7) through (10) we test whether DFI proxies for changes in the

availability of domestic credit.   Domestic credit is defined alternatively as M2 relative to GDP and

the ratio of private credit to GDP.    Although we find that an expansion in M2 eases the financing

constraints of firms, as expected, inclusion of this variable does not affect the magnitude or

significance of the coefficient on DFI*cash. The results in Table 2 suggest that the impact of foreign

investment on domestic financing constraints is remarkably robust.



5.     Testing for the Impact of Restrictions on International Transactions


       If direct foreign investment inflows affect firm financing constraints in host countries, then

restrictions on international transactions (including capital controls which inhibit inflows of DFI) are

likely to exacerbate financing constraints. Table 3 presents the results of testing for the impact of

restrictions on international transactions on firm-level financing constraints. The measures of

restrictions are taken from the International Monetary Fund’s annual report, Trade and Exchange

Restrictions. The IMF assigns a value of 1 if the country has a control, and zero otherwise.

Historically, the IMF has collected information on five types of controls: (1) restrictions on capital

account transactions (2) restrictions on current account transactions (3) surcharges on imports (4)

requirements for advanced import deposits and (5) export taxes, in the form of repatriation and/or

surrender requirements for export revenues. The first control includes any kind of restriction on the

capital account, while the second restriction includes restrictions on trade in goods and services.

Restrictions on incoming DFI are most likely to be associated with the first type of control, which

covers direct restrictions on inflows or outflows of foreign investment. Other controls, however,


means are slightly different from zero (equal to -0.06 for FININT and 0.09 for STKMKT)


                                                                                                         25
could also have an indirect effect, by reducing the overall profitability of investment and thus

discouraging foreign investment inflows.



       Table 3 reports the impact of each type of control on financing constraints separately. We

focus on the coefficient on the interaction of each different type of restriction and cash stock,

Restriction*Cash. As indicated in the table, the only type of restriction which has a significant

impact on financing constraints is the restriction on payments for capital transactions. The coefficient

is highly significant and positive, indicating that countries with restrictions on payments for capital

transactions have more credit-constrained firms.



       The second through sixth columns of Table 3 test for the impact of other types of foreign

exchange or trade restrictions on financing constraints. None of the other types of restrictions affect

firm financing constraints. However, there is a negative and statistically significant relationship

between import surcharges and firm-level investment. Countries with higher import surcharges have

lower investment, after controlling for other determinants of investment. This result confirms the

findings of Levine and Renelt (1992), who argue that trade restrictions operate through their impact

on investment, rather than directly on technological change and growth. It is interesting to note that

the only type of restriction which directly and negatively affects investment is import surcharges.

This suggests that openness to trade could be a critical factor in encouraging domestic investment.



       Table 4 reports robustness tests for the impact of capital account restrictions on financing

constraints. Including either M2 or GDP growth has no impact on the result that countries with

capital account restrictions have more credit-constrained firms. The results in Table 4 suggest that




                                                                                                          26
our results on capital account restrictions are not driven by a negative correlation between capital

account restrictions and M2 or GDP growth.


6.     Extensions


6.1    Impact of DFI on financing constraints by country type


       We would expect that the impact of foreign investment on host country financing constraints

would vary with the level of development. In particular, we would expect that the impact of foreign

investment would be smaller in countries where credit markets are well-developed and constraints on

credit are less pervasive. Table 5 splits the sample into the G7 countries and other countries in the

sample.    The G7 countries include the United States, Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Japan, and

Canada.



       The results show that the impact of foreign investment on firm financing constraints is driven

by the non-G7 countries. DFI has a significant impact on financing constraints only in the non-G7

countries. Only in those countries is greater DFI associated with an easing of financing constraints.

This is not surprising, since half the specifications for the G7 countries indicate that firms on average

are not significantly credit constrained.



6.2    Which Firms benefit Most from the DFI inflows?



       We would also like to be able to identify the mechanism through which foreign inflows affect

domestic financing constraints. For example, are financing constraints eased because firms that were

previously denied credit are able to substitute domestic credit with foreign equity inflows? Or do



                                                                                                       27
foreign inflows provide a signal to foreign banks operating in the country, triggering them to lend

more to domestic enterprises? Although this is the subject of future research, we can answer a

simpler question. In particular, we can separately estimate the impact of DFI inflows on firms with or

without foreign assets.      The Worldscope database allows us to identify which firms are

multinationals, as defined as firms with at least 5 percent total assets owned abroad.


       In Table 6, we redo the basic specification, but we separate firms with foreign assets from

other firms. In columns (1) and (2) we separate firms with foreign assets by defining multinationals

as firms with at least 5 percent of total assets as foreign. In columns (3) and (4), we change the

definition of a multinational to 10 percent foreign assets. The results are two-fold. First, the results

indicate that firms with foreign assets are less likely to be credit-constrained. The point estimate on

cash stock is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant for firms with foreign assets, but large

in magnitude and significant for other firms. Only firms without foreign assets appear to be credit

constrained in our sample.


       Second, the results clearly show that the beneficial effects of DFI inflows are concentrated in

non-multinational firms. The coefficient on DFI*cash is only significantly negative and significant

for firms without foreign assets. The evidence suggests that the level of DFI in a particular economy

does not affect firms with foreign assets, which are more likely to have access to international capital

markets.



       These results do not shed light on whether firms with FDI are more or less likely to receive

the bulk of the benefits—in terms of relaxing financing constraints—from incoming FDI. This is

because we cannot identify which firms have FDI: we can only identify which firms are

multinationals (ie own foreign assets). Harrison and McMillan (2001) show that in the Ivory Coast,


                                                                                                      28
joint ventures receive all the benefits as far as relaxation of credit is concerned, and domestic firms

which are not partially foreign owned are actually crowded out of domestic credit markets. However,

the Ivory Coast is an unusual case. The results in Table 6 appear to indicate that domestic firms

overall (whether joint ventures or otherwise) benefit from incoming FDI through a relaxation of

financing constraints.



6.3    Responding to Kaplan and Zingales.(1997)


       Kaplan and Zingales (1997) argue that using investment-cash flow correlations to identify

financing constraints is fundamentally flawed. One major part of their argument is based on an

analysis of 49 low-dividend firms, identified by Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) as financially

constrained. Kaplan and Zingales (1997) argue that these supposedly constrained firms, which

exhibit high investment-cash flow correlations, are in fact not constrained at all. To measure

constraints, they rely on a detailed analysis of individual firm balance sheets and a number of

indicators of financial health, including cash flow, interest coverage, debt ratios and sales growth.

They argue that based on these accounting measures of financial health, the subset of firms identified

by FHP as exhibiting high cash-flow investment correlations is not financially constrained.



       In response to the Kaplan-Zingales critique, we calculate the same financial ratios that they

use in their paper and regress these measures of (current period) financial health on lagged DFI,

lagged growth in GDP per capita, lagged M2, lagged private credit, and a set of year dummies. The

measures of financial health include two measures of investment, two measures of cash flow, debt,

two measures of interest coverage, and sales growth. All variables were transformed into deviations

from their firm-level means. The results in Table 7 are consistent with the earlier results using the



                                                                                                        29
Euler equation specification: firm-level measures of financial health improve with an influx in foreign

investment. These results are unaffected by the inclusion of other variables that could be correlated

with DFI, including GDP growth and measures of liquidity. In every case, the within regressions

show that an increase in DFI results in improved financial health for the firm. The coefficient on

lagged DFI is the correct sign and statistically significant.   Using an entirely different approach, and

relying on financial ratios as an indicator of financial health, the results in Table 7 provide support for

the Euler equation approach.



7.     Conclusion



       This paper measures whether different measures of globalization affect host country financing

constraints. Direct foreign investment, by bringing in scarce capital, may ease firm financing

constraints. Alternatively, if foreign firms borrow heavily from domestic banks, they may exacerbate

domestic firms’ financing constraints by crowding them out of domestic capital markets. Combining

a unique cross-country firm panel with country-level data on DFI flows, we test whether foreign

investment affects firm-level financing constraints. The results suggest that DFI inflows are

associated with a reduction in firm-level financing constraints. Our results are robust to a number of

controls, including measures of GDP growth, other measures of credit changes, and a proxy for

financial development.



       We also test whether restrictions on international transactions affect domestic firm financing

constraints. Our results suggest that only one type of restriction—those on capital account

transactions—negatively affect firm financing constraints. The results on capital account restrictions

are consistent with the results on DFI: easing restrictions on equity inflows eases financing


                                                                                                         30
constraints on firms. These results are robust to the inclusion of other variables which may be

correlated with restrictions on international transactions. However, other types of exchange

controls—such as repatriation requirements for exporters or import surcharges—have no impact on

firm financing constraints.



       We also explore whether the impact of DFI varies across the level of economic development.

Our results show that direct foreign investment only eases domestic financing constraints in the non-

G7 countries. In other words, incoming foreign investment only eases financing constraints in the

less wealthy countries in our sample. Finally, we show that DFI eases financing constraints only for

firms without foreign assets, i.e. for domestic firms which cannot be classified as multinationals.




                                                                                                      31
                                            References


Aghion, Phillipe, Eve Caroli and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, Inequality and Economic Growth:The
      Perspective of the New Growth Theories, Journal of Economic Literature v37 n4, December
      1999

Arrellano, M. and O. Bover, Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estimation of Error
       Component Models, Journal of Econometrics 68, pp. 29-51, 1995

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Andrew F. Newman, Poverty, Incentives and Development, American
       Economic Review v84 n2, May 1994

Bekaert G., and C. Harvey, ``Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,'' Journal of
Finance, v.55(2), pp. 565-613, 2000

Bekaert G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundblad, ``Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth,'' NBER
working paper W8245, 2001

Bigsten, Arne, Paul Collier, Stefan Dercon, Marcel Fafchamps, Bernard Gauthier, Jan Willem
       Gunning, Mans Soderbom, Abena Oduro, Remco Oostendorp, Cathy Patillo, Francis Teal,
       and Albert Zeufack, Financing constraints in Manufacturing Enterprises in Africa, Centre for
       the Study of African Economies Working Paper Series 2000.24, September 2000

Bond and Cummins, Noisy Share Prices and the Q model of Investement, Oxford University
      Manuscript, Oxford University 2001

Bond, Stephen, Julie Elston, Jacques Mairesse, and Benoît Mulkay, Financial Factors and
       Investment in Belgium, France, Germany, and the UK: A Comparison using Company
       Panel Data, NBER Working Paper Series 5900, National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Cambridge, Massachusetts, January 1997

Bond, Stephen and C. Meghir, Dynamic Investment Models and the firms financial policy,
       Review of Economic Studies, 61, 197-222, 1994

Calomiris, Charles, Charles P. Himmelberg, and Paul Wachtel, Commercial Paper, Corporate
      Finance, and the Business Cycle: a Microeconomic Perspective, Carnegie-Rochester
      Conference Series on Public Policy 42, pp. 203-50, 1995

Demirguc-Kunt A. and R. Levine, Stock Market Development and Financial Intermediaries:
      Stylized Facts, World Bank Economic Review 10, pp. 291-321, 1996

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic, Law, Finance and Firm growth, Journal of Finance,
      53(6) pp. 2107-31, 1998

Erikson and Whited, Measurement error and the Relationship between Investment and Q,


                                                                                                 32
       Journal of Political Economy, 108 1027-57, 2000

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, Financing Constraints and
       Corporate Investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, v1, 141-195, 1988

---------------, Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities are Useful: A Comment on Kaplan and
         Zingales, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2), 695-706, May 2000

Feldstein, Martin, Aspects of Global Economic Integration:Outlook for the Future, NBER
       Working Paper 7899, September 2000

Galindo, A., F. Schiantarelli and A. Weiss, ``Does Financial Liberalization Improve the Allocation
       of Investment? Micro Evidence from Developing Countries,'' Mimeo, Boston College , 2001

Gelos, Gaston R. and Alejandro M. Werner, Financial Liberalization, Financing constraints, and
       Collateral:Investment in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector, IMF Working Paper, WP/99/25,
       1999

Gilchrist, Simon and Charlie Himmelberg, Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment,
       Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 541-572, 1995

Gilchrist, Simon and Charles P. Himmelberg, Investment, Fundamentals and Finance, NBER
       Macro Annual 1998, Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg eds., the MIT Press,
       Cambridge, 223-274, 1998

Gomes, Joao F., Financing Investment, American Economic Review, vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 1263-85,
      December 2001

Harris, John R., Fabio Schiantarelli, and Miranda Siregar, The Effect of Financial Liberalization
        on the Capital Structure and Investment Decisions of Indonesian Manufacturing
        Establishments, The World Bank Economic Review, January, 1994

Harrison, Ann E., and Margaret S. McMillan, Does direct foreign investment affect domestic firms
       credit constraints?, Tufts University Working Paper, 2001

Hart, Oliver, 1995, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. London, Oxford University Press,
       1995.

Harvard Institute for International Development and World Economic Forum, The Africa
      Competitiveness Report 1998, World Economic Forum, Geneva Switzerland, 1998


Hayashi, Fumio, Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,
      Econometrica, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 213-24, January 1982




                                                                                                     33
Henry, P. B., ``Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform and Emerging Market Equity Prices,''
Journal of Finance, v.55(2), pp.529-64, 2000

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Capital-Market Imperfections and Investment, Journal of Economic Literature,
      vol. XXXVI, pp. 193-225, March 1998

Hubbard, R.G. and A. Kashyap, Internal Net Worth and the Investment Process: An
      Application to U.S. Agriculture , Journal of Political Economy, v. 100 (3), 1992

Hubbard, R.G., A. Kashyap and T. Whited, Internal Finance and Firm Investment, Journal of
       Money Credit and Banking, 27 (4) pp. 683-701, 1995
Jaramillo, Fidel, Fabio Schiantarelli and Andrew Weiss, Capital market imperfections before and
       after financial liberalization: An Euler equation approach to panel data for Ecuadorian firms,
       Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 51, Issue 2, December 1996

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behaviour, Agency Costs,
       and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4), pp. 305-60, 1976

Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales, Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provde Useful
      Measures of Financing Constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 169-
      215, 1997

---------------, Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities are Not Valid Measures
         of Financing Constraints, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115, no. 2, pp.
         707-12, May 2000

Kim, Chang-Soo, David Mauer, and Ann E. Sherman, The Determinants of Corporate Liquidity:
      Theory and Evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, v.33(3), 1998

Laeven, Luc, ``Does Financial Liberalization Reduce Financing Constraints,'' Mimeo, World Bank,
2002

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, Legal Determinants of External
       Finance, Journal of Finance, pp. 1131-50, 1997

Levine, Ross, and David Renelt, A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions,
       American Economic Review, 942-963, September 1992

Love, Inessa, The Capital Accumulation Identity-How Well does it Hold in the Data:Evidence
       from Compustat and Worldscope Databases, Mimeograph, Columbia University, 1999

Love, Inessa, Financial Development and Financing Constraints: International Evidence from
       the Structural Investment Model, Ph.D. Dissertation, Columbia Business School, May 2001




                                                                                                   34
Myers, Stewart and Nicholas Majluf, Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms
       Have Information That Investors Do Not Have, Journal of Financial Economics, 13(2), pp.
       187-221, 1984

Opler, Tim, Lee Pickowitz, Rene Stultz, and Rohan Williamson, The Determinants and Implications
       of Corporate Cash Holdings, Journal of Financial Economics, 52(1), pp. 3-46, 1999

Patillo, Catherine, Risk, Financial Constraints and Equipment Investment in Ghana:A Firm-level
         Analysis Ch. 4 of Investment and Risk in Africa edited by Paul Collier and Catherine Patillo,
         St. Martin's Press, New York, New York, 2000

Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic Review,
       88(3), pp. 559-86, 1998

Ross, Stephen A., Randolph W. Westerfield, and Jeffrey Jaffe, Corporate Finance, 4th edition,The
       Irwin Series in Finance, Chicago, IL, 1996
Tybout, James R., Credit Rationing and Investment Behavior in a Developing Country, Review
       of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 65, Issue 4, 598-607, November 1983

Schiantarelli, Fabio, Financial Constraints and Investments: Methodological Issues and
       International Evidence, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 12, 70-89, 1996

Stiglitz, Joseph, The Role of International Financial Institutions in the Current Global Economy,
        Address to the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, Chicago, February 27, 1998

Whited, T., Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from Panel Data,
      Journal of Finance, 47 (4), pp. 1425-60, 1992




                                                                                                     35
                                           Table 1. Main Results on DFI flows

              1               2            3            4                5            6            7
                                           scaled by GDP                                           scaled by GDI
              no limits                    limits 0<DFIN<0.5            no limits                  limits 0<DFIN<0.5
              all firms       rank 150     all firms    rank 150        all firms     rank 150     weighted

I/Kt+1        0.410           0.419        0.392        0.451            0.587        0.482        0.396
              (0.151)***      (0.202)**    (0.154)***   (0.226)**        (0.131)***   (0.184)***   (0.222)*
I/Kt-1        0.215           0.219        0.214        0.219            0.209        0.224        0.209
              (0.012)***      (0.015)***   (0.013)***   (0.016)***       (0.012)***   (0.015)***   (0.018)***
S/Kt          0.037           0.033        0.039        0.033            0.032        0.030        0.035
              (0.007)***      (0.009)***   (0.007)***   (0.010)***       (0.007)***   (0.009)***   (0.009)***

Casht-1       0.128           0.131        0.156        0.165            0.096        0.107        0.176
              (0.036)***      (0.054)**    (0.035)***   (0.055)***       (0.034)***   (0.049)**    (0.076)**

DFItCasht-1   -0.968          -0.859       -1.388       -1.429           -4.622       -3.932       -1.753
              (0.271)***      (0.298)***   (0.343)***   (0.378)***       (1.269)***   (1.369)***   (0.543)***
DFIt          0.170           0.086        0.230        0.099            0.740        0.323        -0.038
              (0.060)***      (0.065)***   (0.074)***   (0.087)          (0.318)**    (0.375)      (0.103)
Constant      0.008           0.004        0.009        0.004            0.007        0.004        -0.001
              (0.001)***      (0.001)***   (0.002)***   (0.002)*         (0.001)***   (0.001)***   (0.003)

N obs       22274             12862        21770        12401            23511       13554       21,770
N firms     5191              2996         5179         2987             5259        3037        5,179
R sq        0.220             0.200        0.224        0.180            0.148       0.190       0.182
Root MSE 0.120                0.123        0.124        0.124            0.133       0.125       0.141
Note:*** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level and * at 10% level. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses
                                                         Table 2. Robustness checks on DFI flows
                1              2             3            4            5           6            7               8            9             10
control:        FD                           growth                                             M2                          private credit
                                             GDP                                                                            to GDP
                all firms      rank 150      all firms    150 firms   150 firms       all firms     all firms   150 firms   all firms      150 firms
                                                                      with limit on   without
                                                                      DFI             forward lag
I/Kt+1             0.430         0.355        0.736         0.768        0.778                     0.370         0.261         0.564         0.386
                 (0.150) ***   (0.175) **   (0.162) *** (0.166) *** (0.209) ***                  (0.136) *** (0.176)         (0.142) ***   (0.165) **
I/Kt-1             0.215         0.221        0.197         0.209        0.207        0.237        0.219         0.225         0.208         0.221
                 (0.012) ***   (0.015) ***  (0.014) *** (0.015) *** (0.017) *** (0.010) *** (0.012) *** (0.015) ***          (0.012) ***   (0.014) ***
S/Kt               0.034         0.033        0.029         0.025        0.029        0.049        0.038         0.037         0.030         0.033
                 (0.007) ***   (0.008) ***  (0.006) *** (0.008) *** (0.009) *** (0.003) *** (0.007) *** (0.008) ***          (0.008) ***   (0.009) ***
Casht-1            0.187         0.199        0.105         0.097        0.134        0.207        0.401         0.469         0.256         0.341
                 (0.046) ***   (0.054) ***  (0.036) *** (0.048) **    (0.053) *** (0.033) *** (0.088) *** (0.118) ***        (0.105) ***   (0.110) ***
DFItCasht-1       -0.994        -0.836       -0.817        -0.773       -1.429       -0.687       -0.910        -0.667        -1.113        -0.904
                 (0.263) ***   (0.288) ***  (0.307) *** (0.356) **    (0.429) *** (0.330) **     (0.294) *** (0.332) **      (0.286) ***   (0.303) ***
DFIt               0.182         0.106        0.292         0.201        0.328        0.257        0.149         0.023         0.219         0.108
                 (0.057) ***   (0.063) *    (0.062) *** (0.078) *** (0.097) *** (0.071) *** (0.071) **         (0.077)       (0.070) ***   (0.067)
ControltCasht-1   -0.054        -0.102       -0.720        -0.591        0.015       -0.833       -0.420        -0.550        -0.158        -0.258
                 (0.029) *     (0.035) ***  (0.789)       (1.020)     (1.100)      (0.730)       (0.135) *** (0.188) ***     (0.115)       (0.128) **
Controlt                                     -0.497        -0.478       -0.697        0.001        0.006        -0.039        -0.016        -0.008
                                            (0.165) *** (0.191) *** (0.224) *** (0.125)          (0.040)       (0.061)       (0.029)       (0.037)
Constant          0.008         0.005         0.008         0.005        0.006        0.010        0.007         0.002         0.007         0.004
                (0.001) *** (0.001) *** (0.001) *** (0.001) *** (0.002) *** (0.001) *** (0.002) *** (0.003)                  (0.002) ***   (0.002) **
N obs            22060         12648         22254         12843        12383        28274        21791         12379         21790         12378
N firms            5144          2848          5187          2992         2983         5992         5079          2884          5079          2884
R sq              0.218         0.220         0.028         0.000        0.000        0.220        0.226         0.229         0.149         0.210
Root MSE          0.125         0.122         0.139         0.140        0.140        0.124        0.125         0.122         0.131         0.124
Note:*** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level and * at 10% level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                 Table 3. Capital Control Restrictions

                               1               2                  3                        4                5                  6
                              E2              E2                 E1                       F1               F2                  G
                       all firms      rank 150            all firms                all firms        all firms          all firms
I/Kt+1                    0.409           0.292              0.602                    0.699            0.637              0.680
                        (0.139) ***     (0.196)            (0.151) ***              (0.164) ***      (0.165) ***        (0.139) ***
I/Kt-1                    0.218           0.229              0.211                    0.205            0.209              0.207
                        (0.012) ***     (0.016) ***        (0.013) ***              (0.014) ***      (0.013) ***        (0.013) ***
S/Kt                      0.041           0.038              0.033                    0.030            0.031              0.031
                        (0.007) ***     (0.009) ***        (0.008) ***              (0.008) ***      (0.008) ***        (0.007) ***
Casht-1                   0.090           0.081              0.063                    0.043            0.064              0.055
                        (0.034) ***     (0.052) a          (0.034) *                (0.037)          (0.035) *          (0.038) a
RestrictiontCasht-1       0.138           0.168             -0.018                   -0.034           -0.157             -0.018
                        (0.050) ***     (0.058) ***        (0.135)                  (0.158)          (0.121)            (0.061)
Restrictiont             -0.002          -0.007             -0.018                   -0.058            0.006             -0.004
                        (0.007)         (0.008)            (0.014)                  (0.021) ***      (0.014)            (0.012)
Constant                  0.008           0.005              0.007                    0.007            0.007              0.007
                        (0.001) ***     (0.001) ***        (0.001) ***              (0.001) ***      (0.001) ***        (0.001) ***
N obs                    21843           12575              21843                    21843            21843              21843
N firms                    5058            2955               5058                     5058             5058               5058
R sq                      0.233             0.25               0.14                     0.07             0.12             0.089
Root MSE                  0.128           0.123              0.135                      0.14           0.137              0.139
Each restriction is a dummy variable. E2 - restrictions for payments for capital transactions; E1 restrictions for payments for current
transactions; F1 Import surcharges; F2 Advance import depostis; G-Export proceeds (repatriation and/or surrender requirements)
Note:*** denotes significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level and a at the 15% level Robust standard errors are in
parentheses.
                  Table 4. Robustness checks on E2 (capital account restrictions)

                                1              2                  3                    4
                               M2            M2           gr GDP                 gr GDP
                        all firms       rank 150          all firms             rank 150

I/Kt+1                     0.445           0.312            0.479                     0.566
                         (0.114) ***     (0.153) **       (0.141) ***               (0.164) ***
I/Kt-1                     0.217           0.230            0.215                     0.220
                         (0.012) ***     (0.015) ***      (0.013) ***               (0.015) ***
S/Kt                       0.038           0.035            0.042                     0.033
                         (0.006) ***     (0.007) ***      (0.006) ***               (0.007) ***

Casht-1                    0.269           0.261            0.103                     0.081
                         (0.105) ***     (0.129) **       (0.035) ***               (0.051) *

E2tCasht-1                 0.111           0.168            0.150                     0.153
                         (0.054) **      (0.063) ***      (0.050) ***               (0.057) ***
E2t                        0.003          -0.005           -0.007                    -0.009
                         (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.007)                   (0.008)

ControltCasht-1         -0.321          -0.358             -1.274                 -1.220
                       (0.160) **      (0.205) *          (0.730) *              (0.921)
Controlt                -0.078          -0.092             -0.147                 -0.186
                       (0.048) *       (0.071)            (0.152)                (0.168)
Constant                 0.005           0.002              0.007                  0.004
                       (0.002) ***     (0.002)            (0.001) ***            (0.001) ***
N obs                   21583           12315              21784                  12517
N firms                   4984            2881               5054                   2951
R sq                     0.218             0.24             0.199                   0.15
Root MSE                 0.129           0.123                0.13                   0.13
Note:*** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level and * at 10% level. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses
                         Table 5. Sample Splits with DFI inflows

                               1                 2               3                         4
                              G7         non G7                 G7                    non G7
                       all firms         all firms        rank 150                  rank 150

I/Kt+1                   0.398             0.258              0.505                     0.229
                       (0.122) ***       (0.315)            (0.108) ***               (0.311)
I/Kt-1                   0.225             0.200              0.257                     0.210
                       (0.015) ***       (0.017) ***        (0.024) ***               (0.017)
S/Kt                     0.035             0.035              0.021                     0.036
                       (0.006) ***       (0.012) ***        (0.007) ***               (0.012)

Casht-1                  0.095             0.116              0.082                     0.139
                       (0.040) **1       (0.067) *          (0.063)                   (0.069)

DFItCasht-1              0.340            -0.809             -0.722                    -0.801
                       (0.822)           (0.320) ***        (0.902)                   (0.318)
DFIt                     0.402             0.056              0.282                     0.056
                       (0.108) ***       (0.070)            (0.143) **                (0.069)
Constant                 0.017             0.005              0.008                     0.004
                       (0.003) ***       (0.002) ***        (0.003) ***               (0.002)

N obs                   14534               7740               5226                     7636
N firms                   3156              2035               1012                     1984
R sq                     0.278               0.21               0.29                     0.22
Root MSE                   0.11              0.14             0.087                    0.139

Note:*** is significant at 1% level, 1 is significat at 2%, ** is significant at 5% and * 10%
Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
              Table 6. Sample Splits for Multinationals versus Other Firms
                   Defining MNCs as >= 5 %             Defining MNCs as >=10 %
                   Foreign Assets                      Foreign Assets
                   1                 2                 3                4
                   Non               MNCs              Non              MNCs
                   MNCs                                MNCs


I/Kt+1                  0.230           0.706              0.289                   0.722
                      (0.147) ***     (0.222)            (0.147) ***           (0.241***)
I/Kt-1                  0.188           0.246              0.195                   0.239
                      (0.019) ***     (0.024) ***        (0.019) ***           (0.026***)
S/Kt                    0.036           0.026              0.036                   0.027
                      (0.008) ***     (0.011) ***        (0.008) ***           (0.011***)

Casht-1                 0.119           0.067              0.119                    0.047
                      (0.055)         (0.080)            (0.051)                  (0.103)

DFItCasht-1            -1.444          -0.394             -1.110                   -0.414
                      (0.574) ***     (0.486)            (0.431) ***              (0.777)
DFIt                    0.271           0.048              0.299                   -0.006
                      (0.118) ***     (0.087)            (0.106) **               (0.069)
Constant                0.009           0.006              0.009                    0.004
                      (0.003) ***     (0.002) ***        (0.003) ***              (0.003)

N obs                    7716            5974              8493                        5197
N firms                  1984            1132              2135                          981
R sq                    0.209             0.17              0.22                        0.16
Root MSE                  0.13            0.11              0.13                        0.11

Note:*** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level and * at 10% level. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses
Appendix 1. Sample Selection


   All countries in the Worldscope database (May 1999 Global Researcher CD) with at least 30 firms
and at least 100 firm-year observations are included in the sample (the exception is Venezuela (VE)
which is included with 80 observations only); former socialist economies are excluded. This results in
a sample of 40 countries. The sample does not include firms for which primary industry is financial
(one digit SIC code of 6).

In addition we delete the following (see Table A.2 for variable definitions):
   - All firms with 3 or less years of coverage;
   - All firm-years with missing CAPEX, PPENT, Sales, and cash;
   - Observations with zero PPENT (200 obs);
   - Observations with negative KBEG (277 obs), Cash/Ta or COGS (27 obs);
   - Observations with IK > 2.5 (1% of all obs);
   - Observations with SK > 20 (5% of all obs);26
   - Observations with Cogs/K > 20 (80 obs.);
   - Observations with Cash/Totass >0.6 (1% of all obs);
   - 50% of all US firms with at least 4 years of data available was selected by random sample.27

    The resulting dataset has about 59,500 observations; the number of observations by country is
given in Table A.1.


26
   This rules excludes firms for which capital is not a big factor in production. Half of these were in the US and UK;
Japan, France and Denmark totaled 25%.
27
   The original sample for the US had over 25,700 observations (firm-years) while for all other countries at most there are
12,000 for the UK, 5,000 for Japan, less then 1,000 for most countreis (see Table 1). Even after the sampling, the US has
the most data available.
                                Table A1. Sample Coverage Across Countries
Country                Country code   Number of              Percent of total           Number of         Average number of
                                      observations           observations               firms             years per firm

Argentina              AR                              198                      0.003            28                           7.1
Austria                AT                              454                      0.008            55                           8.3
Australia              AU                             1571                      0.026           197                           8.0
Belgium                BE                              561                      0.009            71                           7.9
Brazil                 BR                              687                      0.012            94                           7.3
Canada                 CA                             3382                      0.057           391                           8.6
Switzerland            CH                             1043                      0.017           132                           7.9
Chile                  CL                              411                      0.007            55                           7.5
Colombia               CO                              150                      0.003            20                           7.5
Germany                DE                             3970                      0.067           468                           8.5
Denmark                DK                             1045                      0.018           126                           8.3
Spain                  ES                              947                      0.016           114                           8.3
Finland                FI                              747                      0.013            84                           8.9
France                 FR                             3274                      0.055           402                           8.1
United Kingdom         GB                             9931                      0.166          1129                           8.8
Hong Kong              HK                              969                      0.016           142                           6.8
Indonesia              ID                              531                      0.009            84                           6.3
Ireland                IE                              427                      0.007            47                           9.1
Israel                 IL                              152                      0.003            29                           5.2
India                  IN                             1507                      0.025           269                           5.6
Italy                  IT                             1149                      0.019           132                           8.7
Japan                  JP                             4646                      0.078           624                           7.4
South Korea            KR                             1264                      0.021           187                           6.8
Mexico                 MX                              502                      0.008            69                           7.3
Malaysia               MY                             1476                      0.025           205                           7.2
Netherlands            NL                             1280                      0.021           147                           8.7
Norway                 NO                              680                      0.011            84                           8.1
New Zealand            NZ                              315                      0.005            43                           7.3
Peru                   PE                              101                      0.002            17                           5.9
Philippines            PH                              271                      0.005            43                           6.3
Pakistan               PK                              418                      0.007            72                           5.8
Portugal               PT                              254                      0.004            42                           6.0
Sweden                 SE                             1162                      0.019           137                           8.5
Singapore              SG                              841                      0.014           122                           6.9
Thailand               TH                             1045                      0.018           177                           5.9
Turkey                 TR                              145                      0.002            23                           6.3
Taiwan                 TW                              405                      0.007            83                           4.9
USA                    US                            10422                      0.175          1247                           8.4
Venezuela              VE                               81                      0.001            11                           7.4
South Africa           ZA                             1151                      0.019           135                           8.5

Total                                                59565                                     7537

Average number of firms per country                                                                 188
Average number of firms per country, excluding US and GB                                            136
Median number of firms per country, excluding US and GB                                             114
                                          Table A2. Variable Definitions:

Abbreviation        Description

Firm Level variables (from Worldscope)

PPENT               Property Plant and Equipment, net of depreciation
CAPEX               Capital expenditure
DA                  Depreciation and Amortization expense
K                   Beginning period capital = PPENT-CAPEX+DA
IK, I/K             Investment to Capital ratio = CAPEX / K
SK, S/K             Sales to Capital ratio = Sales / K
Cash                Cash plus equivalents scaled by Total Assets (or scaled by K for robustness checks)
CF                  Cash Flow (Net income + DA), scaled by K
COGS                Cost of goods sold, scaled by K
Size                Log of total assets in US dollars
Rank                Ranking based on size of PPENT (first, ranked by year, then averaged over the years), largest firm in
                    each country has rank equal to one (described in section 5.1).
Weight              Weight is a country-level variable equal to one over the number of valid observations per country
                    (described in section 5.1).


Country-Level variables
FDI                 Foreign Direct Investment in the recepient country (IMF Balance of Payments Statistics) scaled by
                    the aggregate gross domestic investment (IFS)

FD                  Financial Development = equals to the sum of (standardized indices): ratio of liquid liabilities to
                    GDP, ratio of domestic credit to private sector to GDP, market capitalization to GDP, total value
                    traded to GDP, and turnover (total value traded to market capitalization). All indices are from
                    Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1996).

GNP PC               Log of GNP per capita in US dollars in 1994, World Development Report 1996.
M2                  Stock of liquid liabilities of the financial system scaled by GDP (IFS).
Domestic credit        Ratio of credit allocated to the private sector by depositary institutions, scaled by GDP (IFS)

grGDP               Annual real growth rate of GDP (IFS)
E1                  Restrictions on Payments on Current Transactions (IMF)
E2                  Restrictions on Payments on Capital Transactions (IMF)
F1                  Import Surcharges
F2                  Advance Import Deposits
GS                  Repatriation and Surrender Requirements for Export
                              Table A.3 Means of Variables Used in Analysis
Country                      DFI Portfolio Other GNP per capita GDP growth M2             FD

Argentina                       0.12      0.21 0.10                8110   0.030   0.145   -1.38
Australia                       0.09      0.16 0.08               18000   0.032   0.588    0.42
Austria                         0.03      0.15 0.08               24600   0.024   0.867   -0.27
Belgium                         0.21      0.55 1.60               22870   0.022   0.615   -0.82
Brazil                          0.04      0.13 -0.06               2970   0.022   0.226   -1.04
Canada                          0.07      0.20 0.06               19510   0.024   0.723    0.03
Chile                           0.21      0.06 0.05                3520   0.077   0.372   -0.75
Colombia                        0.09      0.05 0.06                1670   0.040   0.272    -1.6
Denmark                         0.06      0.15 0.10               27970   0.021   0.579   -0.49
Finland                         0.04      0.19 0.07               18850   0.019   0.555   -0.41
France                          0.07      0.09 0.14               23420   0.019   0.672     0.1
Germany                         0.01      0.17 0.16               25580   0.024   0.654    1.68
India                           0.02      0.03 0.08                 320   0.059   0.441    -0.7
Indonesia                       0.06      0.03 0.06                 880   0.067   0.401   -1.17
Ireland                         0.11      0.10 0.85               13530   0.055   0.487
Israel                          0.05      0.04 0.10               14530   0.053   0.706    0.01
Italy                           0.02      0.16 0.10               19300   0.019   0.660   -0.64
Japan                           0.00      0.04 0.02               34600   0.030   1.825    3.33
Malaysia                        0.18     -0.02 0.03                3480   0.086   1.002    1.19
Mexico                          0.09      0.09 0.00                4180   0.023   0.228   -0.85
Netherlands                     0.15      0.12 0.31               22000   0.027   0.816    0.66
New Zealand                     0.24      0.05 -0.01              13350   0.018   0.620   -0.53
Norway                          0.05      0.07 0.06               26390   0.029   0.565   -0.15
Pakistan                        0.05      0.03 0.22                 430   0.046   0.404   -1.28
Peru                            0.13      0.03 -0.09               2110   0.022   0.141
Philippines                     0.09      0.07 0.20                 950   0.037   0.416   -1.15
Portugal                        0.09      0.12 0.21                9320   0.027   0.699   -0.67
Singapore                       0.37      0.04 0.37               22500   0.087   1.114     1.6
South Africa                    0.02      0.08 -0.01               3040   0.016   0.443    0.25
South Korea                     0.01      0.05 0.02                       0.077   0.592    0.84
Spain                           0.09      0.08 0.09               13440   0.029   0.724   -0.14
Sweden                          0.14      0.06 0.35               23500   0.014   0.475   -0.31
Thailand                        0.06      0.05 0.16                2410   0.080   0.738    0.36
Turkey                          0.02      0.05 0.06                2500   0.042   0.225    -1.2
UK                              0.12      0.25 0.72               18340   0.025   0.765    1.68
US                              0.05      0.13 0.11               25880   0.030   0.624    1.35
Venezuela                       0.12      0.30 -0.22               2760   0.026   0.320   -1.26
Note:All capital flows are scaled by gross domestic investment.
                                Table A.4 Means of Capital Control Variables
COUNTRY       Restrictions on   Restrictions on Import       Advance Import Repatriation    Sum of 5 Controls
              Payments on       Payments on     Surcharges   Deposits       and Surrender
              Current           Capital                                     Requirements
              Transactions      Transactions                                for Exports
Argentina               0.60       0.60            1.00        0.00             0.60                  3.00
Australia               0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.08                  0.08
Austria                 0.00       0.50            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.55
Belgium                 0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.36                  0.40
Brazil                  0.75       0.75            0.00        0.00             1.00                  2.43
Canada                  0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
Chile                   0.67       0.78            0.44        0.00             0.78                  2.75
Colombia                0.80       0.80            0.60        0.60             1.00                  3.89
Denmark                 0.00       0.18            0.00        0.00             0.18                  0.40
Finland                 0.00       0.45            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.50
France                  0.00       0.64            0.00        0.00             0.64                  1.40
Germany                 0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.07                  0.08
Hong Kong               0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
India                   0.78       0.78            1.00        0.00             1.00                  3.50
Indonesia               0.00       0.00            1.00        0.00             0.00                  1.00
Ireland                 0.00       0.55            0.00        0.00             0.64                  1.30
Israel                  0.20       0.60            0.20        0.00             1.00                  2.00
Italy                   0.00       0.64            0.00        0.00             0.64                  1.40
Japan                   0.00       0.08            0.00        0.00             0.08                  0.09
Malaysia                0.00       0.10            0.10        0.00             0.40                  0.33
Mexico                  0.29       0.86            0.14        0.00             0.71                  2.08
Netherlands             0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
New Zealand             0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
Norway                  0.00       0.73            0.00        0.00             0.64                  1.50
Pakistan                0.78       0.78            1.00        0.56             1.00                  4.13
Peru                    0.38       0.50            1.00        0.00             0.38                  2.43
Philippines             0.67       0.78            0.44        0.44             0.44                  3.00
Portugal                0.11       0.56            0.00        0.00             0.56                  1.38
Singapore               0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
South Africa            0.67       0.83            0.75        0.58             1.00                  4.00
South Korea             0.10       0.80            0.00        0.00             1.00                  1.89
Spain                   0.00       0.71            0.00        0.00             0.71                  1.54
Sweden                  0.00       0.64            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.70
Thailand                0.00       0.78            0.78        0.00             1.00                  2.63
Turkey                  0.22       0.78            0.56        1.00             1.00                  3.63
UK                      0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
US                      0.00       0.00            0.00        0.00             0.00                  0.00
Venezuela               0.30       0.80            0.40        0.10             1.00                  2.44
Note these are means by country over all years in the sample, basically it is a proportion of        years that
the control was in effect.
                 Table A.5 Cross-Country Correlations of DFI with Restrictions on international transactions and Macro Variables

DFI and Restrictions on international transactions
                           DFI        Restrictions on   Restrictions on Import               Advance Import Repatriation
                                      Payments on       Payments on     Surcharges           Deposits       and Surrender
                                      Current           Capital                                             Requirements
                                      Transactions      Transactions                                        for Export
Sum of 5 controls          -0.3242*
                           0.00
                           334
Restrictions on Payments -0.1690* 1.00
on Current Transactions
                           0.00
                           371        400
Restrictions on Payments -0.3321* 0.5257*               1.00
on Capital Transactions
                           0.00       0.00
                           371        400               400

Import Surcharges       -0.1184*       0.5292*          0.2888*          1.00
                        0.02           0.00             0.00
                        371            400              400              400
Advance Import Deposits -0.1820*       0.4751*          0.3023*          0.4253*             1.00
                        0.00           0.00             0.00             0.00
                        371            400              400              400                 400
Repatriation and        -0.2960*       0.4858*          0.7004*          0.3600*             0.3310*                          1
Surrender Requirements
for Export
                        0              0                0                0                   0
                        371            400              400              400                 400                           400

DFI and Macro Variables
                     DFI (scaled by DFI (Scaled by FD                      GNP per capita GDP growth           M2                 Private Credit
                     I)             GDP)
FDI scaled by GDP       0.9209*          1.00
                        0.00
                        452              468

FD                      -0.01            0.06             1.00
                        0.76             0.22
                        429              444              450

GNP PC                  0.00             -0.02            0.6530*          1.00
                        0.98             0.64             0.00
                        441              456              438              473

growth GDP              0.2610*          0.2739*          0.0262           -0.1835*           1.00
                        0.00             0.00             0.5865           0.00
                        438              451              432              455                467

M2                      0.05             0.1593*          0.7789*          0.6023*            0.0690           1.00
                        0.28             0.00             0.00             0.00               0.1665
                        403              418              402              411                404              422

Private credit          -0.02            0.03             0.8007*          0.6408*            -0.0257           0.7706*                         1
                        0.64             0.56             0.00             0.00               0.6075            0.00
                        402              417              400              410                403               420                           421
Note: Star denotes significance at the ten percent level. The first number reported is the   correlation coefficient, the second is the p-value
and the third is the number of observations.
