NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MOVING TO GREENER PASTURES?
MULTINATIONALS AND THE POLLUTION HAVEN HYPOTHESIS

Gunnar S. Eskeland
Ann E. Harrison

Working Paper 8888
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8888

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002

We would like to thank Ricardo Sanhueza for superb research assistance. We are greatly indebted to David
Wheeler and Manjula Singh for helpful conversations, for making their database available, and for estimating
the results based on U.S. data. We would also like to thank Art Small, Tarhan Feyzioglu, and two anonymous
referees for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or The World Bank.

© 2002 by Gunnar E. Eskeland and Ann E. Harrison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Moving to Greener Pastures? Multinationals and the Pollution Haven Hypothesis
Gunnar E. Eskeland and Ann E. Harrison
NBER Working Paper No. 8888
April 2002
JEL No. F23, Q2

ABSTRACT
This paper presents evidence on whether multinationals are flocking to developing country
"pollution havens". Although we find some evidence that foreign investors locate in sectors with high
levels of air pollution, the evidence is weak at best. We then examine whether foreign firms pollute less
than their peers. We find that foreign plants are significantly more energy efficient and use cleaner types
of energy. We conclude with an analysis of US outbound investment. Although the pattern of US
foreign investment is skewed towards industries with high costs of pollution abatement, the results are
not robust across specifications.

Gunnar A. Eskeland
The World Bank
1818 H St. NW
Washington, DC 20433
geskeland@worldbank.org

Ann E. Harrison
University of California
329 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
510-643-9676
harrison@are.berkeley.edu

I.

Introduction

Passage of the North-American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) reawakened fears that
multinationals would flock to Mexico to take advantage of lax environmental standards. This is the socalled pollution haven hypothesis, which states that environmental regulations will move polluting
activities for tradeable products to poorer countries. Although existing studies suggest little or no
evidence of industrial relocation, arguments over pollution havens persist. Why?
One answer lies in the fact that the existing literature is primarily based on anecdotes and
scattered case studies. Even the best studies, such as Leonard (1988), make no effort to assess
statistically the relationship between the distribution of US foreign investment and pollution intensity.
Most of these studies make no attempt to control for other factors which may play a role in determining
foreign investment, such as large protected markets. Many of the earlier studies (Pearson, 1985 and
1987; Walter, 1982) use evidence from the 1970s and early 1980s, when the flow of foreign investment
to developing countries was not as high as it is today. One exception is the recent work by Grossman and
Krueger (1993), which focuses on maquiladora activity in Mexico. Yet their research also serves to
highlight the difficulty in explaining the pattern of US investment abroad. They show that neither
pollution abatement costs nor other likely determinants can adequately explain the pattern of maquiladora
activity in Mexico.
Although there is a growing literature on the determinants of global environmental quality, little
research has been done to test the pollution haven hypothesis.2

In this paper, we begin by presenting a

2

Instead, much of the literature focuses on the relationship between income growth and pollution. Grossman and
Krueger (1995) postulate an inverted 'u-curve'. This empirical relationship has found support in other studies as well (see
Selden and Song, 1994; The World Bank, 1992). The hypothesis, supported by their empirical analysis, states that pollution
will first increase with income, then decrease at higher income levels. The initial upward relationship occurs because of a
positive relationship between output and emissions. The downward tendency occurs when higher demand for environmental
quality at higher income levels forces the introduction of cleaner technologies (the technique effect) and an output
combination which is less polluting (the composition effect).
A related literature examines the relationship between openness and environmental quality. Again, the links can be

2

simple model which shows that the effect of environmental regulations imposed at home on outward
investment is ambiguous. Depending on possible complementarities between capital and pollution
abatement, environmental regulation could lead to an increase or a decline in investment in both the host
(developing) country and the originating (developed) country. In other words, environmental regulation
in the home country could lead a firm to increase or reduce its investment in both the home country and
in the country where environmental standards are less stringent.
To resolve the theoretical ambiguity, we turn to an empirical analysis of the pattern of foreign
investment. Our research focuses on three related issues. We begin by analyzing the pattern of foreign
investment in a number of developing countries--looking for evidence which reflects increasing costs of
pollution-intensive activities at home. To control for other factors which may be important in helping to
attract foreign investment, we create measures of trade policies, industrial concentration, the domestic
regulatory environment, factor endowments, and wages at home. We use data from four host countries:
Cote d'Ivoire, Morocco, Mexico, and Venezuela.
Second, we compare the behavior of multinational firms in developing countries with their
counterparts in the host country. In particular, we focus on the emissions behavior of foreign and
domestic plants within the same manufacturing sector. Since emissions across a wide range of countries

decomposed into an output- a composition- and technique effect. In the case of trade reform, however, the composition effect
is of a different nature, since openness to trade itself changes sectoral composition. A number of empirical studies suggest
that openness reduces pollution (Wheeler and Martin, 1992; Birdsall and Wheeler, 1992), while others claim evidence to the
contrary (Rock, 1995). Theoretical models have a different flavor, with results depending on whether pollution problems are
national or transnational, and on the assumed regime for environmental management. Copeland and Taylor (1994) present a
model in which pollution problems are national and national pollution control is optimal in both countries. It is, thus, a model
with no coordination problem, emphasizing comparative advantage as in a traditional trade model. Then, one effect of
openness is that the poor country will be offered a higher premium for undertaking polluting activities, the effect that is
presumed in the pollution haven hypothesis. However, openness will also leave both countries wealthier, and thus more
interested in changing both techniques and composition in the direction of less pollution.
Concerns along the lines of openness and pollution also touch on concerns for competitiveness, and the introduction
of measures such as harmonization of environmental standards in trade negotiations. Kanbur, Keen and Wijnbergen show
that coordination of environmental standards may be justified to avoid damaging "environmental competition", but suggest
that (complete) harmonization would not be the preferred way of coordination. Extending such analysis with a supranational
body such as the European Community, Ulph (1995) shows that information asymmetries between the higher body and the
nations can lead to a greater harmonization than one would see in the case with full information. Markussen, Morey and
Olewiler extend the open-economy analysis to include endogenous market structure.

3

and activities are not available, we use energy consumption and the composition of fuel types as a proxy
for emissions. We present evidence from the US to justify that fuel-and energy-intensity can be used as
proxies for differences in pollution intensities within an industry.
Third, we test whether the pattern of outbound US investment during the 1980s and early 1990s
can be explained by variations in pollution abatement costs across different sectors of the economy. If
environmental legislation in the 1980s led to higher costs of doing business in the United States, then we
would expect that foreign investment leaving this country would be concentrated in sectors where
pollution abatement costs are significant.
Our focus is consequently on two related issues: (1) the impact of pollution abatement costs on
the composition of foreign investment and (2) the role played by foreign investors in improving the
environment by using more energy-efficient technology as well as cleaner sources of energy. Grossman
and Krueger (1993) label these two issues as a "composition" and a "technique" effect. They show that
NAFTA is likely to affect Mexico's environment by changing both the composition of output as well as
the overall level of technology.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a simple modelling
framework, describes the empirical specification, and discusses the data. Section III examines the factors
which affect the stock of foreign investment in four developing countries. Section IV presents the
methodology for analyzing the relative pollution intensity of foreign and domestic firms within an
industry, and then presents the results. Section V presents the analysis of outbound US investment.
Section VI concludes.

II.1

Environmental regulation and the pollution haven hypothesis

In this section, we present a simple theoretical model to study the factors determining the impact

4

of pollution regulation in one country (H) on investment and output by optimizing firms in (H) and
another country (A). The model has homogenous goods and we assume perfect competition (we relax
the assumption of perfect competition in the empirical section which follows). To simplify notation we
use a standard profit function, assuming that output price and its response is known. In our empirical
implementation, however, since we do not observe output price, we introduce factors such as
concentration ratios and protection measures, assuming that these affect profitability through their impact
on the (unobserved) output price.
We show that the impact of abatement costs on industrial relocation is ambiguous. For example,
if abatement costs fall with the scale of output, then the home country firm may find it more
advantageous to expand locally when facing tougher environmental regulations.A market for a
homogenous good is served by several types of firms: one type produces in country H (in which
environmental regulation occurs) and another produces abroad (A).3 The market is perfectly competitive,
implying that firms with different cost structures adjust so that they have equal marginal costs.
Let the profits of a firm located in country H be:
(1)

where p denotes the price of output, xH denotes the firms' sales, cH is the firm's operating (i.e. short-run
marginal) costs, kH denotes the firms's stock, r is the cost of capital, and aH stands for pollution
abatement--the resources needed to meet the country's pollution regulations. cH is continuous, twice
differentiable and convex, so this will be the case for BH as well. We shall furthermore assume that

short term marginal costs are positive (

), that capital reduces operating costs (

3

The generalization to firms operating in several countries is obvious, and adds no relevant insights. The material in this
section is from “Regulation and foreign investment: A more general model”, available from the authors upon request.

5

),

and that abatement increases operating costs (

).

Figure 1

Most of the insights from this model can be gleaned from figure 14. Short run marginal costs
(SRMC) and average costs (AC) are drawn for the firm's present level of capital. A demand schedule is
not drawn, but we assume that there are many other firms in perfect competition in the short run so the
individual firm effectively faces infinitely elastic demand. Since the firm is in a short term equilibrium, it

4

The model is solved by deducing the first-order conditions for profit maximum with respect to capital and output,
differentiating these with respect to the regulatory parameter aH, and finally solving for the effect on investment and output
decisions. Details are shown in an Appendix, available from the authors upon request.

6

will be somewhere on its short term marginal cost curve, SRMC. Furthermore, if the equilibrium is one
with zero excess profits for the present level of capital, then the firm is on the lowest point of its relevant
average cost curve, i.e. where the short term marginal cost curve cuts the average cost curve from below.
Finally, if the firm is in a long run competitive equilibrium, then also the firm's capital will minimize
average costs. In the three dimensions, however, the average cost surface will form a bowl, and a long
run competitive equilibrium would imply that the firm's output and capital would be where SRMC cuts
this bowl from below at its absolute minimum.
Environmental regulations are a part of this picture. The parameter aH represents a shift
parameter controlled by the government which shifts total operating costs upwards - which also means
that average costs shift upwards.
We develop results for the intermediate run, meaning that capital adjusts, but no condition of
zero profit has been included:

(2)

and

(3)

7

The denominator in (2) and (3) is positive by the second-order conditions for profit maximum,
and the effect on output is ambiguous. To obtain the pollution haven result, it is sufficient (but not

necessary) to assume that the output price does not change,

between capital and abatement,

that there is no interaction

and that abatement increases marginal operating costs,

Without these restrictive assumptions, however, a firm's output may increase simply because its
marginal costs have increased less than the output price5 or if there is an interaction between abatement
and output. One such case would be if abatement makes more capital attractive-- such as when capital
intensive technologies are less polluting and capital reduces marginal costs.
The effect of increasing abatement costs on capital investment is also ambiguous. It is possible
that an increase in abatement costs could raise investment in the home country. One such possibility is
when capital lowers abatement costs and marginal operating costs. In this framework, domestic
investment could rise even if output falls, if a sufficiently large increase in capital intensity is induced.
As an illustration of these "complementarities", assume that a higher quality, more expensive
furnace is available to a steel producer. It is more expensive, has lower emissions than the "normal"
model and is also more energy efficient, so it will have lower variable costs once it is installed. Assume
further that at low levels of environmental regulations, the higher energy efficiency is not sufficient to
make the higher quality furnace attractive to the firm. Higher abatement requirements could make this

5

We do not show the modeling of the output price, as it is awkward when there is heterogeneity among firms. As is
apparent from equations (2) and (3), ambiguity with respect to sign remains even if we assume that the output price increases
by as much as marginal operating costs are shifted upwards.

8

cleaner technology attractive (increasing investment, and capital intensity in production), and output
might then expand as a consequence of lower operating costs. The parameters of the model will
determine whether the firm keeps the old furnace and pays higher abatement costs, invests in a new
furnace and remains at home, or moves to another location and shuts down the existing plant.6
The ambiguous results (2) and (3) regarding the impact of environmental regulation on
investment and output demonstrate that this issue can only be resolved through empirical analysis.
However, the empirical tests below are implemented as reduced forms, since data for structural
estimation (output price, for example) is not available. However, this framework is important because it
shows that under reasonable assumptions we cannot predict whether there is likely to be a positive or
negative relationship between foreign investment and pollution abatement costs.

II.2

Empirical models of FDI

In the simplified model above, the effect of environmental regulation on the location of polluting
industries is ambiguous. In our empirical testing, we need to expand the framework to include other
potential determinants of foreign investment. In this section, we describe how such determinants have
been introduced in the literature and how they will be used in our subsequent analysis.
Although trade theories which predict the pattern of trade do not focus in general on ownership,

6

We do not show the results for the plants abroad, as these are rather intuitive. The possibility that output and investment
expands abroad as a result of environmental regulation at home, as supposed in the pollution haven hypothesis, exists.
However, as it is possible that firms in the home country expand both investments and output, it is also possible that firms
abroad reduce both output and investment - the opposite of what is assumed in the pollution haven hypothesis.
As an important example, consider the case in which i) capital at home is complementary to abatement (Then,
ceteris paribus, abatement requirement makes more capital at home attractive); capital at home lowers short term marginal
costs (Then, ceteris paribus, more capital at home makes higher production at home more attractive) and; iii) capital at home
and abroad is substitutable. In this case, we could see the firm investing at home in order to make abatement requirements less
expensive to comply with, taking advantage of the (thereby) reduced short term marginal costs by increasing output at home,
and finally reducing capital abroad due to the substitutability of capital in the two locations. Such a structure would, thus, lead
to the opposite effect of the pollution haven effect in both locations.

9

the same factors which have been used to explain trade have also been used to explain foreign
investment. For example, relatively higher labor costs should increase a country's imports of labor
intensive goods from a relatively labor-rich country. This factor proportions explanation for trade has
also been used to explain the pattern of foreign investment. Everything else equal, we would expect that
foreign investors would locate in countries where factors they use in high proportions are cheaper than at
home. This factor proportions theory for direct investment is described in more detail in Caves (1982),
Helpman (1984) and more recently, in Brainard (1993). The importance of factor proportions in
explaining the pattern of foreign investment can be captured through such variables as skill intensity,
capital-labor ratios, and wage differentials between countries.
It is clear that factor proportions alone yield an unsatisfactory explanation of foreign investment.
As Brainard and others have pointed out, the majority of foreign investment both originates from and
locates in industrial countries. More recent theories about foreign investment focus on the role of
ownership itself. An important role is played by "intangible assets" such as managerial abilities,
technology and business relationships. This intangible asset theory of foreign investment has been
developed by Horstmann and Markusen (1989) and others. The theory is the following: it is essential
that the assets be intangibly related to the control of production; otherwise they can be sold at arms
length or rented so that the link to plant ownership and control is severed. For example, in countries
where patent protection is weak, research-intensive goods might be sold via direct investment rather than
via a licensing agreement with a local firm. To capture the importance of such intangibles–which are
often linked to advances in technology–as a motivation for foreign investment, we will use total factor
productivity growth whenever such data is available.
A third framework has been described by Brainard (1997) as the proximity-concentration tradeoff between multinational sales and trade. According to Brainard, there are a number of factors (other
than intangible assets or factor prices) which make it desirable to locate near the target market. These

10

include tariff barriers and transport costs. A number of researchers have noted the attraction of
protected domestic markets for foreign investment. A large share of foreign investment flows in the early
1990s, for example, were targeted either at the European Union in expectation of EC92 or at the US and
Mexico in anticipation of NAFTA. Helleiner (1989), in his review of the role of foreign investment in
developing countries, points out that "the prospect of large and especially protected local markets are the
key to most import-substituting manufacturing firms' foreign activities". We will capture the importance
of protected markets through measures of trade, such as import penetration or export shares.
Brainard (1997) points out, however, that there is a trade-off between the advantages of
proximity and the benefits of concentrating production in one location. This is particularly true in sectors
where there are economies of scale. We will, as is done elsewhere in the literature, capture the
importance of scale economies with variables such as the numbers of employees per plant, and the
Herfindahl index, which measures the size distribution of plants in a particular sector.

III.

Foreign Investment and Pollution Abatement in Four Developing Countries

The Approach: In this section, we examine the pattern of foreign investment in four developing
countries: Mexico, Morocco, Cote d'Ivoire and Venezuela. In Mexico and Venezuela, the majority of
foreign investment originated in the United States; in Cote d'Ivoire and Morocco, most foreign
investments are of French origin.
For all four countries, the following general specification was adopted for sector i and time t:

(4) DFIi,t =

"1ABCOSTi,t + "2IMPENETi,t-1 + "3HERFi,t-1 + "4(IMPENET*HERF)i,t-1
+ "5LAB/CAP i,t-1+ "6REGULi,t +"7MARKETSIZE i,t-1+ "8WAGE i,t + "9YEARt
+ fi + 0it
11

The independent variables, which vary by four-digit sector, include pollution abatement cost
(ABCOST); import penetration (IMPENET) as a proxy for openness in the sector's product market; the
Herfindahl index (HERF), equal to the sum of the square of firm market shares in each sector, as a
measure of scale and concentration; the interaction of market concentration and import penetration
(IMPENET*HERF); the labor-capital ratio (LABCAP) in the sector; a measure of regulatory barriers
against DFI (REGUL) which varies from 0 (no restrictions) to 2 (foreign investment prohibited); a
measure of market size (MARKETSIZE), which is defined as the lagged share of domestic sales in the
sector j as a percentage of total manufacturing output; and wages in the sector j (WAGE) in the United
States (for Mexico and Venezuela) and France (for Morocco and Cote d'Ivoire). The variables
IMPENET, HERF, LABCAP, and MARKETSIZE are all lagged one period to avoid potential
simultaneity problems. We also allow for time effects (YEAR) and industry fixed effects.
Data Issues. The time period covered in the estimation is slightly different across the four
countries. Cote d'Ivoire covers 1977 through 1987; Venezuela covers 1983 through 1988; and Morocco
covers 1985 through 1990. In Mexico, although we have a panel of plants from 1984 through 1990,
ownership information was only collected in 1990. Data is reported at the plant level, and when sector
level estimates are needed, these are obtained by aggregating over plant observations, using a
concordance to four-digit ISIC classification. Foreign investment is converted to a share variable by
dividing by the total foreign investment in that country and year.
In 1987, the share of foreign investment in manufacturing varied from 38 % in Cote d'Ivoire to 7
percent in Venezuela. Morocco lies somewhere in between: in 1988, foreign investment accounted for
15 % of total assets in manufacturing. In 1990, foreign investment accounted for 10 % of total assets in
manufacturing in Mexico. Since these censuses typically only cover the largest plants, our measure of
DFI may be biased. The smaller plants and informal sector plants are excluded, so it is likely that the

12

importance of foreign investment in the manufacturing sector as a whole may be over-stated. For
Mexico, the sample excludes many "maquiladora" plants--firms under special arrangements to assemble
inputs imported from the United States for re-export.
The independent variables vary across industrial subsectors and over time. For all four countries,
all dependent and independent variables were redefined to be consistent with the ISIC classification,
including US abatement costs. Import penetration, the Herfindahl index (HERF), the labor-capital ratio
(LABCAP), and market size were calculated using both the censuses and trade information from the
source country. The measure of regulations against DFI (REGUL) was taken from both policy reports
and various publications for potential investors. Manufacturing wages by sector and time period in
France and the United States were taken from ILO publications.
The data source for pollution abatement expenditures is the Manufacturers' Pollution Abatement
Capital Expenditures and Operating Costs Survey (referred to as the PACE survey) administered by the
U.S. Department of Commerce. Following earlier studies, we defined pollution abatement costs as the
dollar amount of operating expenditures normalized by industry value-added. We feel justified in
excluding capital expenditures for several reasons. First, the majority of abatement expenditures are for
operating costs, not for capital expenditures. Second, the pattern of costs across industries is very similar
across operating and capital costs. Data was available for 1976 through 1993, excluding 1987 when no
survey was conducted. Since pollution abatement costs were not available for France, we used the same
abatement cost measure in all four host countries. By using the same measure of abatement costs, we are
assuming that abatement costs follow a similar pattern across sectors in the United States and in other
“host” countries.7

7

This assumption is supported by Sorsa (1994), who finds that differences in environmental spending among industrial
countries are minor. We also assume that the pattern is a good proxy for the pattern of cost savings associated with localizing
production in the host country. While the validity of these two assumptions cannot be tested separately, we will test the
hypothesis that the sectoral distribution of foreign investment is positively associated with high abatement costs in the U.S.,
against the alternative hypothesis that there is a negative or no association.

13

Results: The results are reported in Table 1. In columns (8) and (9), we pool all four countries,
but include country dummies to allow for systematic differences across countries. For both the pooled
sample and the individual country results, we report the estimates with and without year and industry
effects. We also report the results of a Hausman test for whether random or fixed effects are more
appropriate. The results of the Hausman test suggest that a fixed effect specification is warranted for
Cote d’Ivoire and Morocco, but not for Venezuela or the full sample. For Mexico, however, the data is
only available as a cross-section for 1990. Consequently, we cannot control for time and industry effects.
Across all specifications, pollution abatement costs do not have a systematic impact on the
pattern of foreign investment. Although there is a significant positive relationship between abatement
costs and foreign investment in Cote d’Ivoire, the relationship is significant and negative for Venezuela.
Both relationships become insignificant with the introduction of fixed effects, although a critic could
argue that this indicates that there is not enough time series variation in the data. The data appear to
suggest no robust association between the pattern of pollution abatement costs and investment. Other
factors, however, significantly affect the pattern of investment. For example, the results show that import
penetration is negatively related to DFI, suggesting that foreign investors locate in sectors with little
competition from imports. The results also point to a negative correlation between the Herfindahl index
and DFI, suggesting that foreign investors are less likely to locate in concentrated sectors typically
characterized by entry barriers and economies of scale.
In all four countries, the single biggest draw for foreign investors was the size of the domestic
market. Foreign investors tend to concentrate in sectors with large total sales. However, controlling for
market size could be unjustified if the size reflects that domestic firms also invest in pollution-intensive
activities--reflecting a country's comparative advantage in producing "dirty" products. Consequently, the
analysis was redone excluding MARKETSIZE. Although excluding MARKETSIZE affects the
magnitude of some of the coefficients, it does not alter our basic results: that the coefficient on abatement

14

costs is not consistently significant across specifications.8
Using Measures of Pollution Intensity: To test whether the costs of environmental regulations
lead firms to move plants abroad, this paper focuses on the relationship between pollution abatement
costs and the pattern of foreign investment. An equally interesting, but slightly different question would
be to ask whether "dirtier" sectors--measured using actual pollution emissions--are more likely to attract
foreign investors.9 We thus redid the analysis using three different measures of pollution emissions: total
particulates, which is a measure of air pollution; biological oxygen demand, which is a broad measure of
water pollution; and total toxic releases.10
Total particulates (TP), which captures small and large dust particles, is closely related to
phenomena such as the (now historic) London smog, and to air pollution in cities with emissions from
fuel- and diesel oil combustion, from energy-intensive processes such as steel and cement, from twostroke engines, coal use, and burning of wood and residues. Analysis in the World Bank and elsewhere
indicates that particulates is the main air pollution problem (as judged by health impact) in many third
world cities (See, for instance, World Bank 1992, Ostro 1994 and Ostro et al 1994). Biological Oxygen
Demand (BOD) indicates how discharges to water bodies deplete their oxygen levels, and is widely
accepted as a broad measure of water pollution. Total toxic releases (TOX) is an unweighted sum of
releases of the 320 compounds in the U.S. EPA's toxic chemical release inventory. All of these measures
are by weight. In order to normalize, emissions are divided by the total output of the firm, measured in
monetary terms, to arrive at sector-specific emission intensities for the three pollutants.
Regretfully, no comprehensive data on manufacturing emissions exists for developing countries.

8

It is not surprising that excluding MARKETSIZE fails to affect the coefficient on abatement costs, since there is no
reason to believe that there is any correlation between the two.
6
One might conjecture that industries with high abatement costs are industries with high pollution intensities, but
this need not be the case, given that abatement could be effective in removing pollution. If abatement is socially optimal, then
an industry will be ranked high in terms of abatement costs and low in terms of pollution intensity if marginal benefits equal
marginal costs at a point with much abatement and little remaining pollution.
7

See Hettige, Martin, Singh and Wheeler, (1995) for more details on the database.

15

We assume that the sector specific emission intensities estimated from data on manufacturing in the
United States can serve as proxies for the relative emission intensities for the same sectors within the
LDC host countries. Sector specific emissions intensities are calculated using a plant-level data set
resulting from a merger of data sets of the Bureau of the Census and U.S. EPA11.
Such "imported" emission intensities (for individual inputs, technologies, or outputs, as applied
here) are routinely used in environmental analysis when local and more specific emission measurements
are not available.12 It may certainly be argued that emission intensities are higher in developing
countries, due to less progress with emission controls, older technologies and lower skill levels. The
working hypothesis is still plausible, however, that relative emission intensities among sectors are similar
across countries. It is certainly the case that industries such as cement, industrial chemicals, fertilizer and
pesticides, pulp and paper, refineries and primary metals--which have the highest abatement costs in the
U.S--are the same industries where abatement costs are high in other industrialized countries (See Sorsa,
1994). Briefly stated, we assume that these sectors in developing countries are also likely to be heavy
polluters.
Table 2 reports the correlations between the three measures of emission intensity and pollution
abatement costs. The table shows that, in a comparison among 4-digit ISIC sectors in the US, there is no
significant correlation between air pollution, water pollution, and toxicity. Thus, although these three
measures of pollution are very broadly defined, there is no general tendency that a sector which pollutes
in one medium also pollutes another medium. However, Table 2 does report a statistically significant
correlation between abatement costs and toxic releases. Industries which on average have high

8

The emissions data are from three separate data-bases generated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (U.S. EPA): The Aerometric Information Retrieval System (Air), The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (water) and the Toxic Chemical Release Inventory (irrespective of medium). These have been linked with the
Longitudinal Research Data Base on manufacturing firms (Bureau of the Census, Center for Economic Studies) by a World
Bank research project: The Industrial Pollution Projection System (IPPS), see Hettige, Martin, Singh and Wheeler, 1995.
9
Such transferred intensities and coefficients are used in engineering analysis as well as in more superficial
economic analysis, and in industrial as well as developing countries. See, for instance, for engineering analysis, U.S. EPA's
AP-42, on industrial emission coefficients for air pollution.

16

abatement costs typically also emit toxic substances.
Table 3 repeats the specification in Table 1, but explores alternative specifications and also
replaces pollution abatement costs with our three different measures of emission intensities. The three
alternative specifications which continue to use pollution abatement costs explore the consequences of
allowing for group-wise heteroskedasticity (row (1)), first-order serial autocorrelation in the error term
(row(2)), and Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimation (row(3)). We employed a GMM
estimator to jointly address serial correlation and potential endogeneity of the herfindahl index, import
penetration, capital-labor ratios and market size. If we make these econometric corrections, we find that
pollution abatement costs have no significant or systematic impact on the pattern of foreign investment,
either with or without industry dummies. The GMM results are particularly unsatisfactory, leading to
large changes in the coefficient on abatement costs and enormous standard errors. In large part, the poor
estimates using GMM stem from the short panel nature of the data; efforts to use lags as instruments for
right-hand side variables such as market size, the capital/labor ratio, concentration and import penetration
led to very small sample sizes. These results reinforce our conclusions that there is no systematic
relationship between pollution abatement costs and the pattern of foreign investment.
In the remaining three rows, we report the coefficients on the three measures of pollution
emissions. We do not report the coefficients on the other variables ( which are similar to those reported
in Table 1, and not of primary interest). We report the results both with and without industry and time
dummies. Since our emission intensity proxies do not change over time (in contrast to pollution
abatement costs, which vary across industries and over time) the panel estimates without industry
dummies are most meaningful.
For two out of the three emission measures, the relationship between emissions and the pattern of
foreign investment is either insignificant or negative--high levels of water pollution (proxied by BOD),
for example, are associated with less foreign investment, not more. The only exceptions are toxic

17

emissions in Cote d’Ivoire and air pollution in all three countries: SUSSPART is significantly and
positively correlated with the pattern of foreign investment, particularly if we do not control for sector
and time effects.
Using measures of emissions instead of actual abatement costs, we conclude that there is some
evidence that high-emission sectors attract foreign investors, particularly if emissions are measured in
terms of air pollution. There is a significantly positive association between air pollution and the pattern
of foreign investment in several countries, even after controlling for other factors. However, using other
measures of emissions, such as measures of water pollution or toxicity, the pattern is reversed: foreign
investment is less likely in sectors where emissions are higher.

IV.

Energy use and pollution intensity

Our discussion so far ignores one potential benefit from the entry of industrial country firms into
developing countries. If industrial country plants use cleaner technology than their local peers, they may
help the host country environment. This would be true if foreign entrants replace older, "dirtier" local
competitors, and even more so if they also influence domestic plants in their choice of fuels or
technology.

Unfortunately, data on emissions by ownership is not currently available for our four

sample countries. One way to address the problem is to find a plant-level proxy for emissions. In this
section, we propose using fuel and energy intensity as a proxy for emissions at the plant level. We first
make the case for these proxies using evidence from the U.S.
The standard reference in the technical literature on this topic is EPA's handbook AP-42, which
prescribes emission factors for various industrial processes (combustion and others). For most processes,
AP-42 proposes an emission function (or a range, given that a limited number of measurements have
given widely varying results), as follows:

18

(5)

(where ei are emissions of pollutant i (say dust, in kilograms), xj is the quantity of fuel j (say diesel oil, in
tons), aj is a variable denoting the type of abatement equipment in place, if any (say, filters, precipitators,
baghouses), and tj is (a vector) denoting other relevant aspects of technology and equipment. In our work
we shall use energy intensity, defined as energy use per unit of output, as a proxy for emissions.
We shall show that even in the U.S., where respectable air pollution control programs have been
in place for more than 20 years, and the choice of fuels and electricity is very varied, there is a strong
statistical relationship between air pollution coefficients and energy use. Due to the lower prevalence of
emission control devices in developing countries, and the likely lower variation in fuel choice within an
industry, the relationship between air pollution and energy use in these countries is likely to be even
stronger.13
We begin by presenting the evidence on the relationship between energy use and pollution
emissions across U.S. industries. As in the earlier tables, we use three different measures of emissions:
particulates, which measure air pollution; BOD, which measures water pollution; and toxics. As before,
particulates are defined as annual pounds of particulates divided by thousands of dollars of total output in
the sector. BOD intensity is defined as daily kilograms per thousands of dollars of output. Two different
measures of toxics are reported, TOXLB and TOXUB. Both measures are computed as annual pounds
of toxics divided by total output in thousands of dollars. TOXLB ("lower bound"), however, is computed
using total toxics reported by the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI), divided by total output in the sector.
TOXUB ("upper bound") is computed using only those plants present in both the TRI database and the

13

Guo and Tybout (1994), Moss and Tybout (1994) and Eskeland, Jimenez and Liu (1994) have studied fuel choice in
Chile and Indonesia, data bases in which details on fuel choice is available, but ownership data is not.

19

LRD database.
The rank correlations between these alternative measures of emissions and different factor
inputs, including energy, are reported in Table 4. We report the correlations between emissions and six
different factor inputs: the share of unskilled labor in total value of shipments, the skilled labor share,
capital share, manufactured input shares, raw material input shares, and the share of energy inputs in total
output. Energy use is highly correlated with different measures of emissions. The correlation between
energy use and particulates is .58; between toxics and energy use the correlation varies between .52 and
.55. The correlation with BOD is lower, though also significantly different from zero, at .22. Table 4
also shows that the correlation between pollution and energy use is much higher than for other factor
inputs.
Yet even if energy intensity could provide a good proxy for emissions across industries, energy
intensity may not be a good proxy for differences in emissions between plants within the same industry.
To investigate this issue, we used a cross section of U.S. manufacturing firms to examine the relationship
between different types of factor inputs and plant-specific emissions, one industry at a time.
The results are reported in Table 5. The strength of the relationship between energy use and
emissions varies with the type of industry. In a cross section of all firms, including SIC sector dummies,
energy intensity is a strong predictor of particulates emission. However, when the relationship is
estimated in a separate equation for each of the 17 SIC industries, emissions of particulates are highly
correlated with energy use at the plant level for only four industries: chemicals, petroleum refining,
lumber and wood products, and non-electrical machinery. Two of the most polluting activities in
manufacturing--chemicals and petroleum refining--are included in these four sectors. The results
presented in Tables 4 and 5 suggest that although energy intensity is highly correlated with particulates
emissions overall, the correlation is based on a strong relationship between emissions and energy use in

20

four industries14. In the section that follows, we restrict our analysis to only those four sectors where
energy use serves as a reasonable proxy for emissions.
The framework for the estimation is is based on a translog approximation to a production
function. W assume that each plant j’s output in time t, Yjt, is given by Yjt = f(Ls,Lu, K, M, E, T)jt where
Y is total value of output, Ls is equal to the number of skilled workers, Lu is equal to the number of
unskilled workers, M is the amount of material inputs, E is the quantity of energy, and T is an index of
technology. With these 5 inputs and our index of technology T (we can denote each input as well as the
technology index as vi), we can approximate Y by the following translog function:

lnYjt =a0 + 3i bilnvijt + 1/23i3mbimlnvijtlnvmjt + ,jt

(6)

where , is a disturbance term. Inverse input demands are obtained in share form by
differentiating (6) with respect to each input. Differentiating (6) with respect to lnE,
where E represents the quantity of energy used by the plant, yields an equation for
energy’s share in output, which we also refer to as “energy intensity”:

(WeEe/PY)jt = Sejt = b0 + b1lnLsjt +b2lnLujt + b3lnKjt + b4lnMjt + b5lnEjt + NTjt + Ljt

(7)

Energy’s share in the total value of the plant’s output, PY, is equal to the price of energy We
multiplied by its quantity Ee, divided by PY. This is a function of the (log) quantity of all inputs, which in
our data include skilled and unskilled workers, materials, capital stock, and energy. We assume that

14

As one referee pointed out, the r-square in the regressions which examine the relationship between energy intensity and
emissions varies significantly. The referee argued that much of the variation in emissions is unexplained by energy intensity,
with the exception of chemical producers (see Table 5). Consequently, we also redid the results reported in Table 6, limiting
the sample to chemical producers. The results are almost identical: multinationals in the chemical sector consume less energy
as a share of output, and their energy use is more skewed towards electricity use.

21

technological change is a function of the plant’s age, ownership structure, investment in research and
development, and imported machinery (which can embody technological change). This yields the final
estimating equation:

(7)

(WeEe /PY)jt = Sejt = b0 + (1FORjt + (2PUBjt + (3AGEjt + (4MACHIMPjt + (5RNDjt +
b1lnLsjt +b2lnLujt + b3lnKjt + b4lnMjt+ b5lnEjt + <jt

Table 6 presents evidence on the determinants of energy intensity at the plant level. In this
estimation, we include only plants in the chemical, petroleum refining, wood and lumber, and nonelectrical machinery sectors, since these were the sectors for which the proxy was significant when
comparing plants within sectors in the U.S. data sets. Independent variables include ownership, plant size,
capital intensity, age of the plant, machinery imports, research and development, and the electricity price.
Morocco is excluded from the analysis due to lack of information on plant-specific energy use. Since data
availability varies across the three data sets, not all variables could be included for each country. The data
from all four sectors are pooled, and all estimates include sector dummies at the four-digit SIC level.
Table 6 reports results on two separate tests. First, we measured the determinants of energy
intensity, defined as the share of energy inputs in total output (in value terms) for each plant. Second, we
examined the extent to which ownership affects the use of cleaner types of energy--in particular,
electricity. The negative and statistically significant coefficient on foreign ownership (see column (1) of
Table 6 for each country) shows that foreign ownership is associated with lower levels of energy use in all
three countries. To the extent that energy use is a good proxy for air pollution emissions, this suggests
that foreign-owned plants have lower levels of emissions than comparable domestically owned plants.
The results are robust to the inclusion of plant age, number of employees, and capital intensity--suggesting
that foreign plants are more fuel efficient even if we control for the fact that foreign plants tend to be

22

younger, larger, and more capital-intensive.
We also test (see column (2)) whether foreign ownership is associated with using "cleaner" types
of energy. For all three countries, we test whether foreign firms have a higher share of electricity in their
energy bill. We also redid the analysis limiting the sample to chemical firms, which show a very high
correlation between energy intensity and emissions in Table 5. As pointed out in footnote 14, the results
were unaffected. For all three countries, we find that foreign ownership is associated both with less
energy use as well as with the "cleaner end" of the range of energy types.15

V.

The Impact of Pollution Abatement Costs on US Outbound Foreign Investment

One possible criticism of the results presented earlier is that we do not distinguish foreign direct
investment by country of origin. We assume that most DFI originates in industrialized countries, and that
the distribution of abatement costs in industrialized countries is similar to the pattern in the United States.
Although both assumptions are plausible, in this section we address these problems by examining foreign
investment originating in the United States.
If environmental legislation has led to higher costs of doing business in the United States, then we
would expect that foreign investment leaving this country would be concentrated in sectors where
pollution abatement costs are high. One simple way to test this hypothesis is to measure the statistical
correlation between the pattern of outbound foreign investment and pollution abatement costs across
different sectors. In the United States, the Department of Commerce gathers information on both the
stock and flow of outgoing foreign investment, and publishes the data at the level of three-digit SIC sector

15

At the point where it is used, electricity is a "clean" fuel, though it may be more or less polluting than others where it is
produced (See Eskeland, Jimenez and Liu, 1994).

23

codes.16 For the manufacturing sector, the PACE survey described earlier was used as a source for
pollution abatement expenditures.
Foreign investment outflows were available for 1982 through 1993, recorded on a historical cost
basis. As earlier, to normalize the foreign investment data, we divided investment for each three digit
sector by the year's total for foreign investment.17 Consequently our foreign investment data measures the
distribution of direct foreign investment (DFI) across sectors. We also redid the analysis using other
measures of foreign investment, such as foreign investment income and sales. However, since using these
alternative measures did not affect our results, they are not reported in the paper.
Using data for the 1982-1993 period, we estimated the strength of the relationship between the
pattern of foreign investment and pollution abatement costs in several different ways. The results are
reported in Table 7. We began by regressing annual foreign investment outflows on pollution abatement
costs, without controlling for other factors. Pollution abatement costs were measured, as before, as the
sectoral share of abatement costs in manufacturing value-added.
As indicated in Table 7, there is a statistically significant correlation between abatement costs and
the pattern of foreign investment if no control variables are included. The results are similar if foreign
investment is measured as a flow (column (1)) or as a stock (column (4)). The magnitudes, however, are
small. If abatement costs doubled from a mean of 1.3 percent of value-added, the distribution of outbound
DFI would move towards dirtier industries by 0.2 to one half of 1 percent.
In the remaining columns, we include other variables which also affect the pattern of foreign

16

The time series data on outbound U.S. DFI is not reported by recipient country. Thus, a detected pattern on this data
would have to reflect a general tendency for DFI to locate in countries with less abatement costs, since one cannot distinguish
recipient countries.
17
Although both DFI and abatement costs are recorded using the same Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), SIC codes
were revised in 1987. New codes were added and others were deleted, making it difficult to create an unbroken time series
for the whole period. We addressed this problem by deleting SIC codes where the change in classification creates a time
series which is not comparable before and after 1987. This led to the elimination of about 30 percent of the SIC codes with
available data.

24

investment. Although some of the controls are the same as those used in the first section of the paper,
others differ because the question we are now asking is somewhat different. In particular, we are now
focusing on the characteristics of the sectors in the source country, rather than the characteristics of the
sectors in the host country, to understand the pattern of US outward bound foreign investment.
Consequently, we continue to include the source wage and pollution abatement costs in the US. We also
include other factors which could not be identified in the first part of the paper. To capture the role of
factor endowments in the source country, we included the labor/capital ratio. If foreign investors move
abroad to find cheap factors, then we would expect that in a capital-rich country like the United States,
more labor-intensive sectors would be more likely to relocate. Labor is measured as total number of
employees, while capital is the real capital stock. This measure is lagged one period to avoid endogeneity
problems. Total factor productivity productivity growth (TFPG) captures the importance of intangible
assets in motivating foreign investment. We also include import penetration (lagged) as an alternative
measure of intangible assets. We would expect that sectors with a high degree of import penetration in the
USA are not sectors where US multinationals have a high degree of intangible assets. Scale economies
are proxied by the number of employees per firm (SCALE).
Without more detail on the destination of foreign investment, it is difficult to formulate measures
of protection in destination markets, although outbound exports from the United States could be a measure
of a sector’s openness. If foreign investment is attracted to protected sectors and markets that are
“protected” either through trade policies or large transport costs, we would expect a negative relationship
between US exports and the pattern of outbound foreign investment. Exports (lagged) are measured as
the share of export sales in total U.S. output.
If we introduce these additional variables, the relationship between abatement expenditures and
the pattern of outbound US investment becomes insignificant if DFI is measured as a flow. However, the
relationship between the stock of foreign investment and pollution abatement costs remains barely
25

significant. The addition of these control variables suggests that the relationship between abatement
expenditures and the pattern of outbound US investment is not a robust one.
Adding time and industry dummies further reduces the statistical significance of the abatement
cost variable, which then becomes insignificant if DFI is measured as a stock. If DFI is measured as a
flow, the sign on abatement costs becomes negative and significant, suggesting more outbound foreign
investment in sectors where abatement costs as a share of value-added is falling. This result suggests that
sector-specific changes in abatement cost are not significantly associated with outbound U.S. DFI.
Although some other variables retain their significance in explaining the pattern of foreign investment,
adding time and industry dummies generally reduces the statistical significance of all the variables. One
interpretation is that pollution abatement costs are not strongly associated with the pattern of foreign
investment. An alternative interpretation, particularly for the results in columns (3) and (6), is that there is
not sufficient sector-specific time variation in the panel. When we add year and industry dummies to the
specification using direct investment stocks, the R-square climbs to .99. This suggests that most of the
variation in the stock of DFI is primarily explained by year and industry effects, and that there is not
sufficient variation in the data. Nevertheless, there were significant changes in foreign investment
during this period. For example, between 1982 and 1993 mean foreign investment shifted annually from
one sector to another by 2 percent and the standard deviation was 3 percent; some sectors experienced
annual reductions as large as 25 percentage points of overall FDI, others increased by 24 percentage
points. Abatement costs on an annual average changed by .2 percent of value added with a standard
deviation of .3 percent; again, some sectors experienced large reductions (of 4 percent) while in other
sectors the value-added share of abatement costs rose by 4 percentage points.
Future research in this area should attempt to build a longer time series and should also attempt to
break down FDI stocks and flows according to country of destination. To the extent that the pollution
haven hypothesis applies primarily to developing countries, it would be useful to examine the relationship
26

between outward FDI to those countries and abatement costs. Once detailed data on outward foreign
investment over time, by destination country, and by subsector is made available, this exercise will be
possible.
The results in Table 7 suggest that it is difficult to find a robust relationship between the
magnitude of expenditures on pollution abatement and the volume of US investment which goes abroad.
In addition, the point estimates suggest that any impact of abatement costs on the distribution of DFI is
very small, if not zero. These results are not surprising in light of the fact that pollution abatement
expenditures are only a small fraction of overall costs. For example, in the dirtiest industries, abatement
costs accounted for less than 10 percent of value-added. During our sample period, abatement costs in
paper mills accounted for 5 percent of value-added, while abatement costs in organic and inorganic
chemical plants accounted for 8 percent of value-added. This evidence appears to confirm the
conclusions reached by earlier studies such as Walter (1982), who argued that other factors (such as
market size or political risk) were simply more important in determining industrial relocation.

VI.

Concluding Remarks

This paper tests whether multinationals are flocking to developing country "pollution havens" to
take advantage of lax environmental standards. We begin by examining the pattern of foreign investment
in four developing countries: Mexico, Venezuela, Morocco and Cote d'Ivoire. This approach allows us to
control for country-specific factors which could affect the pattern of foreign investment. Using a number
of different measures of pollution, we find some evidence that foreign investors are concentrated in
sectors with high levels of air pollution, although the evidence is weak at best. We find no evidence that
foreign investment in these developing countries is related to abatement costs in industrialized countries.
We proceed to test whether, within industries, there is any tendency for foreign firms to pollute less or

27

more than their local peers. Our proxy for pollution intensity is the use of energy and ‘dirty fuels’, and we
find that foreign plants are significantly more energy efficient and use cleaner types of energy.
We then turn to an analysis of the ‘originating country’ by examining the pattern of outbound US
investment between 1982 and 1993. Although there is some evidence that the pattern of US foreign
investment is skewed towards industries with high costs of pollution abatement, the results are not robust
to the inclusion of other variables. Once we include other controls in the analysis or allow for industry
effects, the results are reversed: outbound foreign investment is highest in sectors with low abatement
costs.
Our theoretical model indicates that the pollution haven hypothesis is unambiguous only in a very
simplistic model. In a more realistic model the effect of regulation on foreign investment could be either
positive or negative, depending on complementarities between abatement and capital. For example, if per
unit abatement costs fall with the scale of output, then the home country firm may expand at home as it
implements pollution abatement in response to regulations. Thus, our finding of no robust correlation
between environmental regulation in industrialized countries and foreign investment in developing
countries need not reflect that relocation due to environmental regulation is ‘too small’ to be noticed in the
data set. The relationship between investment and regulation is not as simple as assumed in a naive
model. It depends on a number of factors, the combined effects of which may be positive, zero or
negative.
We also find that foreign firms are less polluting than their peers in developing countries. This
does not in any way mean that ‘pollution havens’ cannot exist, or that we should cease to worry about
pollution in developing countries. However, our research does suggest that policy makers should pursue
pollution control policy focusing on pollution itself, rather than on investment or particular investors.

28

Bibliography
Birdsall, Nancy and David Wheeler (1992). Trade Policy and Industrial Pollution in Latin
America: Where are the Pollution Havens?" In International Trade and the Environment,
World Bank Discussion Paper No. 159, Patrick Low (Editor), The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.
Brainard, S. Lael (1993). “An Empirical Assessment of the Factor Proportions Explanation of
Multinational Sales.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Number 4583.
Brainard, S. Lael (1997). “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-off Between
Multinational Sales and Trade.” The American Economic Review, 87(4) September 1997, 52044.
Caves, Richard (1982). Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor (1994). "North-South Trade and the Environment." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, No. 3, 755-787.
Dean, Judith M. (1992). "Trade and the Environment: A Survey of the Literature". Background Paper
No. 3, World Development Report, Washington, D.C.
Eskeland Gunnar S. (1994). "A Presumptive Pigovian Tax: Complementing Regulation to Mimic an
Emissions Fee". The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 8, No. 3: 373-394.
Eskeland, Gunnar S., Emmanual Jimenez and Lili Liu (1994). "Energy Pricing and Air Pollution:
Econometric Evidence from Manufacturing in Chile and Indonesia". Policy Research Workin
Paper Series 1323. World Bank, Policy Research Department, Washington, D.C.
Glomsroed, S., T. Johnsen and H. Vennemoe (1992). "Stabilization of CO2: A CGE
assessment".Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94 (1), 53-69.
Guo, Charles C. and James R. Tybout (1994). "How Relative Prices Affect Fuel Use Patterns in
Manufacturing: Plant-Level Evidence from Chile". Policy Research Working Paper Series 1297.
World Bank, Policy Research Department, Washington, D.C.
Grossman, Gene M. a nd Alan B. Krueger (1993). "Environmental Impacts of a North American Free
Trade Agreement". In The U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber, ed. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Grossman, Gene M. and Alan B. Krueger (1995). "Economic Growth and the Environment".
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CX, No. 2, 353-377.
Helleiner, Gerald K (1989). "Transnational Corporations and Direct Foreign Investment". In
HollisChenery and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 2,
chap. 27. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

29

Hettige, Hemamala, Paul Martin, Manjula Singh, and David Wheeler (1995). "The Industrial Pollution
Projection System". Policy Research Working Paper 1431. World Bank, Policy Research
Department , Washington, D.C.
Horstmann, Ignatius J. and James R. Markusen (1989). “Firm-Specific Assets and the Gains from Direct
Foreign Investment”. Economica, February, 56(2210, 41-48.
Jorgenson, D.W. and Peter J. Wilcoxen (1993). "Reducing US carbon dioxide emissions:
An econometric general equilibrium assessment". Resource and Energy Economics, 15, 1-25.
Leonard, H. Jeffrey (1988). "Pollution and the Struggle for the World Product: Multinational
Corporations, Environment, and International Comparative Advantage", Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Low, Patrick and Alexander Yeats (1992). "Do "Dirty" Industries Migrate?" In International Trade
and the Environment. Sponsored by International Trade Division, International Economics
Department, The World Bank, November 21-22. Washington, D.C.
Manne, Alan S. and Richard G. Richels (1990). "CO2 Emission Limits: An Economic Cost
Analysis for the USA". The Energy Journal, Vol. 11 No. 2.
Markusen, James R., Edward R. Morey and Nancy D. Olewiler (1993). "Environmental Policy when
Market Structure and Plant Locations are Endogenous". Journal of Environmental
Economics and
Management, 24, 69-86.
Moss, Diana, and James Tybout (1994). "The Scope for Fuel Substitution in Manufacturing Industries:
A Case Study of Chile and Colombia". World Bank Economic Review 8(1): 49-74.
Motta, Massimo and Jacques-Francois Thisse (1994). "Does Environmental Dumping Lead to
Delocation?" European Economic Review, 48, 563-76.
Ostro, Bart (1994). "Estimating Health Effects of Air Pollution: A Methodology with an Application to
Jakarta", Policy Research Working Paper Series 1301. World Bank, Policy Research Department,
Washington, D.C.
Ostro, Bart, Jose Miguel Sanchez, Carlos Aranda, and Gunnar S. Eskeland (1994). "Air Pollution and
Mortality: Results from a Study of Santiago, Chile", Policy Research Working Paper Series 1453.
World Bank, Policy Research Department, Washington, D.C. Also in Journal of Exposure
Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology, Vol. 6, 1996, 97-114.
Pearson, C. (1987). Multinational Corporations, Environment, and the Third World. Durham:Duke
University Press.
___________, (1985). Down to Business: Multinational Corporations, the Environment, and
Development. Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute.

30

Rock Michael T. (1995). "Pollution Intensity of GDP and Trade Policy: Can the World Bank be Wrong?".
World Development, Vol. 24, No. 3, 471-79.
Selden, Thomas M., and Daqing Song (1994). "Environmental Quality and Development: Is There a
Kuznets Curve for Air Pollution Emissions?" Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, XXVII, 147-62.
Sorsa, Piritta (1994). "Competitiveness and Environmental Standards: Some Exploratory Results".
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series, No. 1249, The World Bank, February.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census, various issues, Manufactures' Pollution
Abatement Capital Expenditures and Operating Cost.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1986). "AP-42. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors.
Supplement A, Stationary Point and Area Sources". Research Triangle Park, N.C. October.
Viscusi, A. Magat, Alan Carlin and Mark Dreyfus (1994). "Environmentally Responsibe
Energy Pricing", in Energy Journal, 15(2): 23-42.
Walter, Ingo, (1982). "Environmentally Induced Industrial Relocation to Developing Countries." In S. J.
Rubin and T.R. Graham, eds., Environment and Trade, New Jersey: Allanheld, Ossun, and Co.
Wheeler, David and Paul Martin (1992). "Prices, Policies, and the International Diffusion of Clean
Technology: The Case of Wood Pulp Production". In:International Trade and the Environment, World
Bank Discussion Paper No 159, Patrick Low (Editor), The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
World Development Report (1992). "Development and the Environment". Oxford University
Press, Inc. New York.

31

Table 1: Panel Regressions for DFI and Pollution Abatement Costs
Cote d'Ivoire

Morocco

Mexico1

Venezuela

Pooled Sample2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Pollution
Abatement Costs

6.95
(2.3)

5.94
(0.3)

6.09
(0.7)

7.69
(0.1)

-27.58
(-2.5)

68.96
(1.0)

23.27
(0.7)

-1.63
(-0.3)

17.04
(0.5)

Herfindahl Index
(Lagged)
(Hindex)

-1.09
(-0.3)

-0.40
(-0.1)

-7.69
(-2.9)

-4.53
(-1.3)

-12.84
(-4.3)

-6.97
(-2.6)

-4.71
(-1.0)

-4.43
(-2.1)

-3.71
(-1.8)

Import Penetration
(Lagged) (MPEN)

0.42
(0.4)

-0.43
(-0.3)

-2.94
(-3.1)

-2.79
(-3.4)

.60
(0.4)

-3.69
(-2.7)

.63
(0.4)

-.72
(-1.0)

-1.71
(-2.9)

Hindex*MPEN

-0.14
(0.0)

0.11
(0.0)

-4.97
(-0.7)

-4.86
(-0.6)

12.75
(3.2)

2.77
(0.5)

-7.86
(-0.6)

3.85
(1.3)

3.58
(1.2)

Regulatory Barriers
Against DFI

--

--

-0.55
(-1.1)

0.43
(1.0)

3.74
(2.0)

2.31
(3.8)

1.13
(1.0)

.004
(0.0)

0.14
(0.3)

Labor/Capital Ratio
(Lagged)

-0.03
(-3.5)

-0.04
(-3.1)

-0.03
(-1.1)

-0.02
(-0.4)

-.84
(-2.5)

.33
(0.6)

1.80
(0.6)

-0.06
(-5.3)

-0.03
(-1.9)

Market Size
(Lagged)

78.43
(12.2)

71.36
(9.5)

10.26
(1.2)

16.57
(1.9)

71.31
(3.9)

70.7
(4.0)

47.44
(4.2)

62.18
(7.3)

62.97
(6.9)

Source Wage

-0.020
(-0.7)

-0.045
(-0.2)

-.177
(-1.3)

.264
(0.4)

-0.015
(-0.4)

-0.151
(-0.8)

.321
(0.2)

-0.03
(-0.8)

-0.07
(-1.7)

Year and Industry
Dummies

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Chi-square
(Hausman) Test for
Fixed versus
Random Effects 3.

--

25.2

--

45.7

--

12.1

--

--

8.6

N

209

209

145

145

253

253

44

607

607

Adjusted R-Square

.77

.81

.21

.33

.22

.43

.46

.25

.33

Note:

T-statistics given in parenthesis. Dependent variable is the share of aggregate foreign investment in a given
year assigned to each individual industry.

1. No lags; data on foreign investment only exists for 1990.
2. Includes country dummy variables. Excludes Mexico, which is a pure cross-section.
3. For a column (2), a value greater than 26 indicates rejection (at the 5 percent level) of the null hypothesis that fixed and
random effect specifications are the same. For column (4), the critical value is 17; for column (6) the critical value is 20, and
for column (9), the critical value is 29.

32

Table 2: Correlations Between Pollution Emission Intensities
and Abatement Costs
Suspended Particles
(SUSSPART)

Biological Oxygen
Demand (BOD)

BOD

-0.08

TOX

0.03

-0.10

Pollution
Abatement
Costs

0.12

-0.13*

Note: A "*" indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent level.

33

Total Toxic Releases
(TOX)

0.80*

Table 3: Cross-Section Time-Series Regressions for DFI with Alternative Specifications and
Alternative Measures of Pollution Emissions (Coefficients on Pollution Abatement or Emissions
Only)
Cote D'Ivoire

Morocco

Venezuela

Mexico

Pooled Sample

Pollution
Abatement
Costs 1/

6.95
(1.1)

5.94
(0.2)

6.09
(0.4)

7.69
(0.2)

-27.58
(-1.3)

68.96
(1.1)

10.283
(0.2)

-1.63
(-0.2)

17.04
(0.7)

Pollution
Abatement
Costs 2/

-0.23
(0.0)

-6.93
(-0.8)

8.88
(0.7)

2.07
(0.1)

-25.45
(-1.3)

52.16
(0.9)

--

-0.97
(-0.1)

3.76
(0.2)

Pollution
Abatement
Costs 3/
(GMM
Estimation)

3.99
(1.0

-22.13
(-0.9)

-12.98
(-0.5)

31.28
(0.3)

-6.84
(-0.9)

10.74
(0.1)

--

1.60
(0.4)

-18.94
(-0.7)

0.062
(1.7)

-5.569
(-0.6)

0.154
(1.6)

0.349
(1.1)

0.020
(1.5)

0.902
(2.2)

0.015
(0.3)

0.087
(2.7)

0.575
(1.5)

BOD

-0.002
(-3.6)

0.011
(0.1)

0.001
(1.2)

-0.002
(0.8)

-0.003
(-2.5)

-0.001
(-0.7)

-0.004
(-1.0)

-0.002
(-2.7)

-0.001
(-0.3)

TOX

0.010
(2.1)

0.012
(0.8)

-0.028
(-2.0)

-0.016
(-1.1)

-0.028
(-2.0)

0.006
(0.6)

0.025
(0.4)

-0.013
(-1.8)

0.007
(0.6)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

SUSSPAR
T

Year and
Industry
Dummy

Notes: T-statistics in parenthesis. Dependent variable is the share of foreign investment in a particular ISIC
category. See Table 1 for full specification. The specification above reproduces the specification in Table
1, but either replaces pollution abatement costs with three different measures of pollution emissions or
changes the basic specification.
1. Allows for group-wise heteroskedasticity.
2. Allows for first-order autocorrelation in the error term.
3. Estimation uses GMM estimation; only abatement costs, wages, and regulatory barriers against DFI are
considered exogenous. Instruments for other variables include first lag and second lags of the exogenous variables
and second lags of the endogenous variables. The only exception is Morocco (see text).

34

Table 4: The Relationship Between Energy Intensity and Pollution Emissions Across Industries: Rank
Correlation Coefficients

Particulates

BOD

TOXLB

TOXUB

Unskilled
Labor

Skilled
Labor

Capital

Particulates

1.00

BOD

0.29*

1.00

TOXLB

0.27*

0.17*

1.00

TOXUB

0.30*

0.19*

0.73*

1.00

Unskilled Labor

-0.15*

-0.16*

-0.16*

0.10*

1.00

Skilled Labor

-0.25*

-0.35*

0.01

0.05

0.36*

1.00

0.09

0.36*

0.38*

0.01

0.48*

1.00

-0.13*

-0.00

0.06

-0.01

-0.20*

-0.33*

Capital
Manufactured Inputs

0.28*
-0.19*
*

*

*

*

*

Raw
Material
Inputs

0.44

0.34

0.26

0.17

-0.33

-0.42

0.06

-0.24*

1.00

Energy

0.58*

0.22*

0.55*

0.52*

0.04

0.04

0.62*

-0.19*

0.34*

35

Energy

1.00

Raw Material Inputs

A "*" indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent level.

*

Manufaactured
Inputs

1.00

Table 5: Energy Intensity as a Determinant of Emission Intensity at the Plant Level, US Data
All Plants
(1)

All Plants
(2)

Lumber and
Wood Products
(Except
Furniture)
(3)

Chemicals and
Allied
Products
(4)

Petroleum
Refining and
Related
Products
(5)

Non-Electrical
Machinery (6)

Energy
Intensity

1880
(29.4)

1859
(29.0)

774
(3.1)

2195
(33.8)

1349
(3.0)

3626
(2.0)

Material
Inputs

72
(2.5)

--

-2
(-0.0)

112
(1.2)

-72
(1.0)

45
(0.3)

SIC
Dummies

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

N

892

893

25

110

67

43

R-Square

.50

.50

.30

.91

.17

.09

Notes: T-statistics in parenthesis. All observations are by firm, for one year only. Columns (1) and (2) include
all firms in 17 industries. Columns (3) through (6) are the four industries among 17 SIC industries for which a
specification with energy and materials as independent variables yields a significant coefficient for energy.

36

Table 6: Determinants of Energy Intensity in Selected Manufacturing Sectors:
Cote d'Ivoire, Mexico, and Venezuela
Côte d'Ivoire

Mexico

Venezuela

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

Foreign
Ownership

-.0085
(-2.0)

.0900
(3.1)

-.0036
(-2.3)

0.0291
(3.0)

-0.0078
(-3.7)

0.0399
(3.1)

Public
Ownership

0.0013
(.8)

-0.1827
(-2.4)

-

-

-

-

Age

0.0001
(.8)

.0027
(2.9)

-

-

-0.0001
(-0.8)

0.0006
(2.2)

Machinery
Imports

-

-

-0.0007
(-0.8)

0.0020
(0.4)

-

-

R and D Intensity

-

-

-0.0340
(-1.2)

0.0885
(0.5)

0.0171
(0.5)

0.0429
(0.2)

Log(Electricity)

-

-

0.0107
(19.2)

0.0798
(23.3)

0.0088
(6.3)

.0643
(25.3)

Log(Employees)

.006
(3.5)

-.058
(-2.4)

-

-

-

-

Log(Skilled
Workers)

-

-

-.0048
(-5.5)

-.0075
(-1.4)

-.0005
(-0.8)

.0043
(1.6)

Log(Unskilled
Workers)

-

-

.0027
(2.6)

-.0258
(-4.1)

-0.0012
(-1.0)

.0253
(-7.0)

Log(Materials)

-.015
(-9.4)

0.016
(1.6)

-.0130
(-17.6)

-.035
(-7.7)

-.0103
(-9.1)

-.0071
(-3.1)

Log(Capital
Stock)

0.004
(3.9)

0.054
(6.2)

.0017
(3.2)

-.0003
(-0.1)

.0019
(2.6)

-0.0215
(-11.6)

R-Square

0.32

.23

0.20

0.24

0.03

.33

N

929

929

4,661

4,651

14,147

14,022

Notes:
In column (1), dependent variable is energy share in output
In column (2), the dependent variable is the electricity share in the plant's total energy use
All models include sector dummy variables (4-digit SIC).
T-values are given in parentheses.

37

Table 7: The distribution of US Outbound Foreign Investment and
Pollution Abatement Costs
Distribution of Foreign
Investment
(FLOW)

Distribution of Foreign
Investment
(STOCK)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.224
(2.0)

0.108
(0.9)

-1.086
(-2.3)

0.450
(2.9)

0.296
(1.8)

0.012
(0.2)

Import Penetration
(Lagged)

-

-0.009
(-0.5)

0.008
(0.2)

-

0.014
(1.0)

-0.017
(-1.2)

Export Share (Lagged)

-

-0.014
(-0.6)

0.010
(0.1)

-

0.047
(2.2)

0.008
(0.4)

Labor/Capital Ratio
(Lagged)

-

-0.036
(-0.8)

-0.122
(-0.5)

-

0.077
(2.1)

0.041
(0.9)

Source Wage

-

0.023
(2.0)

-0.074
(-2.8)

-

0.054
(4.1)

-0.005
(-0.9)

Total Factor Productivity
Growth

-

-0.053
(-1.0)

-0.081
(-1.4)

-

0.023
(0.6)

-0.011
(-1.3)

SCALE (Number of
employees per plant)

-

0.0
(-0.6)

0.0
(0.9)

-

-0.00003
(-1.7)

0.0
(0.7)

Year and SIC Dummies

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

N

392

392

392

197

197

197

R-Square

.01

.05

.33

.09

.26

.99

Pollution Abatement Costs

Notes: All specifications corrected for arbitrary heteroskedasticity. T-statistics in parenthesis.

38

