                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              COURTS: THE LEX MUNDI PROJECT


                                          Simeon Djankov
                                           Rafael La Porta
                                     Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                           Andrei Shleifer


                                         Working Paper 8890
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8890


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2002

We are indebted to Carl E. Anduri, and Melinda L. Eggenberger of Lex Mundi, Samuel A. Nolen of
Richards, Layton and Finger, and Juan Carlos Botero for extensive cooperation throughout this project; to
Erhard Blankenburg, Richard Epstein, Judge Roger Errera, Charles Fried, Edward Glaeser, Oliver Hart,
Roumeen Islam, Simon Johnson, Louis Kaplow, Lawrence Katz, Bert Kritzer, Lord Justice Law, Brian
Ostrom, Guy Pfeffermann, Eric Posner, Judge Richard Posner, Mark Ramseyer, Steven Shavell, Jeremy
Stein, and Lord Woolf for their comments; and to Jose Caballero, Claudia Cuenca, Theodora Galabova,
Mario Gamboa-Cavazos, Olga Ioffe, Alfredo Larrea, Margaret Michel, Juan Manuel Pinzon, Alejandro
Ponce-Rodriguez, Stefka Slavova, Ekaterina Trizlova, and Lihong Wang for excellent research assistance.
This research was funded by the World Bank’s World Development Report 2002, the World Bank’s
Financial Sector, the International Institute of Corporate Governance at Yale SOM, and conducted with the
extensive cooperation of Lex Mundi and Lex Africa member firms. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Courts: the Lex Mundi Project
Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 8890
April 2002
JEL No. K10, K40, K41, K42, O10



                                               ABSTRACT


        In cooperation with Lex Mundi member law firms in 109 countries, we measure and describe the
exact procedures used by litigants and courts to evict a tenant for non-payment of rent and to collect a
bounced check. We use these data to construct an index of procedural formalism of dispute resolution
for each country. We find that such formalism is systematically greater in civil than in common law
countries. Moreover, procedural formalism is associated with higher expected duration of judicial
proceedings, more corruption, less consistency, less honesty, less fairness in judicial decisions, and
inferior access to justice. These results suggest that legal transplantation may have led to an inefficiently
high level of procedural formalism, particularly in developing countries.




Simeon Djankov                                                     Rafael La Porta
Financial Economist                                                Department of Economics
The World Bank                                                     Harvard University
1818 H St. NW                                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
Washington, DC 20433                                               and NBER
                                                                   rafael_laporta@harvard.edu

Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes                                         Andrei Shleifer
Yale School of Management                                          Department of Economics
35 Prospect Street                                                 Harvard University
New Haven, CT 06520                                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                           and NBER
florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu                                  ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction.

       Much of economic analysis – from the theory of the firm, to labor economics, to finance –

is based on the idea that individuals and firms can use enforceable contracts to improve their well-

being. Such key results as the Fundamental Welfare Theorems (Arrow and Hahn 1971) and the

Coase Theorem (Coase 1960) show that welfare-improving contracting can achieve perfect

efficiency. More recently, economists have recognized the limitations of the contracting process,

such as asymmetric information (Stiglitz 2000), free-riding (Olson 1965), and “describability” of

various contingencies (Grossman and Hart 1986). Yet even this literature focuses on the problems

of negotiating contracts and takes their enforcement as free and perfect.

       In economic analysis, the institution that enforces contracts both perfectly and freely is the

courts. This theoretical view of perfect enforcement contrasts sharply with the empirical observation

that courts are often slow, inefficient, and even corrupt. It is the enforcement of contracts by courts,

rather than the negotiation of contracts, that often limits Pareto-improving trade (Johnson, McMillan

and Woodruff 2002). Indeed, informal contract enforcement appears as a solution to court failures

(Macaulay 1963, Galanter 1981, Ellickson 1991).

       In this paper, we attempt to understand in more detail how simple disputes are resolved in

courts. We do so in a comparative study of how a plaintiff can use the official court system to evict

a non-paying tenant and to collect a bounced check in 109 countries around the world. We measure

some of the key structural aspects of the operation of courts and examine their consequences for the

quality of formal dispute resolution.

       The focus on courts is crucial. For many corporations and sophisticated traders, alternative

methods of dispute resolution substitute for courts. Likewise, many less wealthy individuals often


                                                   3
resolve disputes privately, using neighbors, shamans, or violence. Nonetheless, we believe that a

well functioning system of public dispute resolution, particularly for ordinary people, is an essential

element of justice. The Enlightenment idea was precisely to make courts accessible to ordinary

citizens, thereby securing justice and avoiding privatization of enforcement. If ordinary people fail

to find justice in state courts, their likely alternative is not some efficient method of private dispute

resolution, but rather violence or acceptance of injustice.

        In a theoretical model of an ideal court, a dispute between two neighbors can be resolved by

a third on fairness grounds, with little knowledge or use of law, no lawyers, no written submissions,

no procedural constraints on how evidence, witnesses, and arguments are presented, and no appeal

(Shapiro 1981). Yet in reality, most legal systems heavily regulate dispute resolution: they rely on

lawyers and professional judges, regiment the steps that the disputants must follow, regulate the

collection and presentation of the evidence, insist on legal justification of claims and judges’

decisions, give predominance to written submissions, and so on. Such regulations, which we call

procedural formalism or formalism for short, can have profound consequences for the quality of

dispute resolution, particularly in simple disputes material to an average person. For this reason, we

focus on measuring and assessing the consequences of formalism of the legal procedure.

        There are several important reasons why procedural formalism exists, some good and some

bad. The sovereign often has an interest in how the dispute is resolved, to punish undesirable

conduct, to establish precedents, or to promote deterrence, but also to help his friends and hurt his

enemies. Formalism, like all regulation, gives the sovereign more control over the outcomes relative

to the informality of the neighbor model. And like all regulation, it can be used both to enhance

public welfare and to facilitate sovereign abuse of the public. Informal justice may also be subject


                                                   4
to various kinds of subversion: one neighbor may be more powerful than the other, and therefore able

to influence the judge. Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) argue that regulation of dispute resolution can

be used to limit subversion. Likewise, formalism may protect weak members of the community from

judicial and prosecutorial abuse, ensuring fairness and accuracy of the process. As the great German

jurist Rudolf von Jhering exclaimed, “form is the sworn enemy of arbitrary rule, the twin sister of

liberty” (1898, p. 471). Yet the potential benefits of formalism may come at a heavy cost in terms

of delay of adjudication, and the consequent reluctance of disputants to use the legal system.

Moreover, it remains a wide-open question of how much justice formalism really buys.

         We have three broad goals. First, we aim to measure the formalism of the court procedure

around the world. Second, we examine empirically the consequences of formalism for the quality

of the judicial system. We examine both the expected duration of dispute resolution and such crucial

measures of its quality as access to justice, fairness, impartiality, consistency, and honesty. Although

we do not have a direct measure of accuracy of dispute resolution, the measures of consistency and

fairness come relatively close. At least for simple disputes, this analysis enables us to ask whether

formalism secures justice. Third, we attempt to interpret the evidence in light of alternative theories

of institutions. Specifically, we consider the possibility that the transplantation of Western legal

procedures to developing countries may have led to undesirably high levels of formalism.2

         To pursue these goals, in cooperation with Lex Mundi, the largest international association

of law firms, we describe the exact procedures used to resolve two specific disputes in 109 countries.

2
 One additional goal we pursue is to examine other determinants of judicial quality, such as the incentives of judges
and regulators. Proper incentives and controls, such as mandatory time limits on judges and proper compensation
systems for attorneys, have been said to improve quality (Messick 1999). We do not find much evidence for the
proposition that these factors effect judicial quality; we summarize our findings in Section V.




                                                          5
These are the eviction of a residential tenant for non-payment of rent and the collection of a check

returned for non-payment. We described the cases to a law firm in each country in great detail, and

asked for a complete write-up of the legal procedures necessary to dispute these cases in court and

the exact articles of the law governing these procedures. For comparability, the cases were specified

so that the plaintiff has fully complied with the agreement (is 100% right), and the defendant has no

justification at all. We also assumed in both cases that the defendant presents a poorly justified

opposition (so default judgment is not an option) and avoids voluntary payment. To understand how

courts work, we also specified that the case does not settle, and proceeds through the system until

the ultimate judgment and its enforcement.

        The focus on these two specific disputes has a number of advantages. First, they represent

typical situations of default on an everyday contract in virtually every country. The adjudication of

such cases illustrates the enforcement of property rights and private contracts in a given legal

environment. Second, the case facts and procedural assumptions could be tailored to make the cases

comparable across countries. This makes these cases distinct from other situations, such as divorce,

in which cross-country comparability is much harder to achieve. Third, the resolution of these cases

involves lower level civil trial courts in all countries (unless Alternative Dispute Resolution is used).

Because these are the courts whose functioning is most relevant to many of a country’s citizens, the

focus on the quality of such courts is appropriate in a development context. Fourth, we focus on

simple disputes resolved in lower level courts. For more complex disputes, additional issues arise,

and it may not be appropriate to generalize our findings. For example, alternatives to the judicial

system, such as commercial arbitration, are available in many countries to large companies, though

not to ordinary citizens. Perhaps even more importantly, formalism may be essential for justice in


                                                   6
complex disputes even when informality is adequate for the simple cases we consider.3

         Using the data from the participating law firms, we construct measures of formalism

(separately for eviction and for check collection), defined here as the extent to which the regulation

causes dispute resolution to deviate from the neighbor model. Our data cover seven broad aspects

of formalism: (1) the use of professional judges and lawyers as opposed to lay judges and self-

representation, (2) the need to make written as opposed to oral arguments at various stages of the

process, (3) the necessity of legal justification of various actions by either disputants or judges, (4)

the regulation of evidence, (5) the nature of superior review of the first-instance judgment, (6)

engagement formalities during the dispute (such as service of process by a judicial officer), and (7)

the count of the number of independent procedural actions required by law. Each category includes

a number of measures of formalism. From these data, we construct seven sub-indices of different

aspects of formalism, and then aggregate them into an overall index.

         Research in comparative law and legal history suggests that formalism varies systematically

among legal origins (Berman 1983, Merryman 1985, Damaska 1986, Schlesinger et al. 1988). In

particular, civil law countries generally regulate dispute resolution, including the conduct of the

adjudicators, more heavily than do common law countries. What is particularly important about this

observation for our purposes is that most developing countries have inherited much of their legal

procedures from their colonizers. Because legal procedures have been transplanted mostly

involuntarily, and have to a significant extent remained unchanged over decades, legal origin is a


3
  Using the case of the collection of a bounced check also gets us away from the concern that rules governing the
eviction of a non-paying tenant are shaped by socialist sentiment in a country. The fact that the structures of dispute
resolution for eviction and check collection are so similar is inconsistent with the view that socialism drives both.



                                                          7
useful instrument for formalism. This also suggests that formalism might be a heritage of the

colonial past rather than an efficient response to the conditions of each country.

        Our data provide a striking empirical confirmation for the proposition that dispute resolution,

as measured by our indices, is more formalized in civil than in common law countries. Legal origins

alone explain around 40% of the variation in formalism of dispute resolution among 109 countries.

In nearly all dimensions, we find greater deviation from the informal neighbor ideal in civil law (and

especially French civil law) countries. This result holds for both eviction and check collection. We

also find that adjudication is more formalized in the less developed than in the rich countries.

        Formalism is not in itself proof of inefficiency: it may serve political goals of the state,

control the subversion of the legal system, or guarantee fairness and accuracy of trials. Indeed, there

is nothing normatively significant about the neighbor model; we simply use it to organize

measurement. Moreover, it is difficult to believe that the optimal amount of formalism in a modern

legal system is zero. The question is what are the consequences of formalism for judicial quality.

        Having established these basic differences in formalism among legal origins, we examine

several aspects of judicial quality. From the participating law firms, we obtain estimates of the

expected duration of our specific disputes in calendar days, from the original filing of a complaint

to the ultimate enforcement of judgment. In addition, we use indicators of judicial quality from other

data sources, covering such areas as judicial efficiency, enforceability of contracts, access to justice,

human rights protection, and corruption. Last, we use data from the World Business Environment

Survey of small firms on the fairness, consistency, honesty, and other aspects of the legal system.

        We find that, holding per capita income constant, procedural formalism is a strong predictor

of expected duration of dispute resolution. Higher formalism also predicts lower judicial efficiency,


                                                   8
higher corruption, lower honesty and consistency of the system, less fairness, and inferior access to

justice. These results hold both in ordinary least squares regressions, and in instrumental variable

estimates where legal origin is used as an instrument for formalism. The results hold for both

eviction and check collection. In our data, there is no evidence that formalism secures justice.

        There are two broad interpretations of this evidence. On the first, formalism represents an

efficient adaptation to the conditions of different countries, with countries exhibiting lower levels

of law and order “requiring” higher formalism. On this interpretation, OLS evidence is simply a

reflection of country heterogeneity: formalism is desirable but does not fully compensate for the lack

of law and order. On the second – more direct – interpretation of the evidence, many countries

exhibit excessive levels of judicial formalism, at least for simple disputes. The fact that many

countries have inherited their legal procedures from their colonizers, and that legal origin explains

such a large share of variation in levels of formalism, supports the second theory over the first. The

exogenous component of formalism predicts both long duration and low quality of adjudication.

        The findings reported in this paper advance the previous research in three distinct ways.

First, the paper takes the research on the quantitative measurement of institutions in a new direction:

the study of courts. Finding objective measures of institutional structure is sometimes more useful

than just focusing on survey assessments of quality, as is often done, because it may point to the

specific directions of efficiency-improving reform. Second, with respect to the study of courts, the

paper is novel in attributing both their efficiency and their ability to deliver justice to the

characteristics of the legal procedure, rather than to general underdevelopment of the country or to

poor management practices. Third, the paper links both the lack of efficiency of courts and their

inability to deliver justice to the transplantation of legal systems. As such, it supports the hypothesis


                                                   9
that transplantation is in part responsible for the structure and quality of the existing institutions.



II.     Conceptual Issues.

Broad Theories

        Shapiro (1981, p. 1) describes an idealized model of a court as follows: “The root concept

employed here is a simple one of conflict structured in triads. Cutting quite across cultural lines, it

appears that whenever two persons come into a conflict that they cannot themselves solve, one

solution appealing to common sense is to call upon a third for assistance in achieving a resolution.

So universal across time and space is this simple invention of triads that we can discover almost no

society that fails to employ it. And from its overwhelming appeal to common sense stems the basic

political legitimacy of courts everywhere. In short, the triad for the purposes of conflict resolution

is the basic social logic of courts, a logic so compelling that courts have become a universal political

phenomenon.” In this universal model, the resolution of a dispute among two neighbors by a third

is guided by common sense and custom. It does not rely on formal law and certainly does not

circumscribe the procedures that the neighbors employ to address their differences.

        Even though Shapiro may have captured the essential “courtness” of courts, it is striking how

far the courts everywhere deviate from this ideal. They employ professional judges and lawyers,

rather than neighbors, to resolve disputes. They follow heavily regimented procedures, restricting

how claims and counter-claims can be presented, how evidence can be interpreted, and how various

parties can communicate with each other. Rather than holding an informal meeting, many courts

assemble written records of the proceedings, and allow disputants to appeal the decisions of a judge.

Rather than adhere to Shapiro’s ideal, most jurisdictions heavily regulate their civil procedures.


                                                  10
        So why isn’t the informal model of a court what we see in reality? The reasons for regulating

dispute resolution are similar to those for regulating any other kind of activity: the sovereign has

either a public or a private reason for wishing a different outcome than that attained by the neighbor

model. Perhaps most importantly, as emphasized by Shapiro, most courts are associated with the

state, and sovereigns often have an interest in how disputes are resolved. They might wish to punish

some undesirable conduct to a greater extent than a judge-neighbor would, to establish precedents,

or to reduce errors relative to informal adjudication. They might alternatively wish disputes to be

resolved so as to favor themselves, or their friends, or their political supporters, as well as to punish

their enemies and political opponents. They might also wish to make sure that disputes are resolved

in a consistent way across their domains, so as to promote trade or political uniformity. They may

indeed use courts to promote policy innovations of sovereign interest, whether good or bad. To

achieve these goals, sovereigns regulate the judicial procedure to ensure that the “judges are no more

than the mouth that pronounces the words of the law, mere passive beings, incapable of moderating

either its force or rigour” (Montesquieu [1748] 1984, p. 194).

        A further reason to regulate dispute resolution is that informal triad justice is vulnerable to

subversion by the powerful. As Shapiro points out, as soon as a neighbor has ruled in favor of one

of the disputants, it becomes two against one rather than a balanced triad. If two neighbors can

always win against one, it obviously becomes in the interest of each disputant to influence the judge.

Their ability to do so, in turn, is the crucial determinant of the viability of the triad system. If one

of the two disputants is economically and politically more powerful than the other, he can encourage

the supposedly impartial judge to favor him. He can do so with carrots, such as bribes and promises

of future favors, or with sticks, such as intimidation and violence. The other side of this coin is


                                                   11
access to justice: the less advantaged members of a society must expect justice rather than abuse

from the state or powerful opponents. Without formalism, justice might be impossible to achieve.

         A leading Spanish scholar made this case a century ago: “The importance of procedural

laws dwells primarily and foremost in that they guarantee and regulate the individual’s right of

defense against all other individuals and the State itself, which in the exercise of the judicial power

could violate this right… In criminal law many crimes can be established—and in fact they have

been established—for the whim of the legislators; for the demands of the forms of government; for

religious and social concerns, and many crimes may also be abolished, without the social foundation

being fatally compromised. Yet no society or people can convict the citizens without hearing them;

without allowing them to justify; without granting them time and facilitate the means and conditions

to defend themselves. And if this happens, such society and such people, corrupted by the repugnant

leper of despotism, start to disintegrate and rapidly die, for having within their bowels a poisonous

virus, incompatible with the vital principle of society” (López-Moreno 1901, p. 43).

       For these, and possibly other reasons, most jurisdictions in the world, while adopting the

triad model in broad outline, heavily regulate its implementation. As a consequence, legal

procedures are universally more formalized than the neighbor model would suggest. Moreover, as

legal historians have long recognized, is that there are different broad traditions of such regulation,

intimately related to the civil versus common law origin of the country’s laws. These traditions have

derived from Roman and English law respectively, and were transplanted to many countries through

conquest and colonization (by France, Germany and Spain in the case of civil law, and England in

the case of common law). Although legal systems of most countries have evolved since colonial

times, recent evidence shows that important features of legal origin are often preserved through the


                                                  12
centuries (e.g., La Porta et al. 1998, 1999).

       Different writers have different theories of how legal origin has shaped legal procedure in

general, and formalism in particular. Some, such as Hayek (1960) and Merryman (1985), attribute

the differences to the ideas of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution. In France, the

revolutionaries and Napoleon did not trust the judges, and instituted heavily codified judicial

procedures as a way to control judicial discretion. According to Schlesinger et al. (1988), in civil

law countries “the procedural codes are meant to be essentially all-inclusive statements of judicial

powers, remedies, and procedural devices.” Consistent with von Jehring’s logic, procedural

formalism was seen as a guarantee of freedom. In England and the United States, in contrast,

lawyers and judges were on the “right” side of the revolutions, and hence the political process

accommodated a great deal more judicial independence. In the common law tradition, “a code is

supplemental to the unwritten law, and in construing its provisions and filling its gaps, resort must

be had to the common law” (Schlesinger et al. 1988). As a consequence, less formalism is required

in the judicial procedure.

       Other writers, including Dawson (1960), Berman (1983), Damaska (1986), and Glaeser and

Shleifer (2002) argue that the procedural differences between common and civil law go back to the

12th and 13th centuries. Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) attribute greater formalism to the need to protect

law enforcers from coercion by disputing parties through violence and bribes. This threat of coercion

was greater in the less peaceful France than in the more peaceful England, where neighborly dispute

resolution by juries (coming closer to Shapiro’s ideal) was more feasible. The different approaches

to legal procedure – motivated by the different law and order environments of England and France




                                                  13
– were then transplanted through conquest and colonization through most of the rest of the world.4

        The fact that most countries in the world inherited significant parts of their legal procedures

– often involuntarily – is of great consequence to our analysis. At the econometric level, it suggests

that legal origin can be used as an instrument for the degree of formalism of the legal procedure. At

the substantive level, the nature of transplantation enables us to distinguish two hypotheses. If

countries select their legal procedures voluntarily, then one can argue that greater formalism is an

efficient adaptation to a weaker law and order environment. If, however, legal procedures are

transplanted through colonization, the efficient adaptation model does not apply. Rather, we can

attribute the consequences of legal formalism to the exogenously determined features of the legal

procedure, and in this way consider the efficiency of alternative rules.



What is procedural formalism?

        The differences in the broad approaches to legal procedure between common and civil law

are reflected in potentially measurable areas of procedural formalism, which we call formalism for

short. Below, we consider 7 such broad areas.

        First, many countries rely on professional judges and lawyers in the operations of a court.

Professional judges often work for the government. This ensures that the sovereign’s preferences

are recognized, but also enables the sovereign to protect judges, making them less vulnerable to

subversion. Professional judges are also necessary when the sovereign insists on judgment in law

rather than equity. By prohibiting direct participation of private parties in the legal process without


4
  On legal transplantation, see Watson (1974), La Porta et al. (1998), and Berkowitz et al. (2002). Other recent
work on optimal institutional design includes Aghion and Alesina (2002).


                                                        14
a duly licensed representative–who has to abide by tight standards of professional conduct and is

subject to close supervision–, the sovereign also raises the level of control over the judicial process.

This may serve to advance the sovereign goals as well as to prevent subversion, since a lawyer would

not allow their client’s improper appeals before the judge when their professional license is at stake.

       Second, many countries mandate the use of written as opposed to oral presentation at various

stages of the procedure. This preference for written over oral presentation raises accountability and

facilitates sovereign control over the judicial process. When every piece of evidence must be

presented in court with a lawyer’s memo, with a copy of such memo signed and sealed by the clerk,

and when every motion, exception, or piece of evidence must be accepted or rejected by the judge

in writing and signed, the entire procedure can be reproduced and subject to a thorough review by

an independent third party. A written record with multiple copies prevents a biased judgment based

on the sudden disappearance of a key piece of evidence or of the entire file.

        Third, many countries require legal justification of civil complaints as well as judicial

decisions – a clear attack on the informality of the neighbor model. The reasons are again clear: the

sovereign pursuing his interests and preventing subversion wants judges ruling according to his law

rather than exercising discretion inherent in informality. Decisions motivated by religious, racial or

other prejudices of a judge can be avoided by demanding full justification of judgments on specific

articles of the law and legal reasons open to review.

       Fourth, every country regulates the manner in which evidence is gathered and presented or

banned in court. To prevent biased selection, judges are banned from rejecting evidence requested

by the parties. Hearsay is prohibited because it cannot be controverted in open court. Mandatory pre-

qualification of questions by the judge and prohibition of partisan interrogation prevent harassment


                                                  15
of witnesses. Rules on authenticity and weight of evidence intend to preclude biased or unfounded

assessments of facts. In all these and other ways, the regulation of evidence can serve to achieve the

state’s goals and reduce the dangers of subversion.

       Fifth, many countries rely on comprehensive appeal procedures and extensive superior review

of trial courts’ decisions. Written records are complementary with appeals; without a record, the

appeal must be limited or a trial must be held de novo. More generally, both written records and

appeals are part of sovereign control of dispute resolution, used to assess, evaluate, and reverse

judicial decisions should the superior court so desire. Both the pursuit of sovereign goals and the

protection of judges from subversion are promoted through such arrangements.

       Sixth, all countries regulate how and when a party can be considered bound by the court

proceedings through engagement formalities.        These include rules of notification and other

procedures, such as mandatory pre-trial reconciliation, that must be used before a party can be

brought to court. These rules are justified by the need to guarantee the defendant’s right to defend.

“The most elementary requirement of due notice is that each party should receive notice of the other

side’s case. This is the province of that complex bundle of rules, often very technical, concerning

‘service’ of writs and other formal procedural documents. These rules are intended to provide a safe

and verifiable means of giving each party proper notice of proceedings” (Andrews, 1994).

       Finally, many countries have very detailed regulations that control the proceedings step by

step. Many of these steps can be best understood from the perspective of controlling errors as well

as subversion: they are intended to ensure that a party cannot gain advantage in a trial by unfairly

manipulating the process. For example, a certain number of days must elapse between one action

and the next to ensure that the affected party has had enough opportunity to respond.


                                                 16
       This discussion suggests that formalism can often be rationalized from the perspective of

sovereign’s public or private reasons to regulate. The empirical questions that the discussion raises

are: how can we measure formalism in dispute resolution in different countries?; does it vary

systematically among legal origins?; and is the variation systematically related to the quality of the

legal system? Ultimately, the optimal level of formalism is an empirical question. Below, we

describe our approach to the measurement of formalism and the evaluation of its consequences.



III. Methodology.

Data Collection Procedures

       The data used in this paper are derived from questionnaires answered by attorneys at Lex

Mundi and Lex Africa member firms. Lex Mundi and Lex Africa are international associations of

law firms, which include as their members law firms with offices in 115 countries. Of the 115

countries, Lex Mundi members in six did not accept our invitation to join the project, and these six

jurisdictions (Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Nicaragua, Northern Ireland, Scotland, St. Kitts and Nevis)

were removed from the sample. We have received and codified data from all the others.

       The 109 cooperating law firms received a questionnaire designed by the authors with the

advice of practicing attorneys from Argentina, Belgium, Botswana, Colombia, Mexico, and the

United States. The questionnaire covered the step-by-step evolution of an eviction and a check

collection procedure before local courts in the country’s largest city. In presenting the cases, we

provided the respondent firm with significant detail, including the amount of the claim, the location

and main characteristics of the litigants, the presence of city regulations, the nature of the remedy

requested by the plaintiff, the merit of the plaintiff’s and the defendant’s claims, and the social


                                                 17
implications of the judicial outcomes. Furthermore, to understand how courts work, we specified

that there is no settlement. These standardized details enabled the respondent law firms to describe

the procedures explicitly and in full detail, and allowed us to get around the problem that different

procedures arise in different circumstances. Our approach is preferred to just a general reading and

codification of laws, where comparability across countries might not be achieved with similar

precision. Moreover, the focus on two distinct cases—eviction and check collection—allowed us

to deal with different types of procedures in sample countries, and thus provided a robustness check

for our indices of regulation of dispute resolution. Finally, we have discovered that even the largest

law firms in most countries employed individuals familiar with eviction and check collection

procedures, generally because they have worked on such cases for their clients.

       The questionnaires provided to law firms were divided into two parts: (1) description of the

procedure of the hypothetical case step by step, and (2) multiple choice questions. The following

aspects of the procedure were covered: (1) step by step description of the procedure, (2) estimates

of the actual duration at each stage, (3) indication of whether written submissions were required at

each stage, (4) indication of specific laws applicable at each stage, (5) indication of mandatory time

limits at each stage, (6) indication of the form of the appeal, and (7) the existence of alternative

administrative procedures.     Multiple-choice questions were used both to collect additional

information and to check the presentations and the uniformity of concepts used at the initial stage.

       Prior to launching the project, the model questionnaire and two sample answers (the U.S. and

Colombia) were sent to and completed by Lex Mundi members in five countries, which represent

different legal institutions and different levels of economic development (France, Germany, Jordan,

Kenya, and India). Their answers were used to improve the questionnaire. All firms responding in


                                                 18
the general round received sample answers for Colombia, France, Germany and the U.S. (represented

by New York City). The completion of the questionnaires required extensive interaction by

telephone and email between the authors and the attorneys at law firms. At each firm, the answers

were prepared by a member of the Litigation Department, and reviewed by a member of the General

Corporate and Commercial Department, which created an internal check within the firm. Two

lawyers in each law firm, from different departments, were required to read, approve, and sign the

questionnaire. As an additional check, the law firms were required to indicate when a particular law

governed the relevant stage of the procedure, and to provide a copy of that law.

         The answers provided by member law firms were coded using the descriptions of the

procedures and answers to multiple-choice questions. In most cases, coding was followed by an

additional round of questions to the completing attorneys aimed to clarify the inconsistencies in their

answers. In our preliminary presentation of these data, several judges and litigation experts from

different countries recommended exploring incentives for attorneys as an alternative determinant of

efficiency. We subsequently asked all participant law firms a set of questions dealing with this issue.

Finally, to ensure comparability, the count of independent procedural actions was reviewed and

returned to every law firm for confirmation.



The Variables

       We wish to measure the regulation of dispute resolution relative to Shapiro’s (1981)

hypothetical benchmark of a neighbor resolving a dispute among two others. Comparative law

textbooks and manuals of civil procedure point to several areas where the laws of different countries

regulate such dispute resolution differently. In our choice of the areas of regulation of dispute


                                                  19
resolution, we were particularly guided by the Civil Procedure-International Encyclopaedia of Laws

published by Kluwer Law International. The Encyclopedia covers 17 countries from different legal

origins, and discusses such broad areas of civil procedure as judicial organization, jurisdiction,

actions and claims, nature of proceedings, legal costs, evidence, enforcement of judgments, and

arbitration. Some of the areas covered in the Encyclopedia were not relevant to the simple disputes

we considered. Others, such as ADR, are covered briefly in our survey, although we focus on courts.

Appendix 1 presents the relationship between the topics covered in the Encyclopedia’s volume on

Civil Procedure for France and the indices used in this paper.

       We focus on seven areas of formalism, and codify the answers provided by Lex Mundi firms

from the perspective of the neighbor model. Below, we briefly describe our approach to organizing

these data. The exact definitions of the variables are contained in Table 1.

       The first area covers the required degree of professionalism of the main actors in the judicial

process, namely judges and lawyers. This comprises three specific areas. First, a basic jurisdictional

distinction is between general and specialized courts. For the simple cases we consider, access to

specialized courts generally entails procedural simplification aimed at “mass production” (similar

to traffic courts in the U.S.). As a consequence, we take the resolution of disputes in specialized

courts to be closer to the neighbor model than that in a general jurisdiction court.

       Second, we distinguish between judges who have undergone complete professional training,

and arbitrators, administrative officers, practicing attorneys, merchants, or any other lay persons who

may be authorized to hear or decide the case. In some countries (e.g., New Zealand, United Arab

Emirates) all disputes between landlords and tenants are resolved by housing tribunals composed of




                                                  20
neighbors or by representatives of associations of landlords and tenants. Such non-professional

judges are closer to the neighbor model.

       Third, in some countries it is mandatory to have an attorney to appear before the judge, while

in others it is entirely voluntary or even prohibited. Evidently, the absence of legal representation is

closer to the neighbor model. Indeed, in the absence of such representation, the judge frequently

assumes the position of a mediator guiding the parties to an agreement.

       Using the data provided by law firms, we combine these three pieces of information to

construct the “professional versus laymen” index for each of the two disputes for each country.

       The second area we consider is the preeminence of written versus oral presentation at each

stage of the procedure, including filing, service of process, defendant’s opposition, evidence, final

arguments, judgment, notification of judgment, and enforcement of judgment. We take oral

presentation to be closer to the neighbor model, and aggregate this information for each country and

each case into the index of “written versus oral” elements.

       The third area is the need for legal justification (meaning reference to the legal reasons and

articles of the law) in the complaint and in the judgment, as well as the necessity of basing the

judgment in the law as opposed to equity. In many countries, a judgment must be justified by

statutory law or settled precedents. In other countries, judgment must still be justified, but in equity

rather than in law. In still other countries, judicial decisions require no justification whatsoever.

Since the neighbor model presumably does not call for such legal justifications, we aggregate this

information into an index of “legal justification.”

       The fourth area is statutory regulation of evidence. The rules of evidence are sometimes

considered to be a key factor in differentiating the overall efficiency of legal procedures among


                                                  21
countries (Langbein 1985). First, in some countries, the judge cannot request evidence not requested

by the parties, a restriction on the neighbor model. Second, the judge in some countries cannot

refuse to collect or admit evidence requested by the parties, even if the judge feels this evidence is

irrelevant to the case. This, too, presents a restriction on the discretion of the judge in the neighbor

model. Third, hearsay evidence is not admissible in some countries while, in others, the judge can

weigh it. Presumably, the inadmissibility of out-of-court statements is a restriction on judicial

freedom in the neighbor model. Fourth, in some jurisdictions, the judge must pre-qualify a question

before it is posed to the witness while, in others, parties may ask witnesses questions without such

pre-qualification. We take the latter scenario as more compatible with the neighbor model. Fifth,

in some jurisdictions, only original documents and certified copies are admissible, a restriction not

present in other jurisdictions. Presumably, the neighbor model would not have these restrictions.

Sixth, in some countries, authenticity and the weight of evidence are defined by law; in others, they

are not. In the neighbor model, we would not expect the evidence to be subjected to rigid rules on

admissibility and weight. Seventh, in some countries, but not others, there is mandatory recording

of evidence, designed to facilitate the superior authority’s control over the judge. We do not take

such recording to be consistent with the neighbor model. As before, we aggregate these seven

dimensions into the index of “statutory regulation of evidence.”

       The fifth area of regulation of formalism is the control of the superior review of the first

instance judgment. The scope of appellate review determines the level of sovereign control over the

trial court proceedings (Damaska, 1986). In general, we take the control of a judge by a superior

court as inconsistent with the neighbor model, and consider a variety of mechanisms of superior

review. First, in some countries, the enforcement of judgment is automatically suspended until the


                                                  22
resolution of the appeal, which substantially reduces the importance of the first instance judgment.

In others, the suspension of enforcement is either non-automatic, or even not allowed. We take the

automatic suspension as being inconsistent with the neighbor model. Second, in some countries, the

review and appeal of judicial decisions are comprehensive. In others, more compatibly with the

neighbor model, only new evidence or issues of law can be reviewed on appeal, or the judgment

cannot be appealed at all. Third, some countries, but not others, allow interlocutory appeals (those

of interim judicial decisions), which we take to be incompatible with the neighbor model. We

aggregate these three aspects of review into an “index of control of superior review.”

       The sixth area is engagement formalities that must be observed before a party is legally

bound by the court proceedings. In some countries a lawsuit cannot be initiated unless a formal pre-

trial conciliation is attempted between the parties. The notification procedures also vary markedly

among countries. In some places, the complaint can be notified to the defendant by the plaintiff

himself or by his attorney, or simply by mailing a letter. In others, the defendant cannot be held

accountable unless he is served the claim by an appointed court officer. Finally, in some countries

the judgment is deemed notified to the parties when pronounced in open court; in others it must be

personally notified to the parties by a dully appointed court employee. We submit that entirely

voluntary pre-trial conciliation and flexible rules of notification of process and judgment are more

compatible with the neighbor model. These three dimensions are aggregated into the index of

“engagement formalities.”

       The seventh area is the count of independent procedural actions involved in pursuing a claim

through a court, covering the filing and service of a complaint, trial and judgment, and enforcement.

An independent procedural action is defined as every step in the procedure, mandated by the law


                                                 23
or by court regulation, which demands interaction between the parties or between them and the judge

or court officer, such as filing a motion or attending a hearing. We also count as an independent

procedural action every judicial or administrative writ or resolution, such as issuing judgment or

entering a writ of execution, which is legally required to advance the proceedings until the

enforcement of judgment. Actions are always assumed to be simultaneous if possible, so procedural

events that may be fulfilled in the same day and place are only counted as one action.5 In the

idealized neighbor model, there would be only three procedural actions: (1) a claimant would request

the judge’s intervention, (2) the judge and the claimant would together meet the defendant and the

judge would issue a decision following a discussion, and (3) the judgment would be enforced. As

the evidence below shows, in some countries, checks can be collected and tenants evicted in just 8

or 9 steps, while in others it takes 40 to 45 steps – a far cry from the neighbor model. We aggregate

these counts into an index of “independent procedural actions” and normalize the index to fall

between zero and one based on the minimum and the maximum number of actions among countries.

         Having assembled the data, we combine the seven sub-indexes into the index of formalism.

We scale each subindex to fall between zero and 1, so the formalism index falls between 0 and 7,

with 7 representing, according to our conception, the greatest distance from the neighbor model. The

exact method of the construction of the formalism index is not crucial, since the various sub-indices

generally point in the same direction as to which countries regulate adjudication more heavily.




5
  We only count the minimum number of independent procedural actions required to bring the case to completion. Thus,
the appointment of a lawyer is only counted as a step if legal representation is mandatory. Notifications of interlocutory
decisions that do not require further interaction between the parties and the judge or court officer (as when the clerk
makes an entry into the notification book) are not counted as separate steps since they are ancillary to the decision.



                                                           24
         Our data also enable us to provide some information on the quality of dispute resolution (see

Table 1 for the description of the data). One measure of quality is an estimate – in calendar days –

of duration of the process of dispute resolution by the lawyers who completed the questionnaires.

Duration is measured as the number of calendar days counted from the moment the plaintiff files

the lawsuit in court, until the moment of actual repossession (eviction) or payment (check). This

measure includes both the days where actions take place and waiting periods between actions. The

participating firms make separate estimates of the average duration until the completion of service

of process, the issuance of judgment (duration of trial), and the moment of payment or repossession

(duration of enforcement).6 To the extent that we are interested in the ability of an ordinary person

to use the legal system, these estimates of duration are highly relevant for efficiency.

         In addition to the data from the questionnaires, we use data from surveys of business people

on the quality of the legal system. Some standard surveys we rely on include measures of the

efficiency of the judicial system, law enforcement quality, equality of access to non-discriminatory

justice, human rights, and corruption. In addition, we use information from small firm assessments

of various aspects of the quality of the legal system, including consistency, honesty, and fairness,

contained in the World Business Environment Survey. These data will be used to shed light on the

crucial question: does formalism secure justice?




6
  Law firms also provide us with estimates of the minimum and the maximum amount of time in calendar days each case
could take given its specifics. This request helped lawyers to focus on the average length of time and not just think about
the worst or best case they had encountered.

                                                           25
IV. Procedural formalism.

        Table 2 presents our data on procedural formalism, with sub-indices and the overall index.

Table 2a focuses on eviction, and Table 2b on check collection (Appendices 2A and 2B provide the

data on each variable in the sub-indices for all countries). The countries are arranged by legal origin,

and the tables report the means and the medians by legal origin, as well as the tests of the differences

in means and medians across legal origins.

        Some examples illustrate the data. In New Zealand, the eviction of a non-paying tenant is

handled by a specialized limited jurisdiction housing court, the “Tenancy Tribunal”. The cases are

decided by lay judges called “adjudicators”, some of which do not even hold a law degree. Attorneys

are not prohibited but strongly discouraged, so the overwhelming majority of cases are handled

without the assistance of a lawyer. The proceedings are conducted orally, and most cases are decided

in a single hearing. The presentation of the complaint, the opposition, the evidence, and the

arguments, all take place at the hearing. The judgment is normally announced in court at the end of

the hearing. The complaint is an informal document that briefly describes the facts and controversy

in layperson’s language. Legal reasoning and justification in specific articles of the law are neither

required nor expected. The judgment may be motivated on either law or equity, as long as written

reasons are provided. Evidence is scarcely regulated; it need not be on oath, it can be oral or written,

and it is not bound by strict rules on administration and evaluation. The tenant and the landlord are

both entitled to attend and be heard, to call evidence and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.

The Tenancy Tribunal may call for and receive as evidence any statement, document, information,

matter or thing that in its opinion may assist to deal effectively with the case before it. Appeal of

first instance judgments is available, but only a tiny fraction of the decisions are appealed and it does


                                                   26
not automatically suspend the enforcement of judgment. Interlocutory appeals are prohibited.

Notifications are normally by mail, without formalities or mandatory intervention of judicial officers.

The entire procedure only takes ten Independent Procedural Actions from filing to actual

enforcement of judgment. The formalism index for eviction in New Zealand is 1.25.

       In Portugal, in contrast, evictions are handled by a professional judge at a civil district court,

the “Tribunal de Comarca.” The landlord needs to appoint a lawyer. The proceedings are mostly

conducted in written form and most of the interaction among the parties and the judge is through

written documents filed before the court. The complaint, the answer to the complaint, the answer

to the opposition and to every motion filed by the parties must be in writing. The complaint must

comply with formal requirements specified by law, and it must be expressly motivated in law and

in facts. The court must verify compliance with formal requirements before admitting the lawsuit.

Judgment is rendered in writing and fully justified in law and facts. Judgment must be motivated

exclusively on legal grounds (not on equity). The judge takes the main responsibility for gathering

and sifting the evidence, and he must pre-qualify the questions before they are asked of the

witnesses. Appeal is comprehensive and it automatically suspends enforcement of judgment.

Interlocutory appeals are broadly allowed. Notifications are mostly by mail. Finally, the procedure

takes at least 22 Independent Procedural Actions from filing to enforcement. The formalism index

for eviction in Portugal is 4.54.

       Consider next check collection, shown in Table 2B. In the United Kingdom, the procedure

for the collection of a bounced check is in most cases dismissed without a trial because the claimant

obtains a summary judgment on the basis that the defendant has no real prospect of defending the

claim. In most cases parties act without legal representation. The proceedings are conducted at an


                                                  27
oral hearing attended by the parties and the judge. The claim is filed in writing, albeit informally.

Judgment is normally given immediately after the hearing. Legal justification of claims is neither

required not expected. Allocation questionnaires, explained in layperson’s language, are sent to both

parties to assess the expected burden and duration of the proceedings, so that the court can plan

accordingly. Written reasons for judgment are not generally given, unless one party wishes to appeal.

Judgment may be motivated on law or on equity grounds. Evidence is mostly gathered and

presented by the parties and freely weighted by the judge. It is not mandatory to have a written

record of all evidence introduced at trial. The right to appeal is not automatic; permission to appeal

must be requested before the judge and is frequently denied. The claim is notified to the defendant

by mail and service is deemed effective on the second day after posting. The defendant must file an

acknowledgment of service to prevent a default judgment. Judgment is normally notified in court.

Finally, the procedure takes 12 Independent Procedural Actions from filing to actual enforcement.

The formalism index for check collection in the United Kingdom is 2.58.

         The collection of a bounced check in Austria is tried before a regular commercial court.

Legal representation is very common in all cases and mandatory beyond certain limit (US$3,500).

The proceedings are mostly conducted in written form and most of the interaction among the parties

and the judge is through written documents filed before the court. As a matter of principle, the

judgment shall be announced orally immediately at the end of the final hearing, which is not the

practice, though. If orally pronounced, it must be drawn in writing within four weeks. The claim

must be fully justified and it must comply with formal requirements to be admissible. It is not

mandatory but very common to include specific articles of the law. In the case of legal representation

a qualified attorney must sign the complaint. The judgment must contain a detailed description of


                                                 28
the proceedings, including particulars of the parties/attorneys, competent court, reference number,

name of judge, date of decision, relief sought, motions by both parties, results of evidence, reasons,

applicable law, decision, and an instruction on parties’ right to appeal. By law, there must be a

written or magnetic record of all evidence introduced at trial. Appeal is filed before the court of first

instance and it automatically suspends enforcement. Notifications are heavily regulated. The

complaint must be personally delivered to the defendant’s residence together with a payment order

containing legal instructions on the defendant’s right to oppose. After a second unsuccessful attempt

of delivery, a notice of deposit is affixed to the defendant’s dwelling. Finally, at least 20

Independent Procedural Actions are required to complete the procedure. The formalism index for

check collection in Austria is 3.52.

        More generally, as Table 2 shows, for both check collection and eviction, the data clearly

reveal that common law countries have least formalized, and French civil law countries most

formalized dispute resolution, with other legal origins in the middle. For eviction, the differences

hold for all sub-indices, but are stronger in some areas (legal justification, number of independent

procedural actions) than in others (evidence, superior review). The differences in formalism among

civil law countries (French, German, socialist and Scandinavian) are less pronounced, and typically

not as statistically significant (except that German and Scandinavian origin countries regulate less

heavily than Socialist and French ones). For check collection, the pattern of results is similar, except

that one of the sub-indices is lower in French civil law countries than in common law countries. We

return to this evidence more systematically in the regression analysis presented in Table 5, but note

that the findings are broadly consistent with the thrust of the comparative law literature.




                                                   29
       Table 3 examines the consistency of this evidence across the various sub-indices measuring

alternative aspects of procedural formalism, as well as across the two cases. The evidence presents

a clear picture of consistency. The various sub-indices are positively correlated with the overall

index within each case. Moreover, across the two types of cases, the same sub-indices are strongly

positively correlated with each other. The correlation of the formalism index between check

collection and eviction is 0.83. In contrast to the general pattern, the evidence and review sub-

indices are uncorrelated with the others. For most aspects of formalism, however, it appears that

some countries regulate dispute resolution more heavily than others.

       Table 4 asks whether the differences in formalism among countries are also a consequence

of the level of economic development. Economic historians have argued that poor institutions are

a consequence of underdevelopment, and only development itself brings about improved institutions,

including the legal system (Demsetz 1967, North 1981, 1990). Table 4 compares formalism among

countries divided into quartiles of per capita income. We find lower formalism in the richest

countries, but no difference between the poorest countries and the middle 50 percent. Table 4 also

shows that the richest countries have the lowest levels of formalism both within common law and

within the French civil law countries.

       In Table 5, we examine the determinants of formalism looking at the sub-indices and the

overall index. Panel A looks at eviction, and Panel B at check collection. The omitted dummy is

common law legal origin. Using the regressions that hold legal origin constant, the result that richer

countries have lighter regulation of adjudication holds both for the eviction of a tenant and the check

collection procedures. At the same time, the R-squared from using (the logarithm of) per capita

income as the explanatory variable is only 4% for eviction and 8% for check collection.


                                                  30
         The data for most sub-indices and the overall index also show that dispute resolution in

socialist and French civil law countries is more formalized than it is in common law countries, even

holding per capita income constant. The point estimates in the regressions are consistent with the

means in Table 2, yielding roughly the same order of legal origins, and in most cases the coefficients

are statistically significant. Dispute resolution in German and Scandinavian origin countries also

appears to be more formalized than in common law countries, although the results for sub-indices

are generally statistically insignificant. Perhaps most remarkably in Table 5, incremental R-squared

in explaining the formalism index from the legal origin dummies is 40%: nearly half of the residual

variation in formalism (holding per capita income constant) is explained by the legal tradition.

         These results provide striking evidence in favor of the hypothesis from the comparative law

literature that there are systematic differences in legal procedure across legal families, and, more

specifically, civil law countries have more formal dispute resolution than do common law countries.7

The next question is whether these differences in formalism matter for the quality of adjudication.



V. Consequences of formalism.

         In the next several tables, we turn to the consequences of formalism for the quality of the

legal system. Table 6 presents the raw information, by country, on the estimated duration of dispute

resolution. As in Table 2, countries are arranged by legal origin. A striking aspect of Table 6 is the

extraordinary length of time it takes, on average, to pursue either claim in court. The worldwide

average time for accomplishing an eviction is 254 (median of 202) calendar days, and for collecting


7
  We also consider the hypothesis that the influence of Catholicism, with its protection of creditors, shapes judicial
formalism. Although the percentage of a country’s population that is catholic is a statistically significant determinant
of formalism, this variable becomes insignificant in a horse-race with legal origin, which remains important.

                                                          31
a check 234 (median of 197) calendar days. With all the other costs, this number suggests why

individuals in most countries choose not to use the formal legal system to resolve their disputes.

       There is tremendous variation in the estimated duration of each procedure among countries

Eviction is estimated to take 49 days in the U.S., 547 in Austria and 660 in Bulgaria. Check

collection is estimated to take 60 in New Zealand, 527 in Colombia, and 645 in Italy. The

comparison by legal origin for eviction puts common law and Scandinavian legal origin countries

on top (shortest duration) and socialist and French legal origin countries at the bottom. Interestingly,

and consistent with earlier work on creditor rights in Germany (La Porta et al. 1997), German legal

origin countries are comparatively more efficient at check collection than at eviction. But the bottom

line of Table 6 is the higher expected duration in civil law countries. In the words of an Indonesian

legal scholar, “in connection with the nature of judicial process itself and considering the formal,

punctual, and rather complicated manners and usages upheld by courts according to the Law of

Procedure (especially for the laymen), it could be said that correct judgment can not be performed

in a short time” (Gandasurbrata 1980, p.7).

       Table 7 presents summary statistics on other measures of judicial quality. The left panel

confirms the findings of La Porta et al. (1999) that, using measures of the quality of the legal system

from business surveys, German and Scandinavian legal origin countries generally score the highest,

with common law countries next, and French civil law countries the lowest. This particular result,

however, should be interpreted with caution since these measures of the quality of the legal system

are highly correlated with per capita income, and German and Scandinavian legal origin countries

are considerably richer than the rest.




                                                  32
       The right panel of Table 7 is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES)

conducted by the World Bank in 2000. The questionnaire, which was answered by managers of

small firms (below 50 employees), was designed to cover various dimensions of efficiency and

quality of the judicial system. Although there is no specific question about the accuracy of the

judicial system, respondents are asked whether it is fair and impartial and whether it is consistent –

both partly reflections of accuracy. The results show that common law countries are perceived to

have fairer, more honest, faster, more affordable, and more consistent judicial systems than French

and Socialist legal origin countries. Respondents had higher confidence in the legal system and felt

that court decisions were better enforced in common law countries.

       Table 8 presents the regression results of the determinants of judicial quality, using per capita

income and our index of formalism as explanatory variables. Panel A focuses on eviction, and panel

B on check collection. For both procedures, expected duration is not related to the level of per capita

income in a statistically significant way. In contrast, expected duration is highly correlated with

procedural formalism. Countries with higher formalism, not surprisingly, have longer expected times

of using the judicial system to evict a non-paying tenant or to collect a check. This result has

important implications: it suggests that legal structure, rather than the level of development, shapes

this crucial dimension of judicial efficiency.

       Some examples illustrate the findings of Table 8. Malawi is a low-income common law

country, with per capita income of $180. It has a formalism index of 3.14 for eviction, and expected

duration of only 35 days. It also has a formalism index of 2.95 for check collection, and expected

duration of 108 days. By comparison, Mozambique is a low-income French legal origin country,

with per capita income of $220. It has one of the highest formalism indices of 5.15 for eviction, and


                                                  33
expected duration of 540 days. For check collection, its formalism index is 4.49, and expected

duration is 540 days. The same pattern emerges if we compare middle income countries (e.g., New

Zealand versus Portugal), as well as rich countries (e.g., United Kingdom versus Austria).

       These striking results on expected duration raise the crucial question: does procedural

formalism, at the cost of longer proceedings, buy higher quality justice controlling for differences

in levels of economic development? The answer suggested by Table 8 is NO.

       Note first that richer countries have higher quality justice as indicated by nearly all survey

measures. More interestingly, nearly all survey measures suggest that higher formalism is associated

with inferior justice, holding per capita income constant. This result holds, with minor differences,

for both eviction and check collection. It holds for judicial efficiency, access to justice, enforcement

of contracts, and corruption. It also holds in the reports by small firms in World Business

Environment Survey. Here higher formalism is associated with less fairness and impartiality of the

legal system, less honesty, lower speed (consistent with the results on expected duration), less

consistency, less reliable enforcement, and less confidence in the legal system (significant only for

check collection). The effect of formalism is still negative, but not consistently significant, for the

affordability of the legal system and human rights. Table 8 provides the basic bottom line of this

paper: at least for simple disputes, higher formalism is associated not only with the expected higher

duration of dispute resolution, but also with lower quality justice as perceived by participants.

       One concern with the results in Table 8 is that the quality of dispute resolution might be

driven by other exogenous factors, possibly correlated with formalism. Following La Porta et al.

(1999), we have rerun all the regressions in Table 8 controlling for ethno-linguistic fractionalization,

distance from the equator, and the physical size of the country. Formalism remains significant in


                                                  34
nearly all specifications, while the other factors are generally insignificant. As a further robustness

check, we re-estimated the regressions in Table 8 separately for countries with above and below

median per capita income. In most specifications, formalism remains a significant determinant of

quality in both the rich and the poor countries.

       In Table 9, we repeat the analysis of Table 8 using legal origin dummies as instruments for

the formalism index. With some exceptions, the results remain statistically significant, and confirm

that formalism has adverse effects on both the expected duration of proceedings and other aspects

of quality of the legal system. The exogeneity of legal origin for most countries in the sample

suggests that it is unlikely to be the case that countries with a worse law and order environment

choose heavier formalism. The instrumental variable results suggest the opposite direction of

causality. Specifically, countries that have inherited legal systems with heavily formalized dispute

resolution end up with lower quality legal systems, at least for simple disputes.

       At the same time, the instrumental variable procedure cannot reject the hypothesis that the

adverse effect of French civil law on the efficiency and quality of dispute resolution works through

a channel other than formalism. For example, suppose that the transplantation of French legal rules

is conducive to general state interventionism and bureaucratic inefficiency, as argued in La Porta et

al. (1999), and that this channel undermines the performance of courts as well. In this case, we

cannot be sure that formalism, as opposed to general interventionism, is the culprit. To assess this

alternative, we repeat the analysis in Tables 8 and 9 using in place of formalism a measure of state

interventionism having nothing to do with courts per se, namely the heaviness of regulation of entry

by new firms from Djankov et al. (2002). The latter paper finds that such regulation is heavier in

French civil law countries than in common law countries. When we do this analysis, we find that,


                                                   35
indeed, the regulation of entry predicts longer duration of dispute resolution, and lower quality of

adjudication, in both the OLS and instrumental variable regressions. However, the explanatory

power of regulation of entry is only 4 to 5%, compared to the explanatory power of formalism of 18

to 20% . Thus, while we cannot reject the hypothesis that the channel of influence of legal origin on

the efficiency and quality of dispute resolution is general interventionism, the channel we have

identified in this paper, namely procedural formalism, explains much more than a generic measure

of interventionism.

       In our analysis, we also considered a number of other potential determinants of judicial

quality, such as statutory protections of defendants, methods of compensation of attorneys, and

mandatory limits on the time that various parties have to complete the steps in the process of

adjudication. Some commentators on our paper have argued that these factors, which shape the

incentives of the participants in the legal system, are more important for the quality of adjudication

than procedural formalism. Except for the possible beneficial effects of hourly compensation of

attorneys on duration (in contradiction to the incentives argument), we do not find much evidence

that these alternative determinants of judicial quality matter. Moreover, the adverse influence of

formalism persists even holding these alternative factors constant.



VII.   Conclusion

       We present an analysis of legal procedures triggered by resolving two specific disputes—the

eviction of a non-paying tenant and the collection of a bounced check—in 109 countries. The data

come from detailed descriptions of these procedures by Lex Mundi member law firms. For each

country, the analysis leads to an index of formalism —a measure of the extent to which its legal


                                                 36
procedure differs from the hypothetical benchmark of a neighbor informally resolving a dispute

between two other neighbors. We then ask whether formalism varies systematically across countries,

and whether it shapes the quality of the legal system.

       Consistent with the literature on comparative law, we find that judicial formalism is

systematically greater in civil law countries, and especially French civil law countries, than in

common law countries. We also find lower formalism in the richest countries. The expected

duration of dispute resolution is often extraordinarily high, suggesting significant inefficiencies. The

expected duration is systematically higher in countries with more formalized proceedings, but is

independent of the level of development. Perhaps more surprisingly, formalism is nearly universally

associated with lower survey measures of the quality of legal system, including judicial efficiency,

access to justice, honesty, consistency, impartiality, fairness, and even human rights.

       There are two broad views of this evidence. According to the first, greater formalism is

efficient in some countries, for a number of possible reasons. It can reduce error, it can advance

benign political goals, or it can protect the judicial process from possible subversion by powerful

interests. On this view, the various regulatory steps, such as reliance on professional judges and

collection of written evidence, are there to secure a fair judicial process. Put differently, while

heavily formalized adjudication appears problematic on some measures, adjudication would be even

more problematic without the regulation.

       According to the second view, many developing countries accepted the formalism in

adjudication they now have as part of the transplantation of their legal system from their colonizers.

On this view, there is no presumption that the transplanted system is efficient. Although heavy

procedural formalism has theoretically plausible reasons for its existence, the reality it brings is


                                                  37
extreme costs and delays, unwillingness by potential participants to use the court system, and

ultimately injustice. At least some of the burdens of formalism may therefore be unnecessary, and

could be relieved through reform, especially for simple disputes.

       We believe that the evidence in this paper supports the second theory. Specifically, the

evidence points to extremely long expected duration of dispute resolution, suggesting that courts are

not an attractive venue for resolving disputes. Furthermore, we find no offsetting benefits of

formalism, even when looking at a variety of measures of the perception of fairness and justice by

the users of the legal system. Moreover, legal origin itself appears to determine judicial quality,

other things equal, suggesting that formalism is unlikely to be part of a benevolent design.

       The evidence suggests that the systems of dispute resolution in many countries may be

inefficient – at least as far as simple disputes are concerned. In particular, one cannot assume in

economic analysis, especially as applied to developing countries, that contract enforcement is

costless thanks to the functioning of courts. Indeed, in light of our evidence, it is probably safer to

assume that most simple contracts cannot be enforced in courts at all and that economic agents must

find alternative strategies of contracting and contract enforcement. At the theoretical level, this

analysis suggests that the incomplete contracting models of Grossman and Hart (1986) are a useful

way to think about reality. At the empirical level, the analysis suggests that at least some

institutional features of developing countries, such as financial underdevelopment, integration of

firms into groups, and the importance of family businesses, might constitute a response to the

difficulties of using courts to resolve disputes.




                                                    38
References

Aghion, Philippe, and Alberto Alesina, “Endogenous Political Institutions,” Harvard University

       Mimeo, (2002).

Andrews, Neil, Principles of Civil Procedure (London: Sweet &Maxwell, 1994).

Arrow, Kenneth, and Frank Hahn, General Competitive Analysis (San Francisco: Holden-Day,

       1971).

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard, “Economic Development, Legality,

       and the Transplant Effect,” European Economic Review, (2002), forthcoming.

Berman, Harold, Law and Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983).

Coase, Ronald, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, 3, (1960), 1-44.

Damaska, Mirjan, The Faces of Justice and State Authority (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1986).

Dawson, John, A History of Lay Judges (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960).

Demsetz, Harold, “Towards a Theory of Property Rights,” American Economic Review , 57, (1967),

       347-359.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The

       Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, (2002), 1-37.

Ellickson, Robert, Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes (Cambridge: Harvard

       University Press, 1991).

Galanter, Mark, “Justice in Many Rooms: Courts, Private Ordering, and Indigenous Law,” Journal

       of Legal Pluralism,19, (1981), 1-47.




                                              39
Gandasurbrata, Purwoto, Indonesia. Administration of Justice: Procedural Reforms on Court

       Congestion, in Purificacion Valera-Quisumbing (Ed.), Asian Comparative Law Series, Vol.

       2, Asian Law Association of the Philippines and University of the Philippines, Manila, 1980.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer, “Legal Origins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,

       (2002), forthcoming.

Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership. A Theory of Vertical

       and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94, (1986), 691-719.

Hayek, Friederich, The Constitution of Liberty (South Bend: Gateway Editions Ltd., 1960).

International Country Risk Guide. (Political Risk Services, East Syracuse, NY, 1996).

Jhering, Rudolf von, Geist des Römischen Rechts auf den Verschiedenen Stufen Seiner Entwicklung

       (The Spirit of Roman Law Through its Several Phases of Development) (Leipzig: Breitkopf

       und Härtel, 1898).

Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, “Courts and Relational

       Contracts,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, (2002), forthcoming.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Legal

       Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52, (1997), 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Law and

       Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, (1998), 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Quality of

       Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15, (1999), 222-279.

Langbein, John, “The German Advantage in Civil Procedure,” University of Chicago Law Review,

       52, (1985), 823-866.


                                               40
López-Moreno, Santiago, Principios Fundamentales del Procedimiento Civil y Criminal (Madrid:

       Librería General de Victoriano Suárez, 1901)

Macaulay, Stewart, “Non-Contractural Relationships in Business: A Preliminary Study,” American

       Sociological Review, 28, (1963), 55-70.

Messick, Richard, “Judicial Reform and Economic Development: A Survey of the Issues,” World

       Bank Research Observer, 14, (1999), 17-136.

Merryman, John Henry, The Civil Law Tradition (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1985).

Montesquieu, M. de Secondat, The Spirit of Laws Special Edition, (The Legal Classics Library. The

       John D., Birmingham, Alabama: Lucas Printing Company, [1748] 1984).

North, Douglass, Structure and Change in Economic History (Cambridge: W.W. Norton and

       Company, 1981).

North, Douglass, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance (Cambridge, U.K.:

       Cambridge University Press, 1990).

Olson, Mancur, The Logic of Collective Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965).

Schlesinger, Rudolf, Hans Baade, Mirjan Damaska, and Peter Herzog, Comparative Law. Case-

       Text- Materials (New York: The Foundation Press, Inc., 1988).

Shapiro, Martin, Courts (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1981).

Stiglitz, Joseph, “The Contributions of Economics of Information to 20th Century Economics,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, (2000), 1441-1478.

Taelman, Piet, (editor), Civil Procedure - International Encyclopaedia of Laws (The Hague:

       Kluwer Law International, 1994).



                                                 41
Watson, Alan, Legal Transplants: An approach to Comparative Law (Charlottesville: University

       of Virginia Press, 1974).

World Bank, World Business Environment Survey (Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2000).




                                            42
                                                          Table 1: Description of the variables

This table describes the variables in the paper. Unless otherwise specified, the source for the variables is the survey to law firms and
the laws of each country.


 Variable                                                                                     Description

                                                                      Professionals vs. laymen

 General jurisdiction court         The variable measures whether a court of general jurisdiction or a court of limited jurisdiction would be chosen or assigned
                                    to hear and decide the case under normal circumstances . For the purposes of this study, we define a court of general jurisdiction
                                    as a State institution, recognized by the law as part of the regular court system, generally competent to hear and decide regular
                                    civil or criminal cases. A limited jurisdiction court is defined as a court that would hear and decide only some type of civil
                                    cases, which encompasses specialized debt-collection or housing courts, small-claims courts, and arbitrators or justices of the
                                    peace. The variable equals one for a court of general jurisdiction, and zero for a court of limited jurisdiction.

 Professional vs.          non-     The variable measures whether the judge, or the members of the court or tribunal, could be considered as professional judges
 professional judge                 or not. A professional judge would be a judge that has undergone through a complete professional training to this effect as
                                    required by law, and whose primary activity is to act as judge or member of a court. A non-professional judge would be an
                                    arbitrator, administrative officer, practicing attorney or merchant, or any other layperson that may be authorized to hear and
                                    decide the case. The variable equals one for a professional judge, and zero for a non-professional judge.

 Legal representation          is   The variable measures whether for the case provided, the law requires the intervention of a licensed attorney. The variable
 mandatory                          equals one when legal representation is mandatory, and zero when legal representation is not mandatory.

 Index: Professionals         vs.   The index measures whether the resolution of the case provided would rely mostly in the intervention of professional judges
 laymen.                            and attorneys, as opposed to the intervention of other types of adjudicators and lay people. The index is formed by the
                                    normalized sum of the following variables: (i) general jurisdiction court, (ii) professional vs. non-professional judge, and (iii)
                                    legal representation is mandatory. The index ranges from 0 to 1, where higher values mean a higher intervention of
                                    professionals.

                                                                      Written vs. oral elements

 Filing                             The variable equals one if the complaint normally has to be submitted in written form to court, and zero if it can be presented
                                    orally.

 Service of process                 The variable equals one if the defendant’s first official notice on the complaint content is most likely received in writing, and
                                    zero otherwise.

 Opposition                         The variable equals one if under normal circumstances the defendant’s answer to the complaint should be submitted in writing,
                                    and zero if it may be presented orally to court.

 Evidence                           The variable equals one if evidence is mostly submitted to the court in written form, in form of attachments, affidavits, or
                                    otherwise, and equals zero if most of the evidence, included documentary evidence, is presented at oral hearings before the
                                    judge.

 Final arguments                    The variable equals one if final arguments on the case would normally be submitted in writing, and zero if on the contrary they
                                    would likely be presented orally at court before the judge.

 Judgment                           The variable equals one if the final decision for the case is adopted and issued by the judge in written form, and zero if, on the
                                    contrary, it is adopted and issued by the judge in open court at an audience attended by the parties. The defining factor is
                                    whether the judge normally decides the case at the hearing or not. Therefore, if the judge at the hearing simply reads out the
                                    content of a previously adopted written decision, the variable equals one, and conversely, an orally adopted judgment that is
                                    later transposed into writing for enforcement purposes would still be considered as orally issued and score zero.

 Notification of judgment           The variable equals one if normally the parties receive their first notice of the content of the final decision in written form,
                                    either by notice mailed to them, publication in a court board or gazette, or through any other written means. The variable equals
                                    zero if they receive their first notice in open court at an audience attended by them.

 Enforcement of judgment            The variable equals one if the execution procedure is mostly carried out through the compliance of written court orders or
                                    written acts by the enforcement authority, and zero otherwise.

 Index: Written vs. oral            The index measures the written or oral nature of the actions involved in the procedure, from the filing of the complaint, until
 elements                           the actual enforcement. The index is calculated as the number of stages carried out mostly in a written form over the total
                                    number of applicable stages, and it ranges from 0 to 1, where higher values mean higher prevalence of written elements.
Variable                                                                                   Description

                                                                        Legal justification

 Complaint must be legally        The variable measures whether the complaint is required, by law or court regulation, to include references to the applicable
 justified                        laws, legal reasoning, or formalities that would normally call for legal training or assistance. The variable equals one for a
                                  legally justified complaint, and zero when the complaint does not require legal justification (specific articles of the law or case-
                                  law).

 Judgment must be legally         The variable measures whether the judgment must expressly state the legal justification (articles of the law or case-law) for
 justified                        the decision. The variable equals one for a legally justified judgment, and zero otherwise.

 Judgment must be on law (not     The variable measures whether the judgment may be motivated on general equitable arguments, or if it must be founded on
 on equity)                       the law. The variable equals one when judgment must be on law only, and zero when judgment may be based on equity
                                  grounds.

 Index: Legal justification       The index measures the level of legal justification required in the process. The index is formed by the normalized sum of the
                                  following variables : (i) complaint must be legally justified, (ii) judgment must be legally justified, and (iii) judgment must be
                                  on law (not on equity). The index ranges from 0 to 1, where higher values mean a higher use of legal language or justification.

                                                                 Statutory regulation of evidence

 Judge can not introduce          The variable equals one if, by law, the judge can not freely request or take evidence that has not been requested, offered, or
 evidence                         introduced by the parties, and zero otherwise.

 Judge can not reject             The variable equals one if, by law, the judge can not refuse to collect or admit evidence requested by the parties, if she
 irrelevant evidence              deems it irrelevant to the case, and zero otherwise.

 Out-of-court statements are      The variable equals one if statements of fact that were not directly known or perceived by the witness, but only heard from a
 inadmissible                     third person, may not be admitted as evidence. The variable equals zero otherwise.

 Mandatory pre-qualification      The variable equals one if, by law, the judge must pre-qualify the questions before they are asked to the witnesses, and zero
 of questions                     otherwise.

 Oral interrogation only by       The variable equals one if parties and witnesses can only be orally interrogated by the judge, and zero if they can be orally
 judge                            interrogated by the judge and the opposing party.

 Only original documents          The variable equals one if only original documents and "authentic" or "certified" copies are admissible documentary evidence,
 and certified copies are         and zero if simple or uncertified copies are admissible evidence as well.
 admissible

 Authenticity and weight of       The variable equals one if the authenticity and probative value of documentary evidence is specifically defined by the law. The
 evidence defined by law          variable equals zero if all admissible documentary evidence is freely weighted by the judge.

 Mandatory recording of           The variable equals one if, by law, there must be a written or magnetic record of all evidence introduced at trial, and zero
 evidence                         otherwise.

 Index: Statutory regulation      The index measures the level of statutory control or intervention of the administration, admissibility, evaluation and recording
 of evidence                      of evidence. The index is formed by the normalized sum of the following variables : (i) judge can not introduce evidence, (ii)
                                  judge can not reject irrelevant evidence, (iii) out-of-court statements are inadmissible, (iv) mandatory pre-qualification of
                                  questions, (v) oral interrogation only by judge, (VI) only original documents and certified copies are admissible, (vii)
                                  authenticity and weight of evidence defined by law, and (viii) mandatory recording of evidence. The index ranges from 0 to
                                  1, where higher values mean a higher statutory control or intervention.

                                                                    Control of Superior Review

 Enforcement of judgment is       The variable equals one if the enforcement of judgment is automatically suspended until resolution of the appeal, when a
 automatically suspended          request for appeal is granted. The variable equals zero if the suspension of the enforcement of judgment is not automatic, or
 until resolution of the appeal   if the judgment can not be appealed at all.


 Comprehensive review in          The variable equals one if both issues of law and issues of fact (evidence) can be reviewed by the appellate court. The
 appeal                           variable equals zero if only new evidence, or only issues of law can be reviewed in appeal, or if judgment can not be
                                  appealed.

 Interlocutory appeals are        The variable equals one if interlocutory appeals are allowed, and zero if they are always prohibited. Interlocutory appeals
 allowed                          are defined as appeals against interlocutory or interim judicial decisions made during the course of a judicial proceeding in
                                  first instance and before final ruling on the entire case.
Variable                                                                                  Description

 Index: Control of superior     The index measures the level of control or intervention of the appellate court’s review of the first-instance judgment. The index
 review                         is formed by the normalized sum of the following variables : (i) enforcement of judgment is automatically suspended until
                                resolution of appeal, (ii) comprehensive review in appeal, and (iii) interlocutory appeals are allowed. The index ranges from
                                0 to 1, where higher values mean a higher control or intervention.

                                                                    Engagement formalities

 Mandatory pre-trial            The variable equals one if the law requires plaintiff to attempt a pre-trial conciliation or mediation before filing the lawsuit,
 conciliation                   and zero otherwise.

 Service of process by          The variable equals one if the law requires the complaint to be served to the defendant through the intervention of a judicial
 judicial officer required      officer, and zero if service of process may be accomplished by other means.

 Notification of judgment by    The variable equals one if the law requires the judgment to be notified to the defendant through the intervention of a judicial
 judicial officer required      officer, and zero if notification of judgment may be accomplished by other means.

 Index: Engagement              The index measures the formalities required to engage someone into the procedure or to held him/her accountable of the
 formalities                    judgment. The index is formed by the normalized sum of the following variables : (i) mandatory pre-trial conciliation, (ii)
                                service of process by judicial officer required, and (iii) notification of judgment by judicial officer required. The index ranges
                                from 0 to 1, where higher values mean a higher statutory control or intervention in the judicial process.

                                                               Independent procedural actions

 Filing and service             The variable equals the total minimum number of independent procedural required to complete the following stages of the
                                process: filing, admission, attachment, and service.

 Trial and judgment             The variable equals the total minimum number of independent procedural actions required to complete the following stages
                                of the process: opposition to the complaint, hearing or trial, evidence, final arguments, and judgment.

 Enforcement                    The variable equals the total minimum number of independent procedural actions required to complete the following stages
                                of the process: notification of judgment and enforcement of judgment.

 Index: Independent             An independent procedural action is defined as a step of the procedure, mandated by law or court regulation, that demands
 procedural actions             interaction between the parties or between them and the judge or court officer (e.g., filing a motion, attending a hearing, mailing
                                a letter, or seizing some goods). We also count as an independent procedural action every judicial or administrative writ or
                                resolution (e.g., issuing judgment or entering a writ of execution) which is legally required to advance the proceedings until
                                the enforcement of judgment. Actions are always assumed to be simultaneous if possible, so procedural events that may be
                                fulfilled in the same day and place are only counted as one action. To form the index, we: (1) add the minimum number of
                                independent procedural actions required to complete all the stages of the process (from filing of lawsuit to enforcement of
                                judgment); and (2) normalize this number to fall between zero and one using the minimum and the maximum number of
                                independent procedural actions across the countries in the sample. The index takes a value of zero for the country with the
                                minimum number of independent procedural actions, and a value of one for the country with the maximum number of
                                independent procedural actions.

                                                                       Formalism index

 Formalism index                The index measures substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases at lower-level civil trial courts, and is
                                formed by adding up the following indices: (i) professionals vs. laymen, (ii) written vs. oral elements, (iii) legal justification,
                                (iv) statutory regulation of evidence, (v) control of superior review, (vi) engagement formalities, and (vii) independent
                                procedural actions. The index ranges from 0 to 7, where 7 means a higher level of control or intervention in the judicial process.

                                                                     Duration in practice

 Duration until completion of   The variable measures the average duration in calendar days, between the moment the plaintiff files the complaint until the
 service of process             moment of service of process to the defendant.

 Duration of trial              The variable measures the average duration, in calendar days, between the moment of service of process and the moment the
                                judgment is issued.

 Duration of enforcement        The variable measures the average duration, in calendar days, between the moment of issuance of judgment and the moment
                                the landlord repossesses the property (for the eviction case) or the creditor obtains payment (for the check collection case).

 Total duration                 The variable measures the total average duration in calendar days of the procedure under the factual and procedural assumptions
                                provided. It results form the sum of: (i) duration until completion of service of process, (ii) duration of trial, and (iii) duration
                                of enforcement.
Variable                                                                                Description

                                                               Other judicial quality measures

 Efficiency of the judicial     Assessment of the “efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it affects business, particularly foreign firms” produced
 system                         by the country risk rating agency International Country Risk (ICR). It may be “taken to represent investors’ assessment of
                                conditions in the country in question.” Average between 1980 and 1983. Scale from 0 to 10, with lower scores representing
                                lower efficiency levels. Source: International Country Risk Guide.

 Equal access to justice        Assessment of the extent to which citizens are “equal under the law, do they have access to an independent, non-disciminatory
                                judiciary, and are they respected by the security forces”. Scale from 0 to 10. The higher the rating the greater the degree of
                                equality under the law”. Source: Economic Freedom of the World 1975-1995.

 Enforceability of contracts    The variable measures “the relative degree to which contractual agreements are honored and complications presented by
                                language and mentality differences.” Scale for 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating higher enforceability. Source: Business
                                Environmental Risk Intelligence. Exact definition in Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, 1995.

 Corruption                     ICR’s assessment of corruption in government. Lower scores indicate “that high government officials are likely to demand
                                special payments” and “illegal payments are generally accepted throughout lower levels of government” in the form of “bribes
                                connected with import and export licences, exchange controls, tax assessment, policy protection, or loans.” Average of the
                                months of April and October of the monthly index between 1982 and 1995. Scale form 0 to 10, with lower scores for higher
                                levels of corruption (we changed the scale form the original range going from 0 to 6). Source: International Country Risk
                                Guide.

 Human rights                   This is an index of human rights violations for each country coded by Poe and Tate (1994) using the Amnesty International
                                Reports for 1993. The coding rules used are:
                                1.        Countries are under a secure rule of law, people are not imprisoned for their views, and torture is rare or
                                          exceptional...Political murders are extremely rare. (score=4)
                                2.        There is a limited amount of imprisonment for nonviolent political activity. However, few persons are affected,
                                          torture and beating are exceptional...Political murders are rare. (score=3)
                                3.        There is extensive political imprisonment, or a recent history of such imprisonment. Execution or other political
                                          murders and brutality may be common. Unlimited detention, with or without trial, for political views is accepted.
                                          (score=2)
                                4.        The practices of [level 3] are expanded to larger numbers. Murders, disappearances are a common part of life...In
                                          spite of its generality, on this level terror affects primarily those who interest themselves in politics or ideas.
                                          (score=1)
                                5.        The terror of [level 4] has been expanded to the whole population...The leaders of these societies place no limit on
                                          the means or thoroughness with which they pursue personal or ideological goals. (score=0). Source: Poe, Tate and

 Legal system is fair and       This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
 impartial                      The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks: “ In resolving
                                business disputes, do you believe your country’s court system to be fair and impartial?” The scale ranges from 1 to 6, where
                                higher scores mean a fairer and more impartial legal system. Source: World Business Environment Survey.

 Legal system is honest or      This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
 uncorrupt                      The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks: “ In resolving
                                business disputes, do you believe your country’s court system to be honest/uncorrupt?” The scale ranges from 1 to 6, where
                                a higher score signals a more honest and uncorrupt system. Source: World Business Environment Survey.

 Legal system is quick          This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
                                The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks: “ In resolving
                                business disputes, do you believe your country’s court system to be quick ?” The scale ranges from 1 to 6, where a higher score
                                means a quicker legal system. Source: World Business Environment Survey.

 Legal system is affordable     This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
                                The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks: “ In resolving
                                business disputes, do you believe your country’s court system to be affordable?” The scale ranges from 1 to 6, where a higher
                                score means a more affordable legal system. Source: World Business Environment Survey.

 Legal system is consistent     This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
                                The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks: “ In resolving
                                business disputes, do you believe your country’s court system to be consistent?” The scale ranges from 1 to 6, where a higher
                                score means a more consistent legal system. Source: World Business Environment Survey.

 Court decisions are enforced   This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
                                The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks the managers the
                                degree to which they believe their country’s court system will enforce its decisions. The scale ranges from 1 to 6, where a
                                higher score means a stronger belief that the system will enforce its decisions more forcefully. Source: World Business
                                Environment Survey.
Variable                                                                              Description

 Confidence in legal system   This variable is based on the World Business Environment Survey (WBES) conducted by the World Bank in the year 2000.
                              The questionnaire was answered by managers of small firms ( below 50 employees). The questionnaire asks the managers the
                              degree to which they believed the system will uphold contracts and property rights in a business dispute. The scale ranges from
                              1 to 6, where a higher score means a higher degree of confidence on the system. Source: World Business Environment Survey.



                                                                    Other variables

 Log of GNP per capita        Logarithm of GNP per capita in 1999, Atlas method, expressed in current US dollars. When 1999 income data in US dollars
                              was not available, the latest available number was used (1996 for Kuwait, 1997 for Cayman Islands, Gibraltar, Turks and
                              Caicos Island, 1998 for Anguilla, Bahrain, Netherlands Antilles, United Arab Emirates). Income for Anguilla, the British
                              Virgin Islands, the Cayman Island, Gibraltar, Monaco, the Netherlands Antilles, and the Turks and Caicos Islands is GDP per
                              capita (PPP) from the CIA World Factbook. Source: World Development Indicators.

 Legal origin                 Identifies the legal origin of the company law or commercial code of each country. Equal 1 of the origin is English common
                              law, two if the origin is the French commercial code, three if the origin is the German commercial code, four is the origin is
                              Scandinavian civil law, and five if the origin is Socialist civil law. Source: La Porta, et al. (1999).
                                                              Table 2A: Eviction of a tenant
This table classifies countries by legal origin and shows the professionals vs. laymen, written vs. oral elements, legal justification, statutory
regulation of evidence, control of superior review, and engagement formalities indices, and the normalized number of independent procedural actions
for the case of eviction of a tenant. All variables are described in Table 1.

                          Professionals   Written vs. oral      Legal        Statutory regulation of   Control of superior   Engagement     Independent procedural   Formalism
                           vs. laymen       elements         justification          evidence                review            formalities          actions             index
 English legal origin
 Anguilla                     0.67             0.88              0.67                 0.13                    1.00              0.67                 0.28              4.28
 Australia                    0.00             0.57              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.17              1.99
 Bahrain                      0.33             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.33                 0.25              3.92
 Bangladesh                   0.33             0.63              0.67                 0.13                    1.00              0.33                 0.28              3.36
 Barbados                     0.67             0.50              0.00                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.25              2.33
 Belize                       0.00             0.38              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.00              2.08
 Bermuda                      0.33             0.38              0.00                 0.25                    0.33              0.00                 0.03              1.32
 Botswana                     0.67             0.75              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.67                 0.28              4.07
 BVI                          0.67             0.50              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.33              2.88
 Canada                       0.00             0.75              0.33                 0.38                    0.33              0.33                 0.19              2.32
 Cayman                       0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.25                    0.67              0.33                 0.39              3.60
 Cyprus                       0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.17              3.50
 Ghana                        0.67             0.50              0.00                 0.50                    0.33              0.33                 0.36              2.69
 Gibraltar                    0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.13                    0.33              0.00                 0.31              2.51
 Grenada                      0.33             0.38              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.11              2.86
 Hong Kong                    0.33             0.75              1.00                 0.13                    0.67              0.00                 0.25              3.13
 India                        0.33             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    0.33              0.33                 0.39              3.51
 Ireland                      0.67             0.71              0.33                 0.13                    1.00              0.00                 0.36              3.20
 Israel                       0.67             0.88              1.00                 0.50                    0.67              0.00                 0.19              3.90
 Jamaica                      0.67             0.38              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.08              2.38
 Kenya                        0.33             0.75              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.39              2.85
 Malawi                       0.33             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.14              3.14
 Malaysia                     0.67             0.63              0.33                 0.50                    0.67              0.00                 0.42              3.21
 Namibia                      0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.33                 0.19              3.86
 New Zealand                  0.00             0.50              0.33                 0.00                    0.33              0.00                 0.08              1.25
 Nigeria                      0.33             0.63              0.33                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.42              3.08
 Pakistan                     0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.53              3.74
 Singapore                    0.67             0.63              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.44              3.11
 South Africa                 0.67             0.50              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.33                 0.14              3.68
 Sri Lanka                    0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.22              3.89
 St. Vincent                  0.67             0.50              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.67                 0.31              3.85
 Swaziland                    0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.19              3.74
 Tanzania                     0.33             0.63              0.33                 0.50                    0.67              0.33                 0.11              2.90
 Thailand                     0.67             0.88              1.00                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.33              4.25
 Trinidad & Tobago            0.67             0.63              0.00                 0.25                    0.33              0.00                 0.28              2.15
 Turks and Caicos             0.67             0.63              0.00                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.47              2.81
 UAE                          0.00             0.50              0.33                 0.00                    0.00              0.33                 0.28              1.44
 Uganda                       0.00             1.00              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.14              2.51
 United Kingdom               0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.00                    0.33              0.00                 0.14              2.22
 USA                          0.33             0.63              1.00                 0.13                    0.67              0.00                 0.22              2.97
 Zambia                       0.67             0.50              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.19              3.07
 Zimbabwe                     0.33             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.11              3.11
 Mean                         0.48             0.63              0.52                 0.30                    0.67              0.17                 0.25              3.02
 Median                       0.67             0.63              0.50                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.25              3.10

 Socialist legal origin
 Bulgaria                     0.67             0.88              1.00                 0.25                    1.00              0.33                 0.39              4.51
 China                        0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.28              3.40
 Croatia                      0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.22              3.43
 Czech Republic               0.67             0.38              1.00                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.25              3.54
 Estonia                      0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.67                 0.28              4.74
 Georgia                      0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.31              3.51
 Hungary                      0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.13                    0.67              0.00                 0.25              3.46
 Kazakhstan                   0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.67              4.00
 Latvia                       0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.19              3.86
 Lithuania                    0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.42              4.21
 Poland                       0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.00                 0.17              4.08
 Romania                      0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.00                 0.56              4.47
 Russia                       0.67             0.50              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.11              3.32
 Slovenia                     0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.47              4.26
 Ukraine                      0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.63                    1.00              0.00                 0.22              3.60
 Vietnam                      0.67             0.50              0.00                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.42              2.86
 Mean                         0.67             0.67              0.79                 0.35                    0.96              0.06                 0.32              3.83
 Median                       0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.28              3.73

 French legal origin
 Argentina                    1.00             1.00              1.00                 0.13                    1.00              0.67                 0.69              5.49
 Belgium                      0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.33                 0.17              3.17
 Bolivia                      1.00             1.00              0.67                 0.25                    1.00              0.67                 0.53              5.11
 Brazil                       1.00             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.17              3.83
 Chile                        1.00             0.88              0.67                 0.50                    0.67              0.67                 0.42              4.79
 Colombia                     0.67             1.00              1.00                 0.25                    0.00              0.33                 0.69              3.94
 Costa Rica                   0.67             0.86              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.67                 0.36              5.05
 Cote D'Ivoire                0.67             0.50              0.67                 0.25                    0.67              0.67                 0.22              3.64
 Dominican Republic           0.33             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.67                 0.36              4.36
                                   Professionals      Written vs. oral        Legal        Statutory regulation of      Control of superior   Engagement     Independent procedural   Formalism
                                    vs. laymen          elements           justification          evidence                   review            formalities          actions             index
  Ecuador                               0.67               0.88                1.00                 0.63                       0.67               0.33                0.47               4.64
  Egypt                                 0.67               0.63                1.00                 0.50                       0.33               0.33                0.14               3.60
  El Salvador                           0.33               1.00                0.67                 0.75                       0.67               0.67                0.17               4.25
  France                                0.33               0.75                1.00                 0.13                       0.67               0.67                0.06               3.60
  Greece                                1.00               1.00                1.00                 0.50                       0.00               0.67                0.14               4.31
  Guatemala                             1.00               1.00                1.00                 0.75                       1.00               0.67                0.36               5.78
  Honduras                              0.67               1.00                1.00                 0.63                       0.67               0.33                0.39               4.68
  Indonesia                             0.33               0.88                0.67                 0.50                       0.67               0.33                0.50               3.88
  Italy                                 1.00               1.00                0.67                 0.13                       0.67               0.67                0.11               4.24
  Jordan                                0.67               0.63                0.67                 0.50                       0.00               0.33                0.58               3.38
  Kuwait                                0.33               0.88                1.00                 0.25                       1.00               1.00                0.14               4.60
  Lebanon                               1.00               0.88                1.00                 0.50                       1.00               0.67                0.53               5.57
  Luxembourg                            0.33               0.86                0.67                 0.50                       1.00               0.00                0.31               3.66
  Malta                                 0.67               0.63                0.67                 0.38                       0.67               0.33                0.08               3.42
  Mexico                                0.33               0.88                1.00                 0.50                       0.67               0.67                0.78               4.82
  Monaco                                0.33               0.63                0.67                 0.25                       0.33               0.67                0.06               2.93
  Morocco                               0.67               1.00                0.67                 0.63                       1.00               0.67                0.17               4.79
  Mozambique                            1.00               0.75                1.00                 0.38                       1.00               0.67                0.36               5.15
  Netherlands                           0.33               0.63                0.67                 0.13                       0.67               0.33                0.25               3.00
  Netherlands Antilles                  0.67               0.63                0.33                 0.25                       0.67               0.67                0.42               3.63
  Panama                                1.00               1.00                1.00                 0.25                       1.00               0.67                1.00               5.92
  Paraguay                              0.67               0.86                1.00                 0.63                       0.67               0.67                0.61               5.09
  Peru                                  1.00               0.88                1.00                 0.38                       1.00               0.67                0.50               5.42
  Philippines                           1.00               1.00                1.00                 0.50                       0.33               0.67                0.50               5.00
  Portugal                              1.00               0.75                1.00                 0.38                       1.00               0.00                0.42               4.54
  Senegal                               0.67               0.63                0.33                 0.63                       0.67               0.67                0.31               3.89
  Spain                                 0.67               0.88                1.00                 0.63                       0.67               0.67                0.31               4.81
  Tunisia                               0.67               0.75                0.67                 0.25                       0.67               0.67                0.22               3.89
  Turkey                                0.67               0.63                1.00                 0.75                       0.00               0.00                0.44               3.49
  Uruguay                               1.00               0.50                0.67                 0.13                       0.67               0.33                0.69               3.99
  Venezuela                             1.00               1.00                1.00                 0.50                       1.00               0.67                0.64               5.81
  Mean                                  0.72               0.81                0.83                 0.42                       0.69               0.53                0.38               4.38
  Median                                0.67               0.87                1.00                 0.44                       0.67               0.67                0.36               4.33

  German legal origin
  Austria                              0.67                0.86                1.00                 0.13                       0.67              0.00                 0.31              3.62
  Germany                              0.33                0.88                1.00                 0.50                       0.67              0.00                 0.39              3.76
  Japan                                0.67                1.00                1.00                 0.25                       0.67              0.00                 0.14              3.72
  Korea                                0.67                0.88                0.33                 0.13                       0.67              0.33                 0.33              3.33
  Switzerland                          0.67                0.63                1.00                 0.25                       1.00              0.33                 0.08              3.96
  Taiwan                               0.67                0.50                0.67                 0.38                       0.67              0.00                 0.17              3.04
  Mean                                 0.61                0.79                0.83                 0.27                       0.72              0.11                 0.24              3.57
  Median                               0.67                0.87                1.00                 0.25                       0.67              0.00                 0.24              3.67

  Scandinavian legal origin
  Denmark                              0.67                0.75                0.67                 0.13                       1.00              0.00                 0.39              3.60
  Finland                              0.33                0.50                0.67                 0.25                       0.67              0.00                 0.11              2.53
  Iceland                              0.67                0.38                1.00                 0.38                       0.67              0.33                 0.06              3.47
  Norway                               0.67                0.75                0.67                 0.13                       1.00              0.33                 0.17              3.71
  Sweden                               0.67                0.75                0.33                 0.25                       1.00              0.00                 0.31              3.31
  Mean                                 0.60                0.63                0.67                 0.23                       0.87              0.13                 0.21              3.32
  Median                               0.67                0.75                0.67                 0.25                       1.00              0.00                 0.17              3.47

  Mean for all countries               0.58                0.71                0.68                 0.33                       0.71              0.27                 0.31              3.68
  Median for all countries             0.67                0.75                0.67                 0.38                       0.67              0.33                 0.28              3.63


                                                                                            Tests of means (t-stats)
  Common vs. Socialist                 -3.08a             -1.13               -2.89a               -1.31                      -4.57a              1.87c              -1.98c             -3.87a
  Common vs. French                    -4.34a             -5.61a              -5.20a               -3.21a                     -0.41              -7.07a              -3.38a             -7.77a
  Common vs. German                    -1.31              -2.53b              -2.29b                0.50                      -0.54               0.70                0.22              -1.74c
  Common vs. Scandinavian              -1.10               0.01               -0.98                 1.20                      -1.77c              0.42                0.72               -0.86
  Socialist vs. French                 -0.78              -3.14a              -0.57                -1.27                      3.38a              -7.00a              -0.94              -2.49b
  Socialist vs. German                  1.71              -1.68               -0.28                 1.31                       4.12a             -0.57               1.29                 1.10
  Socialist vs. Scandinavian            1.90c              0.65                0.80                 2.07c                      1.36              -0.76               1.57                1.93c
  French vs. German                     0.98               0.35                0.00                 1.81c                     -0.24              4.09a                1.56               2.37b
  French vs. Scandinavian               0.99               2.44b               1.63                2.23b                      -1.25              3.55a                1.72c              2.82a
  German vs. Scandinavian               0.13               1.48                1.06                 0.59                      -1.51              -0.21                0.39                1.04

                                                                                           Tests of medians (z-stats)
  Common vs. Socialist                 -3.08a             -1.51               -2.81a               -0.92                      -4.22a             2.13b               -1.64              -3.50a
  Common vs. French                    -3.78a             -4.67a              -4.48a               -2.77a                     -0.86              -5.60a               2.76a             -5.97a
  Common vs. German                    -1.29              -2.00b              -2.17b                0.68                      -0.47               0.64               0.20               -1.75c
  Common vs. Scandinavian              -1.06              -0.30               -1.03                 1.45                      -1.79c              0.33                0.73               -0.85
  Socialist vs. French                 -0.98              -2.78a              -0.04                -1.22                      3.50a              -5.02a              -0.73              -2.45b
  Socialist vs. German                  1.63              -1.60               -0.21                 1.27                       3.10a             -0.99               1.14                 0.88
  Socialist vs. Scandinavian            1.79c              0.40                1.22                 1.95c                      1.33              -1.21               1.49                 1.53
  French vs. German                     1.07               0.38               -0.21                 1.78c                      0.16               3.39a               1.60               2.25b
  French vs. Scandinavian               1.07               2.05b               1.62                2.17b                      -1.26              3.06a                1.79c              2.67a
  German vs. Scandinavian               0.14               1.57                1.18                 0.48                      -1.42              -0.22                0.46                1.28

a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                             Table 2B : Collection of a check
This table classifies countries by legal origin and shows the professionals vs. laymen, written vs. oral elements, legal justification, statutory
regulation of evidence, control of superior review, and engagement formalities indices, and the normalized number of independent procedural actions
for the case of collection of a check. All variables are described in Table 1.

                          Professionals   Written vs. oral      Legal        Statutory regulation of   Control of superior   Engagement     Independent procedural   Formalism
                           vs. laymen       elements         justification          evidence                review            formalities          actions             index
 English legal origin
 Anguilla                     0.00             0.38              0.33                 0.13                    1.00              0.00                 0.13              1.96
 Australia                    0.00             0.50              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.05              1.80
 Bahrain                      0.33             0.75              1.00                 0.75                    1.00              0.33                 0.24              4.40
 Bangladesh                   0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.13                    1.00              0.00                 0.16              3.24
 Barbados                     0.33             0.38              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.33                 0.08              2.37
 Belize                       0.00             0.38              0.00                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.00              1.42
 Bermuda                      0.33             0.38              0.00                 0.25                    0.33              0.33                 0.16              1.78
 Botswana                     0.67             0.75              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.67                 0.29              4.08
 BVI                          0.33             0.38              0.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.33                 0.11              2.52
 Canada                       0.33             0.50              0.00                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.21              2.09
 Cayman                       0.67             0.63              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.21              2.75
 Cyprus                       0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.34              3.68
 Ghana                        0.67             0.50              0.00                 0.50                    0.33              0.33                 0.32              2.65
 Gibraltar                    0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.13                    0.33              0.00                 0.18              2.39
 Grenada                      0.33             0.38              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.05              2.80
 Hong Kong                    0.00             0.63              0.00                 0.00                    0.00              0.00                 0.11              0.73
 India                        0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    0.33              0.00                 0.34              3.34
 Ireland                      0.67             0.57              0.33                 0.13                    0.67              0.00                 0.26              2.63
 Israel                       0.33             0.88              0.67                 0.50                    0.67              0.00                 0.26              3.30
 Jamaica                      0.67             0.38              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.05              2.34
 Kenya                        0.67             0.63              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.42              3.09
 Malawi                       0.67             0.63              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.33                 0.08              2.95
 Malaysia                     0.33             0.50              0.00                 0.50                    0.67              0.00                 0.34              2.34
 Namibia                      0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.33                 0.16              3.82
 New Zealand                  0.00             0.50              0.33                 0.00                    0.67              0.00                 0.08              1.58
 Nigeria                      0.33             0.63              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.53              3.19
 Pakistan                     0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.55              3.76
 Singapore                    0.33             0.38              0.00                 0.50                    0.67              0.33                 0.29              2.50
 South Africa                 0.00             0.38              0.33                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.05              1.68
 Sri Lanka                    0.67             0.86              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.21              3.78
 St. Vincent                  1.00             0.43              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.16              3.63
 Swaziland                    0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.16              3.70
 Tanzania                     0.67             0.86              0.67                 0.50                    0.67              0.33                 0.13              3.82
 Thailand                     0.33             0.50              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.26              3.14
 Trinidad & Tobago            0.33             0.63              0.00                 0.25                    0.33              0.00                 0.26              1.80
 Turks and Caicos             0.00             0.25              0.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.24              1.86
 UAE                          1.00             0.88              1.00                 0.13                    0.33              0.00                 0.47              3.81
 Uganda                       0.00             0.71              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.18              2.61
 United Kingdom               0.67             0.71              0.33                 0.13                    0.67              0.00                 0.08              2.58
 USA                          0.33             0.75              0.33                 0.13                    1.00              0.00                 0.08              2.62
 Zambia                       0.00             0.57              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.18              2.13
 Zimbabwe                     0.33             0.63              0.67                 0.38                    0.67              0.33                 0.11              3.11
 Mean                         0.43             0.58              0.42                 0.31                    0.68              0.13                 0.20              2.76
 Median                       0.33             0.63              0.33                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.18              2.64

 Socialist legal origin
 Bulgaria                     0.67             0.88              1.00                 0.25                    1.00              0.33                 0.45              4.57
 China                        0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.29              3.41
 Croatia                      0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.29              3.62
 Czech Republic               0.67             0.83              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.18              4.06
 Estonia                      0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.33                 0.24              4.36
 Georgia                      0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.25                    0.67              0.00                 0.21              3.09
 Hungary                      0.67             0.75              0.67                 0.13                    1.00              0.00                 0.21              3.42
 Kazakhstan                   0.67             0.75              0.67                 0.50                    1.00              0.33                 0.84              4.76
 Latvia                       0.67             0.63              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.26              3.93
 Lithuania                    0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.00                 0.55              4.47
 Poland                       0.67             0.88              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.24              4.15
 Romania                      0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.00                 0.50              4.42
 Russia                       0.67             0.50              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.18              3.39
 Slovenia                     0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.00                 0.34              4.26
 Ukraine                      0.67             0.75              0.33                 0.63                    1.00              0.00                 0.29              3.66
 Vietnam                      0.67             0.50              0.33                 0.25                    1.00              0.00                 0.50              3.25
 Mean                         0.67             0.72              0.79                 0.38                    0.96              0.06                 0.35              3.93
 Median                       0.67             0.75              1.00                 0.38                    1.00              0.00                 0.29              3.99

 French legal origin
 Argentina                    1.00             1.00              1.00                 0.13                    1.00              0.67                 0.61              5.40
 Belgium                      0.33             0.75              0.33                 0.13                    0.67              0.33                 0.18              2.73
 Bolivia                      1.00             1.00              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              1.00                 0.71              5.75
 Brazil                       0.33             0.50              1.00                 0.38                    0.67              0.00                 0.18              3.06
 Chile                        1.00             0.75              0.67                 0.50                    0.67              0.67                 0.32              4.57
 Colombia                     0.67             1.00              1.00                 0.38                    0.00              0.33                 0.74              4.11
 Costa Rica                   1.00             1.00              1.00                 0.50                    1.00              0.67                 0.32              5.48
 Cote D'Ivoire                0.67             0.63              0.67                 0.13                    0.67              0.67                 0.24              3.65
 Dominican Republic           0.33             0.75              0.67                 0.38                    1.00              0.67                 0.29              4.08
                                  Professionals      Written vs.oral          Legal         Statutory regulation of     Control of superior   Engagement     Independent procedural   Formalism
                                   vs. laymen          elements            justification           evidence                  review            formalities          actions             index
 Ecuador                               1.00               1.00                 0.67                  0.63                      0.67              0.33                 0.63               4.92
 Egypt                                 1.00               0.75                 1.00                  0.50                      0.00              0.33                 0.21               3.79
 El Salvador                           0.33               0.88                 1.00                  0.88                      0.67              0.67                 0.18               4.60
 France                                0.33               0.75                 1.00                  0.13                      0.33              0.67                 0.03               3.23
 Greece                                0.67               1.00                 1.00                  0.50                      0.00              0.67                 0.16               3.99
 Guatemala                             1.00               1.00                 1.00                  0.75                      1.00              0.67                 0.26               5.68
 Honduras                              0.67               1.00                 1.00                  0.63                      0.67              0.33                 0.61               4.90
 Indonesia                             0.33               0.88                 0.67                  0.50                      0.67              0.33                 0.53               3.90
 Italy                                 0.67               0.86                 1.00                  0.00                      0.67              0.67                 0.18               4.04
 Jordan                                0.67               0.75                 0.67                  0.50                      0.00              0.33                 0.61               3.52
 Kuwait                                0.67               0.88                 0.67                  0.13                      0.67              0.67                 0.21               3.88
 Lebanon                               1.00               0.75                 0.67                  0.63                      1.00              0.33                 0.47               4.85
 Luxembourg                            0.33               0.71                 0.67                  0.50                      1.00              0.00                 0.34               3.56
 Malta                                 0.00               0.63                 0.33                  0.38                      0.67              0.33                 0.11               2.44
 Mexico                                0.33               0.88                 1.00                  0.50                      0.67              0.33                 1.00               4.71
 Monaco                                0.33               0.71                 0.33                  0.25                      0.33              0.67                 0.11               2.74
 Morocco                               1.00               1.00                 0.67                  0.50                      0.67              0.67                 0.21               4.71
 Mozambique                            0.67               0.75                 1.00                  0.50                      0.67              0.67                 0.24               4.49
 Netherlands                           0.33               0.63                 0.67                  0.13                      0.67              0.33                 0.32               3.07
 Netherlands Antilles                  0.67               0.88                 0.33                  0.25                      0.33              0.00                 0.39               2.85
 Panama                                1.00               1.00                 1.00                  0.25                      1.00              0.67                 0.92               5.84
 Paraguay                              1.00               1.00                 1.00                  0.63                      0.67              0.67                 0.95               5.91
 Peru                                  1.00               0.88                 1.00                  0.38                      1.00              0.67                 0.68               5.60
 Philippines                           1.00               1.00                 1.00                  0.50                      0.33              0.67                 0.50               5.00
 Portugal                              0.67               0.75                 1.00                  0.50                      0.67              0.00                 0.34               3.93
 Senegal                               0.67               0.88                 0.67                  0.63                      0.67              0.67                 0.55               4.72
 Spain                                 1.00               1.00                 1.00                  0.63                      0.67              0.67                 0.29               5.25
 Tunisia                               0.67               1.00                 0.67                  0.25                      0.67              0.67                 0.13               4.05
 Turkey                                0.00               1.00                 0.67                  0.63                      0.00              0.00                 0.24               2.53
 Uruguay                               1.00               0.50                 0.67                  0.13                      0.67              0.33                 0.76               4.05
 Venezuela                             1.00               1.00                 1.00                  0.50                      1.00              0.67                 0.84               6.01
 Mean                                  0.68               0.85                 0.80                  0.42                      0.63              0.49                 0.41               4.29
 Median                                0.67               0.88                 0.83                  0.50                      0.67              0.67                 0.32               4.10

 German legal origin
 Austria                               0.67               0.86                 1.00                  0.38                      0.33              0.00                 0.29               3.52
 Germany                               0.33               0.88                 1.00                  0.50                      0.67              0.00                 0.13               3.51
 Japan                                 0.33               0.88                 0.67                  0.25                      0.67              0.00                 0.18               2.98
 Korea                                 0.67               0.88                 0.33                  0.13                      0.67              0.33                 0.37               3.37
 Switzerland                           0.67               0.63                 0.67                  0.38                      0.33              0.33                 0.13              3.13
 Taiwan                                0.33               0.50                 0.67                  0.38                      0.33              0.00                 0.16              2.37
 Mean                                  0.50               0.77                 0.72                  0.33                      0.50              0.11                 0.21              3.15
 Median                                0.50               0.87                 0.67                  0.38                      0.50              0.00                 0.17              3.25

 Scandinavian legal origin
 Denmark                               0.33               0.63                 0.00                  0.13                      1.00              0.33                 0.13              2.55
 Finland                               0.67               0.63                 0.67                  0.25                      0.67              0.00                 0.26              3.14
 Iceland                               0.67               0.63                 1.00                  0.38                      1.00              0.33                 0.13              4.13
 Norway                                0.33               0.75                 0.67                  0.13                      1.00              0.00                 0.08              2.95
 Sweden                                0.67               0.75                 0.33                  0.25                      0.67              0.00                 0.32              2.98
 Mean                                  0.53               0.68                 0.53                  0.23                      0.87              0.13                 0.18              3.15
 Median                                0.67               0.63                 0.67                  0.25                      1.00              0.00                 0.13              2.98

 Mean for all countries                0.57               0.71                 0.64                  0.36                      0.70              0.25                 0.30              3.53
 Median for all countries              0.67               0.75                 0.67                  0.38                      0.67              0.33                 0.24              3.52


                                                                                            Tests of means (t-stats)
 Common vs. Socialist                 -3.29a              -3.38a              -4.19a                -1.55                     -4.53a              1.45               -3.38a             -5.24a
 Common vs. French                    -3.85a              -7.97a              -6.29a                -2.71a                     0.82              -7.42a              -4.63a             -7.52a
 Common vs. German                    -0.59               -2.73a              -2.25b                -0.37                     1.84c               0.30               -0.11              -1.12
 Common vs. Scandinavian              -0.79               -1.35               -0.75                  1.22                     -1.70c              0.02                0.33              -1.03
 Socialist vs. French                 -0.21               -3.05a              -0.12                 -0.74                     4.07a              -6.47a              -0.92              -1.36
 Socialist vs. German                 3.81a               -0.73                0.55                  0.67                     7.13a              -0.70               1.78c              3.23a
 Socialist vs. Scandinavian            3.11a               0.93                1.71                 2.35b                      1.36              -0.95               1.95c              2.81b
 French vs. German                     1.40                1.24                0.78                  0.96                      1.02               3.58a              1.88c              2.72a
 French vs. Scandinavian               1.05               2.55b                2.32b                2.05b                     -1.64              3.09a               1.94c              2.45b
 German vs .Scandinavian              -0.30                1.17                0.99                  1.51                     -3.32a             -0.21                0.44              -0.02

                                                                                           Tests of medians (z-stats)
 Common vs. Socialist                 -3.27a              -3.31a              -3.66a                -1.55                     -4.23a              1.42               -3.10a             -4.37a
 Common vs. French                    -3.51a              -6.12a              -5.17a                -2.76a                     0.43              -5.73a              -4.01a             -5.87a
 Common vs. German                    -0.55               -2.40b              -2.15b                -0.47                      1.95c              0.26               -0.38              -1.09
 Common vs. Scandinavian              -0.79               -1.54               -0.74                  1.39                     -1.75c             -0.04                0.17              -1.02
 Socialist vs. French                 -0.63               -2.82a               0.08                 -0.98                      4.11a             -4.90a              -0.55              -1.29
 Socialist vs. German                 2.97a               -1.16                0.68                  0.58                      3.88a             -0.71               2.04b              2.58a
 Socialist vs Scandinavian             2.60a               1.26                1.51                 2.14b                      1.33              -0.95               1.95c              2.48b
 French vs. German                     1.55                1.26                0.79                  1.20                      1.44               3.10a              2.01b              2.74a
 French vs. Scandinavian               1.22                2.48b               1.74c                2.07b                     -1.73c              2.77a              2.06b              2.17b
 German vs .Scandinavian              -0.32                1.23                0.87                  1.43                     -2.35b             -0.22                0.75               0.37

a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                        Table 3: Correlations of formalism index and its components


                                               Formalism        Professionals       Written      Legal          Statutory     Control of   Engagement     Independent
                 Indices                         index           vs. laymen         vs. oral  justification   regulation of    superior     formalities    procedural
                                                                                   elements                     evidence        review                      actions
                                                                                    Panel A: Eviction
Professionals vs. laymen                         0.6420a           1.0000
Written vs. oral elements                        0.6614a           0.3073c         1.0000
Legal justification                              0.6840a           0.2598          0.3976a      1.0000
Statutory regulation of evidence                 0.4161a           0.1471          0.2390       0.2049           1.0000
Control of superior review                       0.4573a           0.2342          0.1009       0.2121           0.0090        1.0000
Engagement formalities                           0.5988a           0.2349          0.4041a      0.2795           0.1995        0.0037        1.0000
Independent procedural actions                   0.5353a           0.3952a         0.3858a      0.1799           0.1546        0.1110        0.1717         1.0000
                                                                                     Panel B: Check
Professionals vs. laymen                         0.7625a          1.0000
Written vs. oral elements                        0.7305a         0.5090a         1.0000
Legal justification                              0.7573a         0.4921 a
                                                                                0.6083a       1.0000
Statutory regulation of evidence                 0.4800a          0.1845        0.3052c      0.3184b          1.0000
Control of superior review                       0.3264b          0.1255        -0.0439       0.1051          0.0316           1.0000
Engagement formalities                           0.6125a         0.4082a        0.4391a      0.2977c          0.2296           -0.0296       1.0000
Independent procedural actions                   0.6517a         0.4836a        0.4538a      0.3406b          0.2869           0.0957        0.2909c        1.0000
                                                              Panel C: Correlations between eviction and check indices
Formalism index                                  0.8257a
Professionals vs. laymen                                           0.5229a
Written vs. oral elements                                                          0.7054a
Legal justification                                                                              0.7502a
Statutory regulation of evidence                                                                                0.9086a
Control of superior review                                                                                                     0.7866a
Engagement formalities                                                                                                                       0.8126a
Independent procedural actions                                                                                                                              0.8575a



a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level
             Table 4: Eviction of a tenant and check collection by legal origin and income level

This table classifies countries by GNP per capita and shows the formalism index for the case of eviction of a tenant and the case of
collection of a check. All variables are described in Table 1.


                                            All countries            English legal origin countries French legal origin countries
By GNP per capita level               Eviction            Check        Eviction          Check        Eviction        Check
                                                Low income - bottom 25 percentile
Mean                                    3.69            3.76            3.20              3.18           4.44            4.58
Median                                  3.60            3.68            3.11              3.19           4.66            4.71
Number of countries                      28              28              13                13             10              10

                                             Medium income - middle 50 percentile
Mean                                    3.95           3.73           3.18                2.71           4.59            4.46
Median                                  3.91           3.93           3.35                2.45           4.54            4.57
Number of countries                      54             54             18                  18             23              23

                                                  High income - top 75 percentile
Mean                                    3.14             2.88            2.53             2.33           3.60            3.32
Median                                  3.20             2.95            2.51             2.50           3.60            3.23
Number of countries                      27               27              11               11              7               7

                                                           All countries
Mean                                    3.68              3.53           3.02             2.76           4.38            4.29
Median                                  3.63              3.52           3.10             2.64           4.33            4.10
Number of countries                     109               109             42               42             40              40


                                                      Tests of means (t-stats)
Bottom 25 vs. middle 50                -1.20             0.12              0.07           1.65           -0.52          0.34
Bottom 25 vs. top 25                   2.66b             4.04a            2.77b           3.23a          2.72b          4.27a
Middle 50 vs. top 25                   3.70a             3.35a            2.05c           1.11           2.93a          2.64b

                                                     Tests of medians (z-stats)
Bottom 25 vs. middle 50                -1.51             -0.08            -0.28           1.56           -0.47          0.16
Bottom 25 vs. top 25                   1.99b             3.55a            2.06b           2.87a          2.34b          2.93a
Middle 50 vs. top 25                   3.62a             3.16 a
                                                                          1.93c           0.63           2.62a          2.53b




a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                      Table 5: Indices regressions
                                                             Panel A: Eviction of a tenant

Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries for the case of eviction of a tenant. The dependent variables are the indices
of formalism and its component indices. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are described in Table 1.

                                                                               Independent variables:

 Dependent                    Log GNP           Socialist         French legal       German legal       Scandinavian    Constant          N
 variables:                   per capita      legal origin           origin             origin           legal origin                    [R2]
   Formalism index             -0.1223b                                                                                 4.6934a          109
                               (0.0567)                                                                                 (0.4800)        [0.04]
                               -0.1254b         0.7437a             1.3681a            0.7842a            0.5729b       4.0386a          109
                               (0.0489)         (0.1791)            (0.1712)           (0.2257)           (0.2677)      (0.3789)        [0.44]
   Professionals vs.           -0.0106                                                                                  0.6936a          109
   laymen                      (0.0169)                                                                                 (0.1410)        [0.00]

                               -0.0115          0.1843a             0.2410a            0.1556b            0.1482c       0.5697a          109
                               (0.0180)         (0.0387)            (0.0562)           (0.0744)           (0.0851)      (0.1469)        [0.20]

   Written vs. oral            -0.0019                                                                                  0.7261a          109
   elements                    (0.0103)                                                                                 (0.0873)        [0.00]

                               -0.0047           0.0435             0.1887a            0.1714b             0.0092       0.6644a          109
                               (0.0102)         (0.0395)            (0.0342)           (0.0774)           (0.0790)      (0.0865)        [0.26]

   Legal justification          0.0069                                                                                  0.6426a          109
                               (0.0207)                                                                                 (0.1740)        [0.00]

                                0.0057          0.2710a             0.3092a            0.2991b             0.1306       0.4769a          109
                               (0.0216)         (0.0902)            (0.0602)           (0.1273)           (0.1203)      (0.1776)        [0.22]

   Statutory regulation         -0.0437a                                                                                0.7078a           109
   of evidence                  (0.0094)                                                                                (0.0792)         [0.16]

                                -0.0435a         0.0274              0.1171a             0.0489             0.0169      0.6557a           109
                                (0.0102)        (0.0357)             (0.0333)           (0.0660)           (0.0524)     (0.0808)         [0.26]

   Control of superior          -0.0253                                                                                 0.9404a           109
   review                       (0.0158)                                                                                (0.1333)         [0.02]

                                -0.0276         0.2768a               0.0263             0.1053            0.2585a      0.8914a           109
                                (0.0171)        (0.0464)             (0.0617)           (0.0736)           (0.0931)     (0.1410)         [0.17]

   Engagement                   -0.0221                                                                                 0.4646a           109
   formalities                  (0.0168)                                                                                (0.1412)         [0.01]

                                -0.0218         -0.1239b             0.3514a            -0.0242             0.0049      0.3520a           109
                                (0.0141)        (0.0571)             (0.0497)           (0.0772)           (0.0876)     (0.1190)         [0.46]

   Independent                  -0.0257a                                                                                0.5183a           109
   procedural actions           (0.0094)                                                                                (0.0825)         [0.05]
                                -0.0221b         0.0647              0.1343a             0.0281             0.0045      0.4285a           109
                                (0.0107)        (0.0424)             (0.0398)           (0.0520)           (0.0640)     (0.0909)         [0.17]




 a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level
                                                       Table 5: Indices regressions
                                                              Panel B: Check collection

 Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries for the case of check collection. The dependent variables are the indices
 of formalism and its component indices. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are described in Table 1.

                                                                            Independent variables:

   Dependent variables:        Log GNP           Socialist         French legal       German         Scandinavian         Constant         N
                               per capita      legal origin           origin        legal origin      legal origin                        [R2]
  Formalism index              -0.2109a                                                                                  5.2787a         109
                               (0.0594)                                                                                  (0.5138)       [0.08]

                               -0.2072a         1.0579a             1.5422a          0.7622a           0.8339a           4.4465a         109
                               (0.0501)         (0.1915)            (0.1922)         (0.2464)          (0.2977)          (0.4042)       [0.48]

   Professionals vs.           -0.0412b                                                                                  0.9077a         109
   laymen                      (0.0164)                                                                                  (0.1404)       [0.05]

                               -0.0420b         0.2154a             0.2568a           0.1473           0.1939b           0.7712a         109
                               (0.0185)         (0.0462)            (0.0656)         (0.0899)          (0.0952)          (0.1555)       [0.21]

   Written vs. oral            -0.0117                                                                                   0.8112a         109
   elements                    (0.0099)                                                                                  (0.0845)       [0.01]

                               -0.0162          0.1386a             0.2751a          0.2207a           0.1330a           0.7090a         109
                               (0.0099)         (0.0373)            (0.0343)         (0.0726)          (0.0467)          (0.0767)       [0.42]

   Legal justification         -0.0316                                                                                   0.8984a         109
                               (0.0209)                                                                                  (0.1715)       [0.02]

                               -0.0328c         0.3533a             0.3809a          0.3609a            0.1824           0.6884a         109
                               (0.0193)         (0.0852)            (0.0586)         (0.1191)          (0.1684)          (0.1615)       [0.32]

   Statutory regulation        -0.0397a                                                                                  0.6846a         109
   of evidence                 (0.0103)                                                                                  (0.0861)       [0.12]

                               -0.0402a          0.0437             0.1080a           0.0965           0.0009c           0.6376a         109
                               (0.0115)         (0.0398)            (0.0355)         (0.0656)          (0.0557)          (0.0915)       [0.20]

   Control of superior         -0.0224                                                                                   0.8891a         109
   review                      (0.0159)                                                                                  (0.1340)       [0.01]

                               -0.0131          0.2687a             -0.0486          -0.1589c          0.2119b           0.7893a         109
                               (0.0169)         (0.0456)            (0.0615)         (0.0864)          (0.0940)          (0.1357)       [0.21]

   Engagement                  -0.0243                                                                                   0.4550a         109
   formalities                 (0.0167)                                                                                  (0.1438)       [0.02]

                               -0.0262b         -0.0866c            0.3579a           0.0235            0.0540           0.3485a         109
                               (0.0138)         (0.0446)            (0.0482)         (0.0745)          (0.0852)          (0.1175)       [0.47]

   Independent                 -0.0399a                                                                                  0.6327a         109
   procedural actions          (0.0112)                                                                                  (0.1025)       [0.08]

                               -0.0366a         0.1247b             0.2120a          0.0723c            0.0576           0.5025a         109
                               (0.0120)         (0.0478)            (0.0453)         (0.0429)          (0.0495)          (0.1039)       [0.26]




a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level
                                                                   Table 6: Duration in practice
This table classifies countries by legal origin and shows the duration in practice for the eviction and the check case. All variables are described
in Table 1.

                                                          Eviction of a tenant                                                                 Check collection
          By legal origin   Duration until completion Duration of trial      Duration of   Total duration     Duration until     Duration of          Duration of   Total duration
                              of service of process                          enforcement                      completion of         trial             enforcement
                                                                                                            service of process

English legal origin
Anguilla                               1                      60                  30             91                 1                30                     7             38
Australia                               3                     35                   6             44                25               160                   135            320
Bahrain                                41                    120                 224            385                 54              114                   200            368
Bangladesh                             30                    180                 180            390                 30              180                    60            270
Barbados                                4                     67                  21             92                 2                49                    60            111
Belize                                 30                     15                  14             59                30                15                    15             60
Bermuda                                 4                     25                  21             50                 4               100                    21            125
Botswana                               14                     42                   7             63                14                42                    21             77
BVI                                     2                     42                  14             58                42                21                   120            183
Canada                                  5                     21                  17             43                 21              250                   150            421
Cayman                                 30                    136                  14            180                 30               60                    30            120
Cyprus                                60                     120                 180            360                60               120                   180            360
Ghana                                  20                    140                  90            250                20                52                    18             90
Gibraltar                             160                     50                  14            224                160               50                    14            224
Grenada                                15                     90                  75            180                 8                90                    30            128
Hong Kong                              7                      35                 150            192                 7                40                    14             61
India                                 142                     24                  46            212                 7                53                    46            106
Ireland                                11                     60                  50            121                11                60                    60            130
Israel                                  3                    272                 135            410                60               120                   135            315
Jamaica                                45                     46                  14            105                 45               87                    70            202
Kenya                                  12                    122                 121            255                12               122                   121            255
Malawi                                  3                     30                   2             35                  3               90                    15            108
Malaysia                               60                     90                 120            270                 15               15                    60             90
Namibia                                11                     25                  83            118                11                25                    83            118
New Zealand                            10                     40                  30             80                10                30                    20             60
Nigeria                                32                    126                 208            366                81               100                    60            241
Pakistan                               60                    245                  60            365                60               185                   120            365
Singapore                              9                      40                  11             60                11                18                    19             47
South Africa                          10                     189                 10             209                10               60                    14             84
Sri Lanka                             90                     440                 200            730                60               200                   180            440
St. Vincent                             3                    302                  30            335                 3                22                    10             35
Swaziland                               5                     28                   7             40                 5                28                     7             40
Tanzania                                7                    180                  30            217                 7                90                    30            127
Thailand                               30                    510                  90            630                 30               90                    90            210
Trinidad & Tobago                      54                    103                  35            192                51               101                    42            194
Turks and Caicos                       14                    100                  60            174                 14               30                    30             74
UAE                                   14                     180                 90             285                14               365                   180            559
Uganda                                  1                      7                  21             29                14                40                    45             99
United Kingdom                         14                     73                  28            115                14                73                    14            101
USA                                    6                     33                  10             49                 23               17                    14             54
Zambia                                 14                     90                   7            111                14               120                    54            188
Zimbabwe                                8                    180                   9            197                 8               180                     9            197
Mean                                   26                    112                  61            199                26                88                    62            176
Median                                 13                     82                  30            180                14                67                    44            126

Socialist legal origin
Bulgaria                               60                    450                 150            660                 10              250                   150            410
China                                  15                    105                  60            180                 15              120                    45            180
Croatia                                60                    180                  90            330                 60              180                    90            330
Czech Republic                         60                     90                 180            330                 30               60                   180            270
Estonia                               59                     136                 110            305                59               136                   110            305
Georgia                               30                      60                 90            180                 30               60                    90            180
Hungary                               90                     185                 90            365                 90               185                    90            365
Kazakhstan                             10                     50                  60            120                 10               50                    60            120
Latvia                                 27                     41                  11             79                 28               41                   120            189
Lithuania                              30                     90                  30            150                 30               60                    60            150
Poland                                90                     720                 270           1080                90               730                   180           1000
Romania                                30                    140                 103            273                 30              105                    90            225
Russia                                 10                     90                  30            130                 10               90                    60            160
Slovenia                              133                    510                 360           1003                133              510                   360           1003
Ukraine                               14                      90                 120            224                14                90                   120            224
Vietnam                                35                     55                  60            150                 35               35                    50            120
Mean                                   47                    187                 113            347                 42              169                   116            327
Median                                 33                     98                  90            248                 30               98                    90            224

French legal origin
Argentina                             60                     300                  80            440                 20              200                    80            300
Belgium                                 3                     60                  57            120                  0               20                   100            120
Bolivia                                14                     60                  20             94                 14              360                    90            464
Brazil                                 30                     60                  30            120                 30               90                    60            180
Chile                                  15                    200                  25            240                 15              140                    45            200
Colombia                              139                    279                  82            500                165              216                   146            527
Costa Rica                             20                     90                  30            140                 10              180                   180            370
Cote D'Ivoire                          8                     120                   2            130                  8               82                    60            150
Dominican Republic                     30                     90                  90            210                 35               90                    90            215
Ecuador                                38                     40                  30            108                 38              235                    60            333
Egypt                                  7                     180                 45             232                 7               150                   45             202
El Salvador                           45                      60                  45            150                 25               15                    20             60
France                                16                      75                 135            226                16               75                    90             181
                                                               Eviction of a tenant                                                                 Check collection
          By legal origin        Duration until completion Duration of trial      Duration of   Total duration     Duration until     Duration of          Duration of   Total duration
                                   of service of process                          enforcement                      completion of         trial             enforcement
                                                                                                                 service of process

Greece                                      32                     35                  180           247                180               45                    90            315
Guatemala                                   10                    180                   90           280                 10              120                    90            220
Honduras                                   15                     30                   30            75                 30               90                    105            225
Indonesia                                   30                    165                   30           225                 30              165                    30            225
Italy                                        0                    450                  180           630                  0              415                   230            645
Jordan                                       7                    100                  30            137                  7              100                    40            147
Kuwait                                       3                     65                   25            93                  7              240                   110            357
Lebanon                                      1                    912                   60           973                  1              540                   180            721
Luxembourg                                  20                    120                  240           380                 15               45                   150            210
Malta                                       30                    610                   90           730                 30              365                   150            545
Mexico                                      20                     60                  100           180                 33               99                   151            283
Monaco                                      17                     86                   16           119                 24               26                    16             66
Morocco                                     15                    365                  365           745                 15              135                    42            192
Mozambique                                  30                    450                   60           540                 30              300                   210            540
Netherlands                                 17                      7                   28            52                 17                7                    15             39
Netherlands Antilles                        15                     70                   20           105                 20               36                    37             93
Panama                                      36                     50                   48           134                 76               86                    35            197
Paraguay                                    12                     50                  140           202                 25               32                   165            222
Peru                                       41                     135                  70            246                 81              135                   165            441
Philippines                                 42                     97                   25           164                 42               97                    25            164
Portugal                                    20                    280                  30            330                 20              280                   120            420
Senegal                                      5                     60                   90           155                  5              150                   180            335
Spain                                       60                     55                   68           183                 49               69                    29            147
Tunisia                                      3                     28                    2            33                  3                1                     3             7
Turkey                                      30                    180                  90            300                30               30                    45             105
Uruguay                                    120                    120                  90            330                150              120                    90            360
Venezuela                                   30                    300                   30           360                 30              300                    30            360
Mean                                        27                    167                   72           266                 34              147                    90            272
Median                                      20                     94                   53           206                 22              110                    90            221

German legal origin
Austria                                      7                    360                  180           547                14               270                   150            434
Germany                                     29                    191                  111           331                29                61                    64            154
Japan                                        3                    350                   10           363                 3                47                    10             60
Korea                                       30                    180                  93            303                20                40                    15             75
Switzerland                                 16                    180                   70           266                59                75                    90            224
Taiwan                                      30                    120                  180           330                30                60                   120            210
Mean                                        19                    230                  107           357                26                92                    75            193
Median                                      23                    186                  102           331                25                61                    77            182

Scandinavian legal origin
Denmark                                     20                    180                  25            225                15                40                   28              83
Finland                                     15                     70                  35            120                35               145                   60             240
Iceland                                     22                     12                  30             64                71               105                   75             251
Norway                                      7                     300                  58            365                7                50                    30             87
Sweden                                      6                     135                  19            160                6                165                   19             190
Mean                                        14                    139                  33            187                27               101                   42             170
Median                                      15                    135                  30            160                15               105                   30             190

Mean for all countries                      29                    151                  74            254                31               122                    80            234
Median for all countries                    17                    97                   57            202                20               90                     60            197

Tests of means (t-stats)
Common vs. Socialist                      -2.05b                 -1.84c               -2.46b        -2.42b             -1.74c           -2.37b                -2.91a         -2.85a
Common vs. French                         -0.16                  -1.66                -0.77         -1.64              -0.93            -2.66a                -2.16b         -2.94a
Common vs. German                          0.47                  -2.49b               -1.65         -2.36b              0.03            -0.13                 -0.52          -0.30
Common vs. Scandinavian                    0.76                  -0.52                 0.95          0.17              -0.05            -0.39                  0.76           0.10
Socialist vs. French                      2.23b                   0.37                 1.80c         1.14               0.71             0.51                  1.33           0.91
Socialist vs. German                       1.90c                 -0.51                 0.15         -0.07               1.06             0.94                  1.18           1.12
Socialist vs. Scandinavian                 2.08c                  0.51                 1.91c         1.14               0.88             0.78                  2.05c          1.23
French vs. German                          0.68                  -0.83                -1.14         -1.03               0.45             1.04                  0.57           1.10
French vs. Scandinavian                    1.03                   0.33                 1.23          0.83               0.35             0.82                  1.72c          1.33
German vs. Scandinavian                    0.82                   1.43                 2.44b        2.63b              -0.08            -0.19                  1.19           0.32

Tests of medians (z-stats)
Common vs. Socialist                      -2.86a                 -1.76c               -2.59a        -1.94c            -2.05b            -1.91c                -2.97a         -2.61a
Common vs. French                         -1.39                  -1.61                -1.54         -1.67c            -0.92             -2.20b                -2.45b         -2.87a
Common vs. German                         -0.22                  -2.68a               -1.59         -2.46b            -0.48             -0.11                 -0.58          -0.39
Common vs. Scandinavian                   -0.05                  -0.66                 0.05         -0.26             -0.14             -0.81                  0.05          -0.17
Socialist vs. French                      2.18b                   0.58                2.13b          0.95              1.38              0.01                  1.36           0.15
Socialist vs. German                      1.93c                  -1.70c               -0.37         -1.26              1.04              1.07                  0.93           1.22
Socialist vs. Scandinavian                2.36b                   0.21                2.49b          1.08              1.00              0.50                  2.62a          1.24
French vs. German                          0.56                  -1.98b               -1.56         -2.12b             0.07              1.22                  0.59           1.04
French vs. Scandinavian                    1.05                  -0.16                 1.43          0.70              0.31              0.34                  1.83c          1.19
German vs. Scandinavian                    0.83                   1.47                 1.83c         1.83c             0.00             -0.46                  0.73          -0.37



a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                               Table 7: Other outcomes
This table classifies countries by legal origin and shows other outcomes that might be related to judicial efficiency for the eviction of a tenant
and the check collection cases. All variables are described in Table 1.

By legal origin
                             Efficiency Equal Enforceabi- Corruption   Human                                Legal system is:                   Court decisions Confidence
                               of the  access to lity of               rights                                                                   are enforced    in legal
                              judicial  justice contracts                            Fair and   Honest or     Quick    Affordable   Consistent                   system
                             system                                                 impartial   uncorrupt

English legal origin
Mean                           7.94     3.93      6.56        6.28      3.79          4.02        3.87         2.78       3.23        3.52          3.76         4.03
Median                         8.00     3.75      7.09        5.95      4.00          3.98        3.82         2.48       3.21        3.35          3.71         4.13


Socialist legal origin
Mean                            .       6.88      4.85        6.37      3.50          3.08        2.95         2.28       3.13        2.97          3.40         3.46
Median                          .       7.50      5.00        6.53      3.50          2.87        2.80         2.27       3.21        2.79          3.39         3.43

French legal origin
Mean                          6.61      3.09      5.30       5.41      3.28           3.08        3.07         2.01       2.94        2.88          3.31         3.77
Median                        6.58      2.50      4.91       5.00      3.00           3.07        2.88         1.88       2.84        2.80          3.13         4.00

German legal origin
Mean                          8.90      7.08      7.50       8.03      4.50           3.76        3.92         2.44       2.16        2.92          3.04         3.69
Median                        9.50      7.50      7.91       8.54      4.50           3.76        3.92         2.44       2.16        2.92          3.04         3.69

Scandinavian legal
Mean                          10.00    10.00      8.12       10.00     4.80           4.16        4.65         2.57       3.20        3.86          3.33         4.16
Median                        10.00    10.00      8.25       10.00     5.00           4.16        4.65         2.57       3.20        3.86          3.33         4.16

Mean for all countries        7.55      4.35      6.07       6.24      3.97           3.43        3.35         2.34       3.07        3.13          3.48         3.79
Median for all countries      7.25      5.00      5.57       5.73      4.00           3.51        3.33         2.26       3.09        3.04          3.47         3.89


Tests of means (t-stats)
Common vs. Socialist            n.a.   -1.79c     2.13b      -0.10       0.29        4.70a       3.98a        1.81c       0.56        2.39b        1.91c         2.76a
Common vs. French             2.54b      1.01    2.74a       1.72c      1.31         4.64a       3.50a        3.44a       1.80c       3.34a        2.49b         1.55
Common vs. German              -0.96   -2.25b     -1.20     -1.86c      -1.24         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.
Common vs. Scandinavian       -1.96c   -4.16a    -1.78c     -3.80a      -1.62         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.
Socialist vs. French            n.a.   2.24b      -0.86      1.22       0.25         0.00        -0.46        1.57        1.06        0.48         0.39         -1.71c
Socialist vs. German            n.a.    -0.15    -3.87a     -2.08c     -2.12c         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.
Socialist vs. Scandinavian      n.a.   -5.69a    -7.15a     -6.71a     -3.05b         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.
French vs. German             -3.04a   -2.80a    -4.19a     -3.03a     -2.39b         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.
French vs. Scandinavian       -4.39a   -4.61a    -5.00a     -5.08a     -2.74b         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.
German vs. Scandinavian        -1.30   -2.63b     -0.89     -2.61b      -0.98         n.a.        n.a.         n.a.        n.a.        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.

Tests of medians (z-stats)
Common vs. Socialist            n.a.   -1.74c     1.85c      -0.21       0.62        3.68a       3.49a        1.79c        0.16       2.14b        1.66c         2.61a
Common vs. French             2.58a      1.08    2.00b       1.51       1.46         4.15a       3.18a        3.61a       1.70c       3.20a        2.60a          1.62
Common vs. German              -0.90   -2.18b     -1.07     -1.91c      -1.01        0.60        -0.45        0.30        1.66c        1.21         1.36          0.68
Common vs. Scandinavian       -2.17b   -3.46a     -1.49     -3.31a     -1.65c        -0.60       -1.21        -0.15        0.08       -0.75        1.21          -0.15
Socialist vs. French            n.a.   2.17b      -0.09       1.41      0.29         0.25        -0.19        2.38b        1.40        0.54         0.44         -1.64
Socialist vs. German            n.a.    -0.52    -2.58a     -1.86c      -1.64        -1.04       -1.62        -0.69       1.39        -0.23        0.23          -0.46
Socialist vs. Scandinavian      n.a.   -2.74a    -2.49b     -2.95a     -1.94c        -1.62       -1.62        -1.04        0.23       -1.62        0.00          -1.39
French vs. German             -2.18b   -2.53b    -3.12a     -2.69a     -2.24b        -1.11       -1.05        -1.30        1.42       -0.31        0.50          0.19
French vs. Scandinavian       -3.07a   -3.37a    -2.94a     -3.42a     -2.55b        -1.42       -1.55        -1.42       -0.56       -1.42        -0.31         -0.80
German vs. Scandinavian       -1.75c   -2.56b     -0.43     -2.49b      -0.98        -1.00       -1.00        -1.00       -1.00       -1.00        -1.00         -1.00

a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
n.a.=not applicable due to lack of observations; .=missing
                       Table 8: Outcomes and the formalism index (OLS regressions)
                                               Panel A: Eviction of a tenant

Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries for the case of eviction of a tenant. Robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are described in Table 1.

                                                                 Independent variables:
      Dependent variables:           Log GNP per capita          Formalism index     Constant         N
                                                                                                    [R2]
                                            0.0215                    0.3225a         3.8787a       109
      Log of duration                      (0.0501)                  (0.0747)        (0.5508)      [0.14]

      Efficiency of the                    0.8281a                   -0.7366a         3.1661b        56
      judicial system                      (0.1242)                  (0.1359)        (1.4065)      [0.59]

                                            1.6093a                  -0.8574a        -5.7556a        77
      Access to justice                    (0.1717)                  (0.2511)        (1.7325)      [0.57]

      Enforceability of                     0.7962a                  -0.6193a         1.6002c        52
      contracts                            (0.0735)                  (0.0920)        (0.8514)      [0.80]

                                            1.0104a                  -0.5260b         -0.1247        86
      Corruption                           (0.1037)                  (0.2082)        (1.1458)      [0.60]

                                            0.4676a                  -0.3521a         1.0766         57
      Human rights                         (0.0629)                  (0.1016)        (0.7609)      [0.51]

      Legal system is fair and              0.0993c                  -0.4451a         4.3855a        65
      impartial                            (0.0540)                  (0.0786)        (0.4777)      [0.26]

      Legal system is honest                0.2181a                  -0.4188a         3.2849a        65
      or uncorrupt                         (0.0599)                  (0.0742)        (0.5359)      [0.28]

                                            0.0056                   -0.2816a         3.3915a        65
      Legal system is quick                (0.0859)                  (0.0794)        (0.7280)      [0.11]

      Legal system is                      -0.1251b                   -0.1106         4.4672a        65
      affordable                           (0.0487)                  (0.0706)        (0.4030)      [0.13]

      Legal system is                       0.0946                   -0.2602a         3.4090a        65
      consistent                           (0.0608)                  (0.0741)        (0.5225)      [0.14]

      Court decisions are                   0.1067c                  -0.2082a         3.4581a        65
      enforced                             (0.0559)                  (0.0676)        (0.4226)      [0.12]

      Confidence in legal                   0.1390b                   -0.0945         3.0863a        65
      system                               (0.0539)                  (0.0768)        (0.4874)      [0.11]


a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level
                       Table 8: Outcomes and the formalism index (OLS regressions)
                                                 Panel B: Check collection

Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries for the case of check collection. Robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses. All variables are described in Table 1.

                                                                 Independent variables:
      Dependent variables:           Log GNP per capita          Formalism index     Constant        N
                                                                                                   [R2]
                                            0.0275                    0.3110a         3.8605a      109
      Log of duration                      (0.0392)                  (0.0518)        (0.3836)     [0.17]

      Efficiency of the                     0.7978a                  -0.5060a         2.4336        56
      judicial system                      (0.1375)                  (0.1419)        (1.6000)     [0.54]

                                            1.5831a                  -0.5006b        -6.9574a       77
      Access to justice                    (0.1796)                  (0.2339)        (1.8681)     [0.54]

      Enforceability of                     0.7490a                  -0.5228a         1.5219c       52
      contracts                            (0.0749)                  (0.0840)        (0.8233)     [0.79]

                                            0.9577a                  -0.5728a         0.4156        86
      Corruption                           (0.1085)                  (0.1494)        (1.1997)     [0.62]

                                            0.4678a                   -0.1938         0.4368        57
      Human rights                         (0.0691)                  (0.1409)        (0.9590)     [0.46]

      Legal system is fair and              0.0657                   -0.4181a         4.5087a       65
      impartial                            (0.0500)                  (0.0600)        (0.4408)     [0.33]

      Legal system is honest                0.1866a                  -0.3882a         3.3808a       65
      or uncorrupt                         (0.0566)                  (0.0615)        (0.5016)     [0.33]

                                            -0.0155                  -0.2565a         3.4382a       65
      Legal system is quick                (0.0835)                  (0.0688)        (0.7102)     [0.13]

      Legal system is                      -0.1332a                   -0.0920         4.4512a       65
      affordable                           (0.0471)                  (0.0554)        (0.3897)     [0.13]

      Legal system is                       0.0747                   -0.2647a         3.5603a       65
      consistent                           (0.0575)                  (0.0557)        (0.4929)     [0.20]

      Court decisions are                   0.0910c                  -0.1922a         3.5026a       65
      enforced                             (0.0539)                  (0.0547)        (0.4096)     [0.14]

      Confidence in legal                   0.1312b                  -0.1315b         3.2796a       65
      system                               (0.0526)                  (0.0571)        (0.4656)     [0.14]



a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level
           Table 9: Outcomes and the formalism index (instrumental variables regressions)
                                               Panel A: Eviction of a tenant

Instrumental variables regressions of the cross-section of countries for the case of eviction of a tenant. The first stage
regression (not shown) has the formalism index as the dependent variable and the independent variables are: (a) the
log of GNP per capita; (b) the set of legal origin dummies; and (c) a constant term. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. All variables are described in Table 1.

                                                                 Independent variables:
          Dependent variables:            Log GNP per         Formalism index       Constant            N
                                             capita                                                    [R2]
                                             0.0160                 0.2777b          4.0889a           109
          Log of duration                   (0.0532)               (0.1216)         (0.7510)          [0.14]

          Efficiency of the                  0.7938a               -1.0811a          4.7352a            56
          judicial system                   (0.1337)               (0.2838)         (1.7295)          [0.57]

                                             1.6188a               -0.7507c         -6.2334a            77
          Access to justice                 (0.1719)               (0.4160)         (2.1931)          [0.57]

          Enforceability of                  0.7605a               -0.9007a          2.9767a            52
          contracts                         (0.0760)               (0.1770)         (1.0350)          [0.77]

                                             0.9822a               -0.8130a          1.1893             86
          Corruption                        (0.1059)               (0.2622)         (1.3503)          [0.58]

                                             0.4582a               -0.4931b          1.6816c            57
          Human rights                      (0.0636)               (0.1860)         (0.9861)          [0.50]

          Legal system is fair and           0.1152c               -0.7004a          5.2521a            65
          impartial                         (0.0619)               (0.1554)         (0.5884)          [0.18]

          Legal system is honest             0.2334a               -0.6636a          4.1158a            65
          or uncorrupt                      (0.0657)               (0.1626)         (0.6980)          [0.21]

                                             0.0214                -0.5349a          4.2514a            65
          Legal system is quick             (0.0866)               (0.1738)         (0.9763)          [0.02]

          Legal system is                   -0.1223b                -0.1543          4.6156a            65
          affordable                        (0.0506)               (0.1145)         (0.4593)          [0.13]

          Legal system is                    0.1088                -0.4875a          4.1807a            65
          consistent                        (0.0654)               (0.1490)         (0.6781)          [0.05]

          Court decisions are                0.1154c               -0.3478a          3.9322a            65
          enforced                          (0.0582)               (0.1247)         (0.5085)          [0.08]

          Confidence in legal                0.1483a               -0.2450b          3.5971a            65
          system                            (0.0552)               (0.1172)         (0.5873)          [0.06]


a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level ; c=significant at 10% level
           Table 9: Outcomes and the formalism index (instrumental variables regressions)
                                                 Panel B: Check collection

Instrumental variables regressions of the cross-section of countries for the case of check collection. The first stage
regression (not shown) has the formalism index as the dependent variable and the independent variables are: (a) the
log of GNP per capita; (b) the set of legal origin dummies; and (c) a constant term. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. All variables are described in Table 1.

                                                                 Independent variables:
          Dependent variables:            Log GNP per         Formalism index       Constant         N
                                             capita                                                 [R2]
                                             0.0275                 0.3108a          3.8614a        109
          Log of duration                   (0.0440)               (0.1054)         (0.6174)       [0.17]

          Efficiency of the                  0.7216a               -0.8787a          4.3645b         56
          judicial system                   (0.1362)               (0.2565)         (1.8209)       [0.50]

                                             1.5808a                -0.5115         -6.9002a         77
          Access to justice                 (0.1822)               (0.3487)         (2.2091)       [0.54]

          Enforceability of                  0.6856a               -0.7861a          3.0087a         52
          contracts                         (0.0757)               (0.1524)         (0.9594)       [0.76]

                                             0.9389a               -0.6760a          0.9470          86
          Corruption                        (0.1087)               (0.2208)         (1.3943)       [0.62]

                                             0.4398a               -0.4291b          1.4945          57
          Human rights                      (0.0698)               (0.1802)         (1.0541)       [0.42]

          Legal system is fair and           0.0633                -0.5838a          5.1567a         65
          impartial                         (0.0512)               (0.1186)         (0.5178)       [0.28]

          Legal system is honest             0.1842a               -0.5570a          4.0408a         65
          or uncorrupt                      (0.0576)               (0.1272)         (0.6209)       [0.28]

                                             -0.0180               -0.4327a          4.1271a         65
          Legal system is quick             (0.0831)               (0.1400)         (0.9317)       [0.07]

          Legal system is                   -0.1336a                -0.1196          4.5593a         65
          affordable                        (0.0470)               (0.0911)         (0.4455)       [0.13]

          Legal system is                    0.0727                -0.4016a          4.0957a         65
          consistent                        (0.0579)               (0.1159)         (0.6212)       [0.15]

          Court decisions are                0.0896                -0.2889a          3.8808a         65
          enforced                          (0.0541)               (0.0994)         (0.5000)       [0.11]

          Confidence in legal                0.1299b               -0.2216b          3.6317a         65
          system                            (0.0530)               (0.0914)         (0.5518)       [0.12]



a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level ; c=significant at 10% level
  Appendix 1. Mapping between the “International Encyclopaedia of Laws – Civil Procedure,” and the variables and indices in the paper

This table compares the coverage of all the variables and indices in the paper with the table of contents of the Encyclopedia of Laws – Civil Procedure (French
monograph). The first column shows the different parts of the “International Encyclopaedia of Laws-Civil Procedure.” The second column gives the names of the
variables in the paper that are related to the chapter in the encyclopedia. The last column indicates if the variables in the second column belong to the Formalism
Index (FI); to other determinants of judicial efficiency (Other), which are not reported in this version but are available from the authors; or to variables that are
outcomes in the paper (Outcomes).

 Encyclopedia of Laws – Civil             Variables in the paper                                                            Indices in the paper
 Procedure (France)
 Part I. Judicial organization
      1. The courts and their members     Variable: Professional vs. non-professional judge                                 FI: Professionals vs. laymen
      2. The bar                          Variable: Legal representation is mandatory                                       FI: Professionals vs. laymen
      3. Law officials                    Variable: Service of process by judicial officer required                         FI: Engagement formalities
                                          Variable: Notification of judgment by judicial officer required                   FI: Engagement formalities
 Part II: Jurisdiction
      1. Domestic jurisdiction            Variable: General jurisdiction court                                              FI: Professionals vs. laymen
      2. International jurisdiction       Not covered: Lex Mundi Project analyzed simple local disputes only
 Part III: Actions and claims
      1. Actions                          Not covered: Right to sue assumed by case facts.
                                                        Collective actions outside of scope of Lex mundi Project, which
                                                         analyzed simple local disputes only.
     2. Claims and defenses               Variables: Filing and opposition                                                  FI: Written vs. oral elements
                                          Variable: Complaint must be legally justified                                     FI: Legal justification
      3. Sanctions and procedural         Variables: Mandatory time limits                                                  Other: Mandatory time limits
          irregularities
 Part IV: Proceedings
       1. Pre-trial proceedings:          Variable: Mandatory pre-trial conciliation                                        FI: Engagement formalities
          Conciliation before trial
       2. Proceedings in first instance   Variables: Filing, service, opposition, final arguments, judgment, notification   FI: Written vs. oral elements
                                                    of judgment.
                                          Variable: Complaint must be legally justified                                     FI: Legal justification
                                          Variable: Judgment must be legally justified                                      FI: Legal justification
                                          Variable: Judgment must be on law (not on equity)                                 FI: Legal justification
                                          Variable: Independent procedural actions for filing and service                   FI: Independent procedural actions
                                          Variable: Independent procedural actions for trial and judgment                   FI: Independent procedural actions
                                          Variable: Duration of filing and service                                          Outcomes: Duration in practice
                                          Variable: Duration of trial and judgment                                          Outcomes: Duration in practice
                                          Variable: Service of process by judicial officer required                         FI: Engagement formalities
                                          Variable: Notification of judgment by judicial officer required                   FI: Engagement formalities
                                          Variable: Defendant’s economic situation is considered at judgment                Other: Defendant protection
       3. Review proceedings (appeal)     Variable: Enforcement of judgment is automatically suspended until                FI: Control of superior review
                                                    resolution of the appeal
                                          Variable: Comprehensive review in appeal                                          FI: Control of superior review
                                          Variable: Interlocutory appeals are allowed                                       FI: Control of superior review
Encyclopedia of Laws – Civil            Variables in the paper                                                             Indices in the paper
Procedure (France)
Part V: Incidents                       Mostly not covered: Outside standardized facts included in questionnaire
                                        Variable: Interlocutory appeals are allowed                                        FI: Control of superior review
Part VI: Legal costs and legal aid
      1. Legal costs                    Variable: Legal representation is mandatory                                        FI: Professionals vs. laymen
                                        Variable: Attorney fees are fixed or limited by statute, court or administrative   Other: Attorney’s incentives
                                                  regulation
                                        Variable: Most common remuneration of litigation attorneys                         Other: Attorney remuneration
                                        Variable: Quota litis or contingent fee agreements                                 Other: Quota litis
                                        Variable: Looser pays rule                                                         Other: Other determinants
                                        Variable: Fully compensatory interests                                             Other: Other determinants
      2. Legal aid                      Variable: Mandatory legal aid available by law or by order of the court            Other: Defendant protection
Part VII: Evidence
      1. Burden of proof                Variable: Authenticity and weight of evidence defined by law                       FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Judge has the independent legal obligation to investigate facts          Other: Defendant protection
     2. Admissibility of evidence       Variable: Judge can not introduce evidence                                         FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Judge can not reject irrelevant evidence                                 FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Out-of-court statements are inadmissible                                 FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Only original documents and certified copies are admissible              FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Mandatory pre-qualification of questions                                 FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
     3. Administration of evidence      Variable: Mandatory recording of evidence                                          FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Oral interrogation only by judge                                         FI: Statutory regulation of evidence
                                        Variable: Evidence                                                                 FI: Written vs. oral elements
Part VIII: Particular proceedings       Not covered: Lex Mundi Project covered only eviction and check collection
                                                      proceedings
Part IX: Enforcement of judgments and
preliminary seizure for security
     1. Enforcement of domestic         Variable: Independent procedural actions for enforcement of judgment               FI: Independent procedural actions
        judgments                       Variable: Duration of enforcement of judgment                                      Outcomes: Duration in practice
                                        Variable: Enforcement of judgment.                                                 FI: Written vs. oral elements
                                        Variable: Defendant’s economic situation is considered at enforcement of           Other: Defendant protection
                                                  judgment
                                        Variable: Enforcement of judgment is automatically suspended until                 FI: Control of superior review
                                                  resolution of the appeal.
                                        Variable: Transfer of debtor’s property only through public auction                Other: Defendant protection
                                        Variable: Mandatory exclusion of defendant’s essential survival assets             Other: Defendant protection
      2. Protective measures            Variable: Attachment of debtor’s property only after judgment                      Other: Defendant protection
      3. Recognition and enforcement    Not covered: Lex Mundi Project analyzed simple local disputes only
      of foreign judgments
Part X: Arbitration                     Not covered: Lex Mundi Project focused on judicial procedures
                                        Variable: Administrative procedures                                                Other: Other determinants
                                                                                     Appendix 2A: Eviction of a tenant
This table classifies countries by legal origin and shows the professional vs. laymen, written vs. oral arguments, legal justification, and engagement formalities indices for the case of eviction of a tenant. A
variables are described in Table 1.
                                                      Professionals vs. laymen                                                                                                                                    Written vs. oral elements                                                                                                                                       Legal justification                                                                                                                                                                                     Statutory regulation of evidence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Control of superior review                                                                                                                                                                  Engagement formalities                                                                                                                   Independent procedural actions                                                                           Formalism index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Authenticity and weight of evidence defined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Only original documents and certified copie




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Notification of judgment by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Enforcement of judgment is automatically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Judgment must be on law (not on equity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mandatory pre-qualification of questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Out-of-court statements are inadmissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    suspended until resolution of the appeal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Judge can not reject irrelevant evidence
                                                              Professional vs. non-professional judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Service of process by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Complaint must be legally justified


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Judgment must be legally justified
                                                                                                        Legal representation is mandatory




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mandatory recording of evidence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Judge can not introduce evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Interlocutory appeals are allowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Comprehensive review in appeal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oral interrogation only by judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Statutory regulation of evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mandatory pre-trial conciliation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Independent procedural actions



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Independent procedural actions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Control of superior review
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Enforcement of judgment
                                 General jurisdiction court




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Written vs. oral elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Notification of judgment
                                                                                                                                            Professionals vs. laymen




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Engagement formalities
    Eviction - by legal origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Trial and judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Legal justification
                                                                                                                                                                                Service of process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Formalism index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Filing and service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Final arguments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are admissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Enforcement
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Opposition




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     required


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              required
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        by law
                                                                                                                                                                       Filing
English Legal Origin
Anguilla                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 1          1                          1                       0.88                          1                                       0                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.13                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              1                                          0                                         1                                      0.67                       7                       6                    4            17                               0.28                                  4.28
Australia                          0                            0                                         0                                 0.00                         1        1                    1             0         n.a                0          0                          1                       0.57                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.25                                    1                                            0                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       5                    4            13                               0.17                                  1.99
Bahrain                            0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    0             0          1                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       5                       3                    8            16                               0.25                                  3.92
Bangladesh                         0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       0                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             0                                    0.13                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       8                       4                    5            17                               0.28                                  3.36
Barbados                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       0                                     0                                       0.00                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.25                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       5                       6                    5            16                               0.25                                  2.33
Belize                             0                            0                                         0                                 0.00                         1        1                    0             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.38                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       1                    2             7                               0.00                                  2.08
Bermuda                            0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    0             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.38                          0                                       0                                     0                                       0.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    0                                            0                                     1                                      0.33                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       3                       1                    4             8                               0.03                                  1.32
Botswana                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 1          0                          1                       0.75                          1                                       0                                     1                                       0.67                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             0                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              1                                          1                                         0                                      0.67                       6                       7                    4            17                               0.28                                  4.07
BVI                                1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.50                          1                                       0                                     0                                       0.33                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       6                    6            19                               0.33                                  2.88
Canada                             0                            0                                         0                                 0.00                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            0                                     0                                      0.33                              1                                          0                                         0                                      0.33                       4                       6                    4            14                               0.19                                  2.32
Cayman                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          1                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     0                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         1                                      0.33                       7                       9                    5            21                               0.39                                  3.60
Cyprus                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     0                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       6                       4                    3            13                               0.17                                  3.50
Ghana                              1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       0                                     0                                       0.00                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.50                                    0                                            0                                     1                                      0.33                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       9                       4                    7            20                               0.36                                  2.69
Gibraltar                          1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          1                          1                       0.75                          1                                       0                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.13                                    0                                            0                                     1                                      0.33                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       8                       4                    6            18                               0.31                                  2.51
Grenada                            0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    0             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.38                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     0                                      0.67                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       5                       1                    5            11                               0.11                                  2.86
Hong Kong                          0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             1          0                 1          0                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.13                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       8                    4            16                               0.25                                  3.13
India                              0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             1          0                 1          0                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            0                                     1                                      0.33                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       8                       7                    6            21                               0.39                                  3.51
Ireland                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0         n.a                1          0                          1                       0.71                          1                                       0                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.13                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       8                       7                    5            20                               0.36                                  3.20
Israel                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          1                 1          1                          1                       0.88                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       1                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.50                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       3                       7                    4            14                               0.19                                  3.90
Jamaica                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    0             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.38                          0                                       0                                     1                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       3                    3            10                               0.08                                  2.38
Kenya                              0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       5                       9                    7            21                               0.39                                  2.85
Malawi                             1                            0                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     0                                       0.67                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              1                                          0                                         0                                      0.33                       5                       2                    5            12                               0.14                                  3.14
Malaysia                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       0                                     1                                       0.33                    1                                       1                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.50                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       9                    9            22                               0.42                                  3.21
Namibia                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       0                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       4                       5                    5            14                               0.19                                  3.86
New Zealand                        0                            0                                         0                                 0.00                         1        1                    0             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.00                                    0                                            1                                     0                                      0.33                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       3                       1                    6            10                               0.08                                  1.25
Nigeria                            0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                      10                       6                    6            22                               0.42                                  3.08
Pakistan                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                      11                      10                    5            26                               0.53                                  3.74
Singapore                          1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       0                                     0                                       0.33                    1                                       1                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       9                       7                    7            23                               0.44                                  3.11
South Africa                       1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.50                          1                                       0                                     1                                       0.67                    1                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             1                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       5                       4                    3            12                               0.14                                  3.68
Sri Lanka                          1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       5                    3            15                               0.22                                  3.89
St. Vincent                        1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          0                       0.50                          1                                       0                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       1                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            0                                     1                                      0.67                              1                                          1                                         0                                      0.67                       5                       7                    6            18                               0.31                                  3.85
Swaziland                          1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       6                    4            14                               0.19                                  3.74
Tanzania                           0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       0                                     0                                       0.33                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.50                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       6                       2                    3            11                               0.11                                  2.90
Thailand                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          1                 1          1                          1                       0.88                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       8                       6                    5            19                               0.33                                  4.25
Trinidad & Tobago                  1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       0                                     0                                       0.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    0                                            0                                     1                                      0.33                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       5                    5            17                               0.28                                  2.15
Turks and Caicos                   1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       0                                     0                                       0.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                      10                    7            24                               0.47                                  2.81
UAE                                0                            0                                         0                                 0.00                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       0                                     1                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.00                                    0                                            0                                     0                                      0.00                              1                                          0                                         0                                      0.33                       3                       9                    5            17                               0.28                                  1.44
Uganda                             0                            0                                         0                                 0.00                         1       n.a                  n.a           n.a        n.a                1         n.a                         1                       1.00                          0                                       0                                     1                                       0.33                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       1                       6                    5            12                               0.14                                  2.51
United Kingdom                     1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 1          0                          1                       0.75                          0                                       0                                     1                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.00                                    0                                            0                                     1                                      0.33                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       3                       5                    4            12                               0.14                                  2.22
USA                                0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    0             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.13                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       6                       3                    6            15                               0.22                                  2.97
Zambia                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       7                       2                    5            14                               0.19                                  3.07
Zimbabwe                           0                            1                                         0                                 0.33                         1        1                    1             1          0                 0          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       4                       4                    3            11                               0.11                                  3.11
Mean                             0.60                         0.83                                      0.00                                0.48                       1.00     1.00                 0.83          0.32       0.08              0.52       0.20                       0.98                      0.63                        0.52                                    0.50                                  0.55                                      0.52                  0.38                                    0.10                                            0.74                                            0.02                                            0.00                                    0.38                                          0.02                                          0.76                                   0.30                                  0.33                                         0.76                                  0.90                                     0.67                            0.14                                       0.33                                      0.05                                     0.17                     5.69                    5.29                 4.95          15.93                             0.25                                  3.02
Median                           1.00                         1.00                                      0.00                                0.67                       1.00     1.00                 1.00          0.00       0.00              1.00       0.00                       1.00                      0.63                        1.00                                    0.50                                  1.00                                      0.50                  0.00                                    0.00                                            1.00                                            0.00                                            0.00                                    0.00                                          0.00                                          1.00                                   0.38                                  0.00                                         1.00                                  1.00                                     0.67                            0.00                                       0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                     5.00                    5.50                 5.00          16.00                             0.25                                  3.10

Socialist Legal Origin
Bulgaria                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          1                 1          1                          1                       0.88                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             0                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          1                                         0                                      0.33                       7                       7                    7            21                               0.39                                  4.51
China                              1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             1                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       5                       6                    6            17                               0.28                                  3.40
Croatia                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    0             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             1                                             1                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     0                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       4                    4            15                               0.22                                  3.43
Czech Republic                     1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    0             0          0                 0          0                          1                       0.38                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       5                    4            16                               0.25                                  3.54
Estonia                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              1                                          0                                         1                                      0.67                       9                       4                    4            17                               0.28                                  4.74
Georgia                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       8                       5                    5            18                               0.31                                  3.51
Hungary                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.13                                    0                                            1                                     1                                      0.67                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       6                       4                    6            16                               0.25                                  3.46
Kazakhstan                         1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    0                                       1                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             0                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                      17                    7            31                               0.67                                  4.00
Latvia                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.63                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       2                    5            14                               0.19                                  3.86
Lithuania                          1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             1                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                      10                       3                    9            22                               0.42                                  4.21
Poland                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             1          0                 1          0                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.50                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       5                    4            13                               0.17                                  4.08
Romania                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                       0                                             1                                             1                                    0.50                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       8                      10                    9            27                               0.56                                  4.47
Russia                             1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    0             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       1                                     1                                       0.67                    1                                       1                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             0                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       4                       3                    4            11                               0.11                                  3.32
Slovenia                           1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          1                                       1                                     1                                       1.00                    1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       0                                             0                                             1                                    0.38                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       9                       8                    7            24                               0.47                                  4.26
Ukraine                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    1             0          0                 1          1                          1                       0.75                          0                                       1                                     0                                       0.33                    0                                       1                                               1                                               0                                               1                                       1                                             0                                             1                                    0.63                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       7                       3                    5            15                               0.22                                  3.60
Vietnam                            1                            1                                         0                                 0.67                         1        1                    0             0          0                 1          0                          1                       0.50                          0                                       0                                     0                                       0.00                    0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                       1                                             0                                             0                                    0.25                                    1                                            1                                     1                                      1.00                              0                                          0                                         0                                      0.00                       9                       6                    7            22                               0.42                                  2.83
Mean                             1.00                         1.00                                      0.00                                0.67                       1.00     1.00                 0.75          0.06       0.06              0.94       0.56                       1.00                      0.67                        0.63                                    0.94                                  0.81                                      0.79                  0.31                                    0.19                                            0.63                                            0.13                                            0.06                                    0.50                                          0.25                                          0.75                                   0.35                                  0.94                                         1.00                                  0.94                                     0.96                            0.06                                       0.06                                      0.06                                     0.06                     7.13                    5.75                 5.81          18.69                             0.32                                  3.83
Median                           1.00                         1.00                                      0.00                                0.67                       1.00     1.00                 1.00          0.00       0.00              1.00       1.00                       1.00                      0.75                        1.00                                    1.00                                  1.00                                      1.00                  0.00                                    0.00                                            1.00                                            0.00                                            0.00                                    0.50                                          0.00                                          1.00                                   0.38                                  1.00                                         1.00                                  1.00                                     1.00                            0.00                                       0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                     7.00                    5.00                 5.50          17.00                             0.28                                  3.73

French Legal Origin
Argentina                                1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1        1                    1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                                0                                           0                                      1                                     0.13                                    1                                           1                                     1                                       1.00                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      13                      11                     8             32                             0.69                                  5.49
Belgium                                  1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1        1                    0              1         0                  1               1                          1                  0.75                                   1                                       0                                      0                             0.33                   0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               1                                                0                                           0                                      1                                     0.25                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      5                       3                      5             13                             0.17                                  3.17
Bolivia                                  1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1        1                    1              1        n.a                 1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      0                             0.67                   0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               0                                                1                                           0                                      1                                     0.25                                    1                                           1                                     1                                       1.00                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      13                      8                      5             26                             0.53                                  5.11
Brazil                                   1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1        1                    1              0         0                  1               0                          1                  0.63                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               0                                               1                                               1                                                0                                           0                                      1                                     0.38                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          0                                           0                            0.00                      4                       6                      3             13                             0.17                                  3.83
Chile                                    1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1        1                    1              0         1                  1               1                          1                  0.88                                   1                                       1                                      0                             0.67                   1                                       1                                               0                                               0                                               0                                                1                                           1                                      0                                     0.50                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      8                       9                      5             22                             0.42                                  4.79
Colombia                                 1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1        1                    1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               0                                                0                                           0                                      1                                     0.25                                    0                                           0                                     0                                       0.00                                      0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      10                      17                     5             32                             0.69                                  3.94
Costa Rica                               1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1        1                    1              0        n.a                 1               1                          1                  0.86                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                                1                                           0                                      1                                     0.50                                    1                                           1                                     1                                       1.00                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      8                       8                      4             20                             0.36                                  5.05
Cote D'Ivoire                            1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1        1                    0              0         0                  0               1                          1                  0.50                                   1                                       1                                      0                             0.67                   0                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               1                                                0                                           0                                      0                                     0.25                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      6                       3                      6             15                             0.22                                  3.64
Dominican Republic                       0                                1                                       0                         0.33                        1        1                    0              0         0                  1               1                          1                  0.63                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                                0                                           1                                      0                                     0.38                                    1                                           1                                     1                                       1.00                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      7                       5                      8             20                             0.36                                  4.36
Ecuador                                  0                                1                                       1                         0.67                        1        1                    0              1         1                  1               1                          1                  0.88                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                                1                                           1                                      1                                     0.63                                    1                                           1                                     0                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      11                      7                      6             24                             0.47                                  4.64
Egypt                                    1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1        1                    1              0         0                  1               0                          1                  0.63                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       1                                               1                                               0                                               0                                                0                                           1                                      1                                     0.50                                    0                                           1                                     0                                       0.33                                      0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      4                       2                      6             12                             0.14                                  3.60
El Salvador                              0                                1                                       0                         0.33                        1        1                    1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   0                                       1                                      1                             0.67                   1                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                                1                                           1                                      1                                     0.75                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      6                       3                      4             13                             0.17                                  4.25
France                                   0                                1                                       0                         0.33                        1        1                    1              0         0                  1               1                          1                  0.75                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               1                                                0                                           0                                      0                                     0.13                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      4                       1                      4             9                              0.06                                  3.60
Greece                                   1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1       n.a                  n.a             1        n.a                 1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   1                                       0                                               1                                               0                                               1                                                1                                           0                                      0                                     0.50                                    0                                           0                                     0                                       0.00                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      4                       3                      5             12                             0.14                                  4.31
Guatemala                                1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1        1                    1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   1                                       1                                               1                                               1                                               0                                                0                                           1                                      1                                     0.75                                    1                                           1                                     1                                       1.00                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      5                       11                     4             20                             0.36                                  5.78
Honduras                                 0                                1                                       1                         0.67                        1        1                    1              1        n.a                 1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      1                             1.00                   0                                       0                                               0                                               1                                               1                                                1                                           1                                      1                                     0.63                                    1                                           0                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      6                       9                      6             21                             0.39                                  4.68
Indonesia                                1                                0                                       0                         0.33                        1        1                    1              1         1                  1               0                          1                  0.88                                   1                                       1                                      0                             0.67                   0                                       0                                               1                                               1                                               0                                                1                                           0                                      1                                     0.50                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      8                       10                     7             25                             0.50                                  3.88
Italy                                    1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1        1                    1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                       1                                      0                             0.67                   0                                       0                                               0                                               0                                               1                                                0                                           0                                      0                                     0.13                                    0                                           1                                     1                                       0.67                                      0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      4                       1                      6             11                             0.11                                  4.24
                                                              Professionals vs. laymen                                                                                                                                            Written vs. oral elements                                                                                                                                                             Legal justification                                                                                                                                                                                           Statutory regulation of evidence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Control of superior review                                                                                                                                                                 Engagement formalities                                                                                                                         Independent procedural actions                                                                              Formalism index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Authenticity and weight of evidence defined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Only original documents and certified copie




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Notification of judgment by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Enforcement of judgment is automatically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Judgment must be on law (not on equity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mandatory pre-qualification of questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Out-of-court statements are inadmissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               suspended until resolution of the appeal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Judge can not reject irrelevant evidence
                                                                       Professional vs. non-professional judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Service of process by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Complaint must be legally justified


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Judgment must be legally justified
                                                                                                                  Legal representation is mandatory




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Judge can not introduce evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mandatory recording of evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Interlocutory appeals are allowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Comprehensive review in appeal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oral interrogation only by judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Statutory regulation of evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mandatory pre-trial conciliation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Independent procedural actions



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Independent procedural actions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Control of superior review
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Enforcement of judgment
                                         General jurisdiction court




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Written vs. oral elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Notification of judgment
                                                                                                                                                       Professionals vs. laymen




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Engagement formalities
    Eviction - by legal origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Trial and judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Legal justification
                                                                                                                                                                                                Service of process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Formalism index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Filing and service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Final arguments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    are admissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Enforcement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Opposition




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               required


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        required
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   by law
                                                                                                                                                                                   Filing
Jordan                                    1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    0             0          1                      1               0                               1                        0.63                               0                                        1                                     1                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              0                                      1                                             0                                              1                                  0.50                                     0                                             0                                    0                                    0.00                               0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                        9                            9                    10             28                               0.58                                   3.38
Kuwait                                    0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    1             0          1                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              1                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.25                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               1                                           1                                         1                                      1.00                        5                            3                     4             12                               0.14                                   4.60
Lebanon                                   1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             0          1                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.50                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        9                           11                     6             26                               0.53                                   5.57
Luxembourg                                0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    0             1         n.a                     1               1                               1                        0.86                               1                                        1                                     0                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              1                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.50                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        6                            7                     5             18                               0.31                                   3.66
Malta                                     1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               0                               1                        0.63                               0                                        1                                     1                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.38                                     1                                             1                                    0                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                        3                            2                     5             10                               0.08                                   3.42
Mexico                                    0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    1             0          1                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      0                                             0                                              1                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.50                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                       14                           12                     9             35                               0.78                                   4.82
Monaco                                    0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    0             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.63                               1                                        1                                     0                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              1                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.25                                     0                                             0                                    1                                    0.33                               1                                           1                                         0                                      0.67                        4                            2                     3              9                               0.06                                   2.93
Morocco                                   1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             1          1                      1               1                               1                        1.00                               1                                        1                                     0                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              1                                      1                                             1                                              1                                  0.63                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        5                            4                     4             13                               0.17                                   4.79
Mozambique                                1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.75                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.38                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        6                            8                     6             20                               0.36                                   5.15
Netherlands                               0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    0             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.63                               1                                        1                                     0                                            0.67                         1                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                  0.13                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                        8                            4                     4             16                               0.25                                   3.00
Netherlands Antilles                      1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    0             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.63                               1                                        0                                     0                                            0.33                         0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.25                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                       10                            6                     6             22                               0.42                                   3.63
Panama                                    1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             1          1                      1               1                               1                        1.00                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      1                                             0                                              0                                  0.25                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                       16                           15                    12             43                               1.00                                   5.92
Paraguay                                  0                             1                                          1                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0         n.a                     1               1                               1                        0.86                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              1                                      1                                             0                                              1                                  0.63                                     1                                             0                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                       10                           10                     9             29                               0.61                                   5.09
Peru                                      1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             1          0                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              1                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.38                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        9                            9                     7             25                               0.50                                   5.42
Philippines                               1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             1          1                      1               1                               1                        1.00                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      1                                             0                                              1                                  0.50                                     0                                             1                                    0                                    0.33                               1                                           1                                         0                                      0.67                       13                            7                     5             25                               0.50                                   5.00
Portugal                                  1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.75                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.38                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        6                           10                     6             22                               0.42                                   4.54
Senegal                                   1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    0             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.63                               0                                        1                                     0                                            0.33                         1                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      1                                             1                                              1                                  0.63                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        8                            4                     6             18                               0.31                                   3.89
Spain                                     1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          1                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.63                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        8                            2                     8             18                               0.31                                   4.81
Tunisia                                   1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    0             0          1                      1               1                               1                        0.75                               0                                        1                                     1                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                  0.25                                     1                                             1                                    0                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                        6                            3                     6             15                               0.22                                   3.89
Turkey                                    1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               0                               1                        0.63                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      0                                             1                                              1                                              1                                      1                                             0                                              1                                  0.75                                     0                                             0                                    0                                    0.00                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                       10                            6                     7             23                               0.44                                   3.49
Uruguay                                   1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             0          0                      0               0                               1                        0.50                               1                                        1                                     0                                            0.67                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                  0.13                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                       14                            8                    10             32                               0.69                                   3.99
Venezuela                                 1                             1                                          1                                  1.00                          1             1                    1             1                                 1               1                               1                        1.00                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.50                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           1                                         1                                      0.67                       14                            9                     7             30                               0.64                                   5.81
Mean                                    0.73                          0.98                                       0.45                                 0.72                        1.00          1.00                 0.72          0.43       0.52                   0.95            0.83                            1.00                       0.81                             0.88                                     0.95                                  0.68                                           0.83                       0.28                                   0.08                                          0.65                                           0.45                                           0.35                                   0.38                                          0.40                                           0.75                                 0.42                                   0.48                                          0.83                                 0.78                                   0.69                             0.08                                        0.90                                      0.60                                     0.53                      7.98                         6.70                  6.05           20.73                             0.38                                   4.38
Median                                  1.00                          1.00                                       0.00                                 0.67                        1.00          1.00                 1.00          0.00       1.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.87                             1.00                                     1.00                                  1.00                                           1.00                       0.00                                   0.00                                          1.00                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   0.00                                          0.00                                           1.00                                 0.44                                   0.00                                          1.00                                 1.00                                   0.67                             0.00                                        1.00                                      1.00                                     0.67                      8.00                         7.00                  6.00           20.00                             0.36                                   4.33

German Legal Origin
Austria                                   1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0         n.a                     1               1                               1                        0.86                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.13                                     1                                             1                                    0                                    0.67                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        6                            6                     6             18                               0.31                                   3.62
Germany                                   0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    1             1          0                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      1                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             1                                              1                                  0.50                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        6                            9                     6             21                               0.39                                   3.76
Japan                                     1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             1          1                      1               1                               1                        1.00                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         1                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.25                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        4                            3                     5             12                               0.14                                   3.72
Korea                                     1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          1                      1               1                               1                        0.88                               0                                        0                                     1                                            0.33                         0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.13                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                        8                            5                     6             19                               0.33                                   3.33
Switzerland                               1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    0             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.63                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.25                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               1                                           0                                         0                                      0.33                        2                            3                     5             10                               0.08                                   3.96
Taiwan                                    1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          0             1                    0             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.50                               0                                        1                                     1                                            0.67                         1                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.38                                     1                                             1                                    0                                    0.67                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        4                            6                     3             13                               0.17                                   3.04
Mean                                    0.83                          1.00                                       0.00                                 0.61                        0.83          1.00                 0.67          0.33       0.40                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.79                             0.67                                     0.83                                  1.00                                           0.83                       0.50                                   0.17                                          0.33                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   0.00                                          0.17                                           1.00                                 0.27                                   0.50                                          1.00                                 0.67                                   0.72                             0.17                                        0.17                                      0.00                                     0.11                      5.00                         5.33                  5.17           15.50                             0.24                                   3.57
Median                                  1.00                          1.00                                       0.00                                 0.67                        1.00          1.00                 1.00          0.00       0.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.87                             1.00                                     1.00                                  1.00                                           1.00                       0.50                                   0.00                                          0.00                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   0.00                                          0.00                                           1.00                                 0.25                                   0.50                                          1.00                                 1.00                                   0.67                             0.00                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                      5.00                         5.50                  5.50           15.50                             0.24                                   3.67

Scandinavian Legal Origin
Denmark                                   1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.75                               1                                        1                                     0                                            0.67                         1                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                  0.13                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        6                            7                     8             21                               0.39                                   3.60
Finland                                   0                             1                                          0                                  0.33                          1             1                    0             0          0                      1               0                               1                        0.50                               0                                        1                                     1                                            0.67                         1                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.25                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        6                            1                     4             11                               0.11                                   2.53
Iceland                                   1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    0             0          0                      0               0                               1                        0.38                               1                                        1                                     1                                            1.00                         0                                      0                                             1                                              0                                              0                                      1                                             0                                              1                                  0.38                                     0                                             1                                    1                                    0.67                               1                                           0                                         0                                      0.33                        5                            2                     2              9                               0.06                                   3.47
Norway                                    1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.75                               0                                        1                                     1                                            0.67                         1                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              0                                  0.13                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               1                                           0                                         0                                      0.33                        4                            5                     4             13                               0.17                                   3.71
Sweden                                    1                             1                                          0                                  0.67                          1             1                    1             0          0                      1               1                               1                        0.75                               0                                        0                                     1                                            0.33                         1                                      0                                             0                                              0                                              0                                      0                                             0                                              1                                  0.25                                     1                                             1                                    1                                    1.00                               0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                        9                            6                     3             18                               0.31                                   3.31
Mean                                    0.80                          1.00                                       0.00                                 0.60                        1.00          1.00                 0.60          0.00       0.00                   0.80            0.60                            1.00                       0.63                             0.40                                     0.80                                  0.80                                           0.67                       0.80                                   0.00                                          0.20                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   0.20                                          0.00                                           0.60                                 0.23                                   0.60                                          1.00                                 1.00                                   0.87                             0.40                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.13                      6.00                         4.20                  4.20           14.40                             0.21                                   3.32
Median                                  1.00                          1.00                                       0.00                                 0.67                        1.00          1.00                 1.00          0.00       0.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.75                             0.00                                     1.00                                  1.00                                           0.67                       1.00                                   0.00                                          0.00                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   0.00                                          0.00                                           1.00                                 0.25                                   1.00                                          1.00                                 1.00                                   1.00                             0.00                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                      6.00                         5.00                  4.00           13.00                             0.17                                   3.47

Mean all countries                      0.70                          0.90                                       0.15                                 0.58                        0.99          1.00                 0.76          0.30       0.22                   0.76            0.53                            0.99                       0.71                             0.63                                     0.73                                  0.68                                           0.68                       0.36                                   0.09                                          0.62                                           0.18                                           0.13                                   0.35                                          0.18                                           0.73                                 0.33                                   0.45                                          0.82                                 0.85                                   0.71                             0.13                                        0.45                                      0.23                                     0.27                      6.49                         5.76                  5.42           17.66                             0.30                                   3.58
Median all countries                    1.00                          1.00                                       0.00                                 0.67                        1.00          1.00                 1.00          0.00       0.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.75                             1.00                                     1.00                                  1.00                                           0.67                       0.00                                   0.00                                          1.00                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   0.00                                          0.00                                           1.00                                 0.38                                   0.00                                          1.00                                 1.00                                   0.67                             0.00                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.33                      6.00                         6.00                  5.00           17.00                             0.28                                   3.63

Tests of Means (t-stats)
Common vs. Socialist                   -3.24a                         -1.76c                                     0.00                                 -3.08a                      0.00          0.00                 0.67         2.04 b      0.18                   -3.12a          -2.87a                          -0.61                      -1.13                            -0.68                                   -3.30a                                 -1.88c                                         -2.89a                     0.48                                   -0.95                                         0.84                                           -1.56                                          -1.64                                  -0.81                                         -2.89a                                         0.09                                 -1.31                                  -4.80a                                        -2.20b                               -0.39                                  -4.57a                           0.83                                      2.15 b                                   -0.22                                       1.87 c                    -2.36b                       -0.55                 -1.89c         -1.98c                            -1.98c                                 -3.87 a
Common vs. French                       -1.24                         -2.20b                                     -5.79a                               -4.34a                      0.00          0.00                 1.19         -1.00       -4.67a                 -4.90a          -7.21a                          -0.98                      -5.61a                           -3.69a                                  -5.17a                                 -1.18                                          -5.20a                     1.01                                   0.32                                          0.86                                           -5.23a                                         -4.70a                                 0.05                                          -4.68a                                         0.12                                 -3.21a                                 -1.31                                         -0.70                                1.61                                   -0.41                            0.98                                   -6.38a                                   -6.59a                                         -7.07a                    -3.61a                      -1.97c                 -2.83a         -3.38a                            -3.38a                                 -7.77 a
Common vs. German                       -1.12                         -1.07                                      0.00                                 -1.31                       2.84 a        0.00                 0.93         -0.08       -2.21b                 -2.29b          -4.87a                          -0.37                      -2.53b                           -0.65                                    -1.54                                 -2.18b                                         -2.29b                     -0.55                                  -0.53                                         2.05 b                                         0.37                                           0.00                                   1.88 c                                        -1.65                                          -1.34                                0.50                                   -0.79                                         -1.34                                1.66                                   -0.54                            -0.15                                       0.81                                      0.54                                     0.70                      0.73                         -0.04                 -0.34          0.22                              0.22                                   -1.74 c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c                                                                                      b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c
Common vs. Scandinavian                 -0.88                         -0.98                                      0.00                                 -1.10                       0.00          0.00                 1.21          1.49       0.63                   -1.17           -2.05                           -0.34                      0.01                             0.51                                     -1.27                                 -1.07                                          -0.98                      -1.82                                  0.71                                          2.55                                           0.34                                           0.00                                   0.78                                          0.34                                           0.77                                 1.20                                   -1.17                                         -1.22                                -0.71                                  -1.77                            -1.45                                       1.55                                      0.49                                     0.42                      -0.30                        0.91                  1.01           0.72                              0.72                                   -0.86
Socialist vs. French                    2.42 b                        0.63                                       -3.55a                               -0.78                       0.00          0.00                 0.24         -2.75a      -3.36a                 -0.18           -2.09b                          0.00                       -3.14a                           -2.18b                                   -0.18                                 1.02                                           -0.57                      0.28                                   1.22                                          -0.17                                          -2.37b                                         -2.25b                                 0.85                                          -1.05                                          0.00                                 -1.27                                  3.48 a                                        1.81 c                               1.44                                   3.38 a                           -0.16                                  -9.77a                                   -4.11a                                         -7.00a                    -0.94                        -0.84                 -0.42          -0.94                             -0.94                                  -2.49 b
Socialist vs. German                    1.71                          0.00                                       0.00                                 1.71                        1.71          0.00                 0.37         -1.68       -1.96c                 -0.60           -2.06c                          0.00                       -1.68                            -0.17                                    0.73                                  -1.12                                          -0.28                      -0.79                                  0.11                                          1.21                                           0.88                                           0.60                                   2.34 b                                        0.40                                           -1.35                                1.31                                   2.62 b                                        0.00                                 1.68                                   4.12 a                           -0.73                                     -0.73                                       0.60                                     -0.57                     2.41 b                       0.26                  0.84           1.29                              1.29                                   1.10
Socialist vs. Scandinavian              1.90 c                        0.00                                       0.00                                 1.90 c                      0.00          0.00                 0.62          0.55       0.55                   0.89            -0.14                           0.00                       0.65                             0.86                                     0.89                                  0.06                                           0.80                       -2.01c                                 1.02                                          1.70                                           0.80                                           0.55                                   1.16                                          1.23                                           0.62                                 2.07 c                                 1.96 c                                        0.00                                 -0.55                                  1.36                             -1.96c                                      0.55                                      0.55                                     -0.76                     1.24                         0.88                  1.70           1.57                              1.57                                   1.93 c
French vs. German                       -0.55                         -0.38                                      2.17b                                0.98                        2.77 a        0.00                 0.25          0.42       0.47                   -0.55           -1.10                           0.00                       0.35                             1.32                                     1.07                                  -1.66                                          0.00                       -1.11                                  -0.73                                         1.49                                           2.17 b                                         1.76 c                                 1.86 c                                        1.09                                           -1.38                                1.81 c                                 -0.11                                         -1.10                                0.57                                   -0.24                            -0.73                                     5.28 a                                   2.93 a                                      4.09 a                    2.05 b                       0.84                  1.05           1.56                              1.56                                   2.37 b
French vs. Scandinavian                 -0.35                         -0.35                                      1.98 c                               0.99                        0.00          0.00                 0.53         1.88 c      2.24 b                 1.26            1.18                            0.00                       2.44 b                           2.78 a                                   1.26                                  -0.56                                          1.63                       -2.45b                                 0.62                                          1.98 c                                         1.98 c                                         1.60                                   0.76                                          1.78 c                                         0.70                                 2.23 b                                 -0.52                                         -1.01                                -1.18                                  -1.25                            -2.25b                                    6.56 a                                   2.68 b                                      3.55 a                    1.25                         1.40                  1.92 c         1.72 c                            1.72 c                                 2.82 a
German vs. Scandinavian                 0.13                          0.00                                       0.00                                 0.13                        -0.90         0.00                 0.21         1.43        1.63                   1.11            1.81                            0.00                       1.48                             0.83                                     0.13                                  1.11                                           1.06                       -0.98                                  0.90                                          0.45                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   -1.11                                         0.90                                           1.81                                 0.59                                   -0.30                                         0.00                                 -1.43                                  -1.51                            -0.81                                     0.90                                       .                                         -0.21                     -0.83                        0.78                  0.91           0.39                              0.39                                   1.04

Tests of Medians (z-stats)
Common vs. Socialist                   -3.00a                         -1.73c                                     0.00                                 -3.08a                      0.00          0.00                 0.68         1.99 b      0.19                   -2.90a          -2.70a                          -0.62                      -1.51                            -0.69                                   -3.04a                                 -1.84c                                         -2.81a                     0.48                                   -0.96                                         0.84                                           -1.54                                          -1.62                                  -0.82                                         -2.72a                                         0.09                                 -0.92                                  -4.08a                                        -2.13b                               -0.39                                  -4.22a                           0.83                                      2.09 b                                   -0.23                                       2.13 b                    -2.34b                       0.18                  -1.58          -1.64                             -1.64                                  -3.50 a
Common vs. French                       -1.23                         -2.15b                                     -4.89a                               -3.78a                      0.00          0.00                 1.18         -1.00       -4.11a                 -4.33a          -5.63a                          -0.98                      -4.67a                           -3.43a                                  -4.51a                                 -1.17                                          -4.48a                     1.01                                   0.33                                          0.86                                           -4.54a                                         -4.18a                                 0.06                                          -4.17a                                         0.12                                 -2.77a                                 -1.30                                         -0.70                                1.60                                   -0.86                            0.98                                   -5.23a                                   -5.34a                                         -5.60a                    -3.04a                       -1.61                 -2.54b         -2.76a                            -2.76a                                 -5.97 a
Common vs. German                       -1.12                         -1.07                                      0.00                                 -1.29                       2.65      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.00                 0.94         -0.08       -2.12              b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2.19       b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -3.98                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.38                      -2.00                        b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.65                                    -1.52                                 -2.10                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -2.17                  b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.55                                  -0.53                                         1.98            b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.38                                           0.00                                   1.83                         c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1.62                                          -1.33                                0.68                                   -0.79                                         -1.33                                1.63                                   -0.47                            -0.15                                       0.82                                      0.54                                     0.64                      0.65                         0.08                  -0.66          0.20                              0.20                                   -1.75 c
Common vs. Scandinavian                 -0.88                         -0.98                                      0.00                                 -1.06                       0.00          0.00                 1.21          1.47       0.64                   -1.16           -1.98b                          -0.35                      -0.30                            0.52                                     -1.26                                 -1.07                                          -1.03                      -1.77c                                 0.71                                          2.41 b                                         0.35                                           0.00                                   0.79                                          0.35                                           0.78                                 1.45                                   -1.16                                         -1.22                                -0.71                                  -1.79c                           -1.43                                       1.52                                      0.49                                     0.33                      -0.38                        0.77                  1.30           0.73                              0.73                                   -0.85
Socialist vs. French                    2.32 b                        0.63                                       -3.23a                               -0.98                       0.00          0.00                 0.24         -2.60a      -3.05a                 -0.19           -2.03b                          0.00                       -2.78a                           -2.11b                                   -0.19                                 1.02                                           -0.04                      0.28                                   1.22                                          -0.17                                          -2.27b                                         -2.18b                                 0.85                                          -1.05                                          0.00                                 -1.22                                  3.17 a                                        1.77 c                               1.42                                   3.50 a                           -0.16                                  -5.93a                                   -3.62a                                         -5.02a                    -0.44                        -0.92                 -0.30          -0.73                             -0.73                                  -2.45 b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c                                               c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b                                                                                                                                                               b                                                                                                              a                                                                                                                                                                                                      b
Socialist vs. German                    1.63                          0.00                                       0.00                                 1.63                        1.63          0.00                 0.38         -1.61       -1.84                  -0.61           -1.92                           0.00                       -1.60                            -0.18                                    0.74                                  -1.12                                          -0.21                      -0.80                                  0.11                                          1.20                                           0.89                                           0.61                                   2.12                                          0.41                                           -1.32                                1.27                                   2.32                                          0.00                                 1.61                                   3.10                             -0.74                                     -0.74                                       0.61                                     -0.99                     2.10                         -0.11                 0.60           1.14                              1.14                                   0.88
Socialist vs. Scandinavian              1.79 c                        0.00                                       0.00                                 1.79 c                      0.00          0.00                 0.63          0.56       0.56                   0.89            -0.14                           0.00                       0.40                             0.87                                     0.89                                  0.06                                           1.22                       -1.88c                                 1.02                                          1.62                                           0.81                                           0.56                                   1.15                                          1.21                                           0.63                                 1.95 c                                 1.84 c                                        0.00                                 -0.56                                  1.33                             -1.84c                                      0.56                                      0.56                                     -1.21                     1.35                         0.62                  1.78 c         1.49                              1.49                                   1.53
French vs. German                       -0.56                         -0.39                                      2.08 b                               1.07                        2.58 a        0.00                 0.26          0.42       0.47                   -0.55           -1.10                           0.00                       0.38                             1.31                                     1.07                                  -1.63                                          -0.21                      -1.10                                  -0.73                                         1.47                                           2.08 b                                         1.72 c                                 1.81 c                                        1.09                                           -1.37                                1.78 c                                 -0.11                                         -1.10                                0.57                                   0.16                             -0.73                                     4.18 a                                   2.71 a                                      3.39 a                    2.01 b                       0.75                  0.85           1.60                              1.60                                   2.25 b
French vs. Scandinavian                 -0.35                         -0.35                                      1.91 c                               1.07                        0.00          0.00                 0.54         1.83 c      2.13 b                 1.25            1.17                            0.00                       2.05 b                           2.59 a                                   1.25                                  -0.56                                          1.62                       -2.32b                                 0.63                                          1.91 c                                         1.91 c                                         1.58                                   0.76                                          1.74 c                                         0.71                                 2.17 b                                 -0.52                                         -1.01                                -1.17                                  -1.26                            -2.16b                                    4.69 a                                   2.51 b                                      3.06 a                    1.15                         1.50                  2.00 b         1.79 c                            1.79 c                                 2.67 a
German vs. Scandinavian                 0.14                          0.00                                       0.00                                 0.14                        -0.91         0.00                 0.22         1.36        1.50                   1.10            1.63                            0.00                       1.57                             0.84                                     0.14                                  1.10                                           1.18                       -0.98                                  0.91                                          0.47                                           0.00                                           0.00                                   -1.10                                         0.91                                           1.63                                 0.48                                   -0.32                                         0.00                                 -1.36                                  -1.42                            -0.82                                     0.91                                     0.00                                        -0.22                     -0.75                        0.65                  1.21           0.46                              0.46                                   1.28

a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.
n.a.=Not applicable
.=Missing
                                                                                 Appendix 2B : Collection of a check
This table classifies countries by legal origin and shows the professional vs. laymen, written vs. oral arguments, legal justification, and Engagement formalities indices for the case of collection
of a check. All variables are described in Table 1.
                          Professionals vs. Laymen                                                                                                                                                         Written vs. oral elements                                                                                                                                         Legal justification                                                                                                                                                                       Statutory regulation of evidence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Control of superior review                                                                                                                                                    Engagement formalities                                                                                                             Independent procedural actions                                                                              Formalism index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Notification of judgment by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Enforcement of judgment is automatically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Judgment must be on law (not on equity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mandatory pre-qualification of questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Out-of-court statements are inadmissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                suspended until resolution of the appeal.
                                                       Professional vs. non-professional judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Judge can not reject irrelevant evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Only original documents and certified




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Service of process by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Authenticity and weight of evidence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Complaint must be legally justified


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Judgment must be legally justified
                                                                                                 Legal representation is mandatory




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mandatory recording of evidence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Judge can not introduce evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Interlocutory appeals are allowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Comprehensive review in appeal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oral interrogation only by judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Statutory regulation of evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mandatory pre-trial conciliation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Independent procedural actions



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Independent procedural actions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Control of superior review
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Enforcement of judgment
                          General jurisdiction court




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Written vs. oral elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Notification of judgment
                                                                                                                                     Professionals vs. laymen




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Engagement formalities
Check - by legal origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             copies are admissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Trial and judgment
                                                                                                                                                                         Service of process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Formalism index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Legal justification




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Filing and service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Final arguments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     defined by law




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Enforcement
                                                                                                                                                                                              Opposition




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    required


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             required
                                                                                                                                                                Filing
English Legal Origin
Anguilla                   0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     1                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.13                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      7                    2                    5             14                               0.13                                  1.96
Australia                  0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                   n.a             0         n.a.                0         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.25                                       1                                    0                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      2                    3                    6             11                               0.05                                  1.80
Bahrain                    0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           1                 1         0                          1                        0.75                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    1                                 1                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       1                               1                                0.75                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      8                    4                    6             18                               0.24                                  4.40
Bangladesh                 1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         1                                        0                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               0                                0.13                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      6                    3                    6             15                               0.16                                  3.24
Barbados                   0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     1                                        0.33                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.25                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      4                    2                    6             12                               0.08                                  2.37
Belize                     0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      4                    1                    4              9                               0.00                                  1.42
Bermuda                    0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       0                                    0                                1                                  0.33                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      5                    6                    4             15                               0.16                                  1.78
Botswana                   1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1           0                 1         0                          1                        0.75                         1                                        0                                     1                                        0.67                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               0                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          1                                           1                                         0                                      0.67                      6                    7                    7             20                               0.29                                  4.08
BVI                        0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      4                    1                    8             13                               0.11                                  2.52
Canada                     0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    0                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      3                    5                    9             17                               0.21                                  2.09
Cayman                     1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 0         1                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      7                    5                    5             17                               0.21                                  2.75
Cyprus                     1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         1                                        1                                     0                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      12                   6                    4             22                               0.34                                  3.68
Ghana                      1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.50                                       0                                    0                                1                                  0.33                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      7                    5                    9             21                               0.32                                  2.65
Gibraltar                  1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           1                 0         1                          1                        0.75                         1                                        0                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.13                                       0                                    0                                1                                  0.33                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    1                    7             16                               0.18                                  2.39
Grenada                    0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                0                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      4                    1                    6             11                               0.05                                  2.80
Hong Kong                  0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    1              0           0                 0         1                          1                        0.63                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.00                                       0                                    0                                0                                  0.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      4                    2                    7             13                               0.11                                  0.73
India                      1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    0                                1                                  0.33                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    8                    6             22                               0.34                                  3.34
Ireland                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0         n.a.                0         0                          1                        0.57                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.13                                       1                                    1                                0                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    4                    7             19                               0.26                                  2.63
Israel                     0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           1                 1         1                          1                        0.88                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    1                                 1                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.50                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      6                    7                    6             19                               0.26                                  3.30
Jamaica                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     1                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      4                    3                    4             11                               0.05                                  2.34
Kenya                      1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      7                    9                    9             25                               0.42                                  3.09
Malawi                     1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.25                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          1                                           0                                         0                                      0.33                      3                    4                    5             12                               0.08                                  2.95
Malaysia                   0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    1                                 1                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.50                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      4                    6                    12            22                               0.34                                  2.34
Namibia                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1           0                 0         0                          1                        0.63                         1                                        0                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      4                    5                    6             15                               0.16                                  3.82
New Zealand                0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    0              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.00                                       1                                    1                                0                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      2                    1                    9             12                               0.08                                  1.58
Nigeria                    0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      13                   8                    8             29                               0.53                                  3.19
Pakistan                   1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1           0                 0         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      12                   12                   6             30                               0.55                                  3.76
Singapore                  0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    1                                 1                                           0                                         0                                          1                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.50                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          1                                           0                                         0                                      0.33                      7                    7                    6             20                               0.29                                  2.50
South Africa               0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.38                         0                                        0                                     1                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       1                               1                                0.25                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      3                    1                    7             11                               0.05                                  1.68
Sri Lanka                  1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1         n.a.                1         0                          1                        0.86                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    3                    6             17                               0.21                                  3.78
St. Vincent                1                            1                                         1                                  1.00                        1         1                    1              0         n.a.                0         0                          0                        0.43                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 1                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    0                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      5                    4                    6             15                               0.16                                  3.63
Swaziland                  1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1           0                 0         0                          1                        0.63                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      4                    6                    5             15                               0.16                                  3.70
Tanzania                   1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1         n.a.                1         0                          1                        0.86                         1                                        1                                     0                                        0.67                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.50                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      6                    3                    5             14                               0.13                                  3.82
Thailand                   0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        0         1                    0              0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.50                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      8                    5                    6             19                               0.26                                  3.14
Trinidad & Tobago          0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       0                                    0                                1                                  0.33                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      7                    4                    8             19                               0.26                                  1.80
Turks and Caicos           0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        0         1                    0              0           0                 0         0                          1                        0.25                         0                                        0                                     0                                        0.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      6                    2                    10            18                               0.24                                  1.86
UAE                        1                            1                                         1                                  1.00                        1         1                    1              1           1                 1         0                          1                        0.88                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.13                                       0                                    1                                0                                  0.33                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      13                   8                    6             27                               0.47                                  3.81
Uganda                     0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    1              1         n.a.                0         0                          1                        0.71                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      7                    2                    7             16                               0.18                                  2.61
United Kingdom             1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                    1              1         n.a.                0         0                          1                        0.71                         0                                        0                                     1                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          1                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.13                                       1                                    0                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      2                    5                    5             12                               0.08                                  2.58
USA                        0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         0                                        0                                     1                                        0.33                    1                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.13                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      2                    3                    7             12                               0.08                                  2.62
Zambia                     0                            0                                         0                                  0.00                        1         1                    1              0         n.a.                0         0                          1                        0.57                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      9                    2                    5             16                               0.18                                  2.13
Zimbabwe                   0                            1                                         0                                  0.33                        1         1                    1              1           0                 0         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      4                    4                    5             13                               0.11                                  3.11
Mean                      0.45                         0.79                                      0.05                                0.43                       0.95     1.00                 0.71           0.24        0.12              0.38       0.14                       0.98                      0.58                        0.24                                     0.52                                  0.50                                      0.42                  0.36                               0.12                                       0.74                                       0.00                                       0.05                                    0.40                                    0.05                             0.76                              0.31                                     0.40                                  0.76                             0.88                                0.68                         0.07                                       0.33                                      0.00                                     0.13                     6.02                 4.29                 6.45          16.76                             0.20                                  2.76
Median                    0.00                         1.00                                      0.00                                0.33                       1.00     1.00                 1.00           0.00        0.00              0.00       0.00                       1.00                      0.63                        0.00                                     1.00                                  0.50                                      0.33                  0.00                               0.00                                       1.00                                       0.00                                       0.00                                    0.00                                    0.00                             1.00                              0.38                                     0.00                                  1.00                             1.00                                0.67                         0.00                                       0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                     6.00                 4.00                 6.00          16.00                             0.18                                  2.64

Socialist Legal Origin
Bulgaria                   1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           1                 1         1                          1                        0.88                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    1                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               0                                0.25                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           1                                         0                                      0.33                      7                    8                    11            26                               0.45                                  4.57
China                      1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       1                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      10                   3                    7             20                               0.29                                  3.41
Croatia                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       1                               1                                0.25                                       1                                    1                                0                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    6                    6             20                               0.29                                  3.62
Czech Republic             1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1             n.a.        n.a.                1         0                          1                        0.83                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      7                    4                    5             16                               0.18                                  4.06
Estonia                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    1                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         1                                      0.33                      8                    4                    6             18                               0.24                                  4.36
Georgia                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.25                                       0                                    1                                1                                  0.67                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      9                    3                    5             17                               0.21                                  3.09
Hungary                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.13                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      6                    5                    6             17                               0.21                                  3.42
Kazakhstan                 1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               1           0                 1         0                          1                        0.75                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    0                                 1                                           1                                         0                                          1                                        1                                       0                               0                                0.50                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          1                                           0                                         0                                      0.33                      12                   17                   12            41                               0.84                                  4.76
Latvia                     1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.63                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         1                                          0                                        0                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      9                    2                    8             19                               0.26                                  3.93
Lithuania                  1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          1                                        1                                       1                               1                                0.50                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      16                   3                    11            30                               0.55                                  4.47
Poland                     1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               1           0                 1         1                          1                        0.88                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    1                                 0                                           0                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    5                    5             18                               0.24                                  4.15
Romania                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    0                                 0                                           1                                         1                                          0                                        0                                       1                               1                                0.50                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    6                    14            28                               0.50                                  4.42
Russia                     1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   0               0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        1                                     1                                        0.67                    1                                 1                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        0                                       0                               0                                0.38                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    3                    5             16                               0.18                                  3.39
Slovenia                   1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         1                                        1                                     1                                        1.00                    1                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.50                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      8                    4                    10            22                               0.34                                  4.26
Ukraine                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   1               0           0                 1         1                          1                        0.75                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 1                                           1                                         0                                          1                                        1                                       0                               1                                0.63                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      10                   3                    7             20                               0.29                                  3.66
Vietnam                    1                            1                                         0                                  0.67                        1         1                   0               0           0                 1         0                          1                        0.50                         0                                        1                                     0                                        0.33                    0                                 0                                           1                                         0                                          0                                        1                                       0                               0                                0.25                                       1                                    1                                1                                  1.00                          0                                           0                                         0                                      0.00                      13                   6                    9             28                               0.50                                  3.25
Mean                      1.00                         1.00                                      0.00                                0.67                       1.00     1.00                 0.88           0.13        0.07              1.00       0.63                       1.00                      0.72                        0.56                                     1.00                                  0.81                                      0.79                  0.31                               0.19                                       0.56                                       0.13                                       0.19                                    0.63                                    0.25                             0.75                              0.38                                     0.94                                  1.00                             0.94                                0.96                         0.06                                       0.06                                      0.06                                     0.06                     9.19                 5.13                 7.94          22.25                             0.35                                  3.93
Median                    1.00                         1.00                                      0.00                                0.67                       1.00     1.00                 1.00           0.00        0.00              1.00       1.00                       1.00                      0.75                        1.00                                     1.00                                  1.00                                      1.00                  0.00                               0.00                                       1.00                                       0.00                                       0.00                                    1.00                                    0.00                             1.00                              0.38                                     1.00                                  1.00                             1.00                                1.00                         0.00                                       0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                     8.00                 4.00                 7.00          20.00                             0.29                                  3.99

French Legal Origin
Argentina                         1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1             1                 1              1        n.a.                1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                        1                                      1                             1.00                            0                                    0                                           0                                         0                                        0                                       0                                      0                                1                        0.13                                                1                                   1                                 1                         1.00                                   0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      16                   5                    11              32                             0.61                                  5.40
Belgium                           0                                1                                       0                         0.33                        1             1                 0              1         0                  1               1                          1                  0.75                                   1                                        0                                      0                             0.33                            0                                    0                                           0                                         0                                        0                                       0                                      0                                1                        0.13                                                0                                   1                                 1                         0.67                                   0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      5                    4                    7               16                             0.18                                  2.73
Bolivia                           1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1             1                 1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                        1                                      0                             0.67                            0                                    0                                           0                                         0                                        1                                       1                                      0                                1                        0.38                                                1                                   1                                 1                         1.00                                   1                                          1                                           1                            1.00                      18                   11                   7               36                             0.71                                  5.75
Brazil                            0                                1                                       0                         0.33                        1             1                 0              0         0                  1               0                          1                  0.50                                   1                                        1                                      1                             1.00                            0                                    0                                           0                                         1                                        1                                       0                                      0                                1                        0.38                                                0                                   1                                 1                         0.67                                   0                                          0                                           0                            0.00                      4                    7                    5               16                             0.18                                  3.06
Chile                             1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1             1                 0              0         1                  1               1                          1                  0.75                                   1                                        1                                      0                             0.67                            1                                    1                                           0                                         0                                        0                                       1                                      1                                0                        0.50                                                0                                   1                                 1                         0.67                                   0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      10                   8                    3               21                             0.32                                  4.57
Colombia                          1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1             1                 1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                        1                                      1                             1.00                            0                                    0                                           1                                         0                                        0                                       1                                      0                                1                        0.38                                                0                                   0                                 0                         0.00                                   0                                          1                                           0                            0.33                      14                   14                   9               37                             0.74                                  4.11
Costa Rica                        1                                1                                       1                         1.00                        1             1                 1              1         1                  1               1                          1                  1.00                                   1                                        1                                      1                             1.00                            0                                    0                                           1                                         1                                        0                                       1                                      0                                1                        0.50                                                1                                   1                                 1                         1.00                                   0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      8                    9                    4               21                             0.32                                  5.48
Cote D'Ivoire                     1                                1                                       0                         0.67                        1             1                 0              0         1                  0               1                          1                  0.63                                   1                                        1                                      0                             0.67                            0                                    0                                           1                                         0                                        0                                       0                                      0                                0                        0.13                                                0                                   1                                 1                         0.67                                   0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      6                    3                    9               18                             0.24                                  3.65
Dominican Republic                0                                1                                       0                         0.33                        1             1                 0              0         1                  1               1                          1                  0.75                                   1                                        1                                      0                             0.67                            0                                    0                                           1                                         1                                        0                                       0                                      1                                0                        0.38                                                1                                   1                                 1                         1.00                                   0                                          1                                           1                            0.67                      7                    5                    8               20                             0.29                                  4.08
                                       Professionals vs. Laymen                                                                                                                                                                              Written vs. oral elements                                                                                                                                                               Legal justification                                                                                                                                                                                         Statutory regulation of evidence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Control of superior review                                                                                                                                                                Engagement formalities                                                                                                                   Independent procedural actions                                                                                             Formalism index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Notification of judgment by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Enforcement of judgment is automatically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Judgment must be on law (not on equity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mandatory pre-qualification of questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Out-of-court statements are inadmissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      suspended until resolution of the appeal.
                                                                         Professional vs. non-professional judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Judge can not reject irrelevant evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Only original documents and certified




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Service of process by judicial officer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Authenticity and weight of evidence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Complaint must be legally justified


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Judgment must be legally justified
                                                                                                                    Legal representation is mandatory




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mandatory recording of evidence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Judge can not introduce evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Interlocutory appeals are allowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Comprehensive review in appeal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oral interrogation only by judge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Statutory regulation of evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mandatory pre-trial conciliation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Independent procedural actions



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Independent procedural actions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Control of superior review
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Enforcement of judgment
                                       General jurisdiction court




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Written vs. oral elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Notification of judgment
                                                                                                                                                             Professionals vs. laymen




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Engagement formalities
Check - by legal origin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 copies are admissible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trial and judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Service of process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Formalism index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Legal justification




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Filing and service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Final arguments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         defined by law




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Enforcement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Opposition




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Judgment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Evidence




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      required


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               required
                                                                                                                                                                                             Filing
Ecuador                                1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         1                                       1                               1                                 0.63                                        1                                    1                                     0                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           14                        12                    7              33                                   0.63                                       4.92
Egypt                                  1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                0           1                      1              0                               1                         0.75                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      1                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    0                                     0                                   0.00                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           6                         2                     9              17                                   0.21                                       3.79
El Salvador                            0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   0                1           1                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               1                                         1                                       1                               1                                 0.88                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           8                         4                     4              16                                   0.18                                       4.60
France                                 0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.75                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               1                                         0                                       0                               0                                 0.13                                        0                                    0                                     1                                   0.33                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           3                         1                     6              10                                   0.03                                       3.23
Greece                                 1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1            n.a.                 n.a.              1         n.a.                     1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         1                                       1                               0                                 0.50                                        0                                    0                                     0                                   0.00                               1                                            0                                         1                                      0.67                           5                         3                     7              15                                   0.16                                       3.99
Guatemala                              1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      1                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.75                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           8                         5                     6              19                                   0.26                                       5.68
Honduras                               1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            0                                              1                                               1                                         1                                       1                               1                                 0.63                                        1                                    0                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           13                        12                    7              32                                   0.61                                       4.90
Indonesia                              1                                 0                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              0                               1                         0.88                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           11                        10                    8              29                                   0.53                                       3.90
Italy                                  0                                 1                                          1                                       0.67                             1            n.a.                  1                0           1                      1              1                               1                         0.86                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               0                                 0.00                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           5                         6                     5              16                                   0.18                                       4.04
Jordan                                 1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           1                      1              0                               1                         0.75                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    0                                     0                                   0.00                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           12                        9                     11             32                                   0.61                                       3.52
Kuwait                                 1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           1                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.13                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           9                         3                     5              17                                   0.21                                       3.88
Lebanon                                1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                0           1                      1              0                               1                         0.75                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         1                                       1                               1                                 0.63                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           8                         11                    8              27                                   0.47                                       4.85
Luxembourg                             0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   0                0         n.a.                     1              1                               1                         0.71                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               1                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.50                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           5                         9                     8              22                                   0.34                                       3.56
Malta                                  0                                 0                                          0                                       0.00                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              0                               1                         0.63                              0                                          1                                     0                                             0.33                         0                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.38                                        1                                    1                                     0                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           6                         2                     5              13                                   0.11                                       2.44
Mexico                                 0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   1                0           1                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      0                                            0                                              1                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           15                        16                    16             47                                   1.00                                       4.71
Monaco                                 0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1            n.a.                  1                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.71                              0                                          1                                     0                                             0.33                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               1                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.25                                        0                                    0                                     1                                   0.33                               1                                            1                                         0                                      0.67                           7                         2                     4              13                                   0.11                                       2.74
Morocco                                1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         1                                       1                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           9                         4                     4              17                                   0.21                                       4.71
Mozambique                             1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.75                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               1                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.50                                        1                                    0                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           4                         7                     7              18                                   0.24                                       4.49
Netherlands                            0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   0                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.63                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               0                                 0.13                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           11                        4                     6              21                                   0.32                                       3.07
Netherlands Antilles                   1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                1           0                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              1                                          0                                     0                                             0.33                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.25                                        0                                    1                                     0                                   0.33                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           8                         7                     9              24                                   0.39                                       2.85
Panama                                 1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         1                                       0                               0                                 0.25                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           18                        11                    15             44                                   0.92                                       5.84
Paraguay                               1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1         n.a.                     1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               1                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.63                                        1                                    0                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           20                        13                    12             45                                   0.95                                       5.91
Peru                                   1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           0                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               1                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.38                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           14                        9                     12             35                                   0.68                                       5.60
Philippines                            1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    1                                     0                                   0.33                               1                                            1                                         0                                      0.67                           13                        7                     8              28                                   0.50                                       5.00
Portugal                               1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.75                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               1                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.50                                        1                                    0                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           5                         9                     8              22                                   0.34                                       3.93
Senegal                                1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                1           1                      0              1                               1                         0.88                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         1                                       1                               1                                 0.63                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           13                        8                     9              30                                   0.55                                       4.72
Spain                                  1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1           1                      1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.63                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           9                         5                     6              20                                   0.29                                       5.25
Tunisia                                1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1            n.a.                 n.a.            n.a.        n.a.                     1              1                               1                         1.00                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            0                                              1                                               0                                         0                                       1                               0                                 0.25                                        1                                    1                                     0                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           4                         1                     9              14                                   0.13                                       4.05
Turkey                                 0                                 0                                          0                                       0.00                             1              1                   1                1         n.a.                     1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            1                                              1                                               0                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.63                                        0                                    0                                     0                                   0.00                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           9                         4                     5              18                                   0.24                                       2.53
Uruguay                                1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                0           0                      0              0                               1                         0.50                              1                                          1                                     0                                             0.67                         0                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               0                                 0.13                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           16                        8                     14             38                                   0.76                                       4.05
Venezuela                              1                                 1                                          1                                       1.00                             1              1                   1                1         n.a.                     1              1                               1                         1.00                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.50                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         1                                      0.67                           20                        9                     12             41                                   0.84                                       6.01
Mean                                  0.70                              0.93                                       0.43                                     0.68                            1.00          1.00                 0.79            0.54        0.67                   0.93            0.83                            1.00                       0.85                             0.85                                       0.95                                  0.60                                           0.80                       0.28                                    0.08                                        0.65                                            0.45                                            0.28                                     0.43                                    0.43                             0.75                               0.42                                      0.43                                  0.73                                  0.75                                 0.63                              0.10                                        0.85                                      0.53                                     0.49                          9.90                      6.98                  7.88           24.75                                 0.41                                       4.29
Median                                1.00                              1.00                                       0.00                                     0.67                            1.00          1.00                 1.00            1.00        1.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.88                             1.00                                       1.00                                  1.00                                           0.83                       0.00                                    0.00                                        1.00                                            0.00                                            0.00                                     0.00                                    0.00                             1.00                               0.50                                      0.00                                  1.00                                  1.00                                 0.67                              0.00                                        1.00                                      1.00                                     0.67                          9.00                      7.00                  7.50           21.00                                 0.32                                       4.10
German Legal Origin
Austria                                1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0         n.a.                     1              1                               1                         0.86                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               1                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.38                                        1                                    0                                     0                                   0.33                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           6                         6                     8              20                                   0.29                                       3.52
Germany                                0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   1                1           0                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         1                                      1                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       1                               1                                 0.50                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           4                         3                     7              14                                   0.13                                       3.51
Japan                                  0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   1                1           0                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.25                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           8                         3                     5              16                                   0.18                                       2.98
Korea                                  1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           1                      1              1                               1                         0.88                              0                                          0                                     1                                             0.33                         0                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.13                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           11                        5                     7              23                                   0.37                                       3.37
Switzerland                            1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   0                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.63                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.38                                        0                                    0                                     1                                   0.33                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           4                         4                     6              14                                   0.13                                       3.13
Taiwan                                 0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             0              1                   0                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.50                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.38                                        0                                    1                                     0                                   0.33                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           4                         6                     5              15                                   0.16                                       2.37
Mean                                  0.50                              1.00                                       0.00                                     0.50                            0.83          1.00                 0.67            0.33        0.20                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.77                             0.33                                       0.83                                  1.00                                           0.72                       0.67                                    0.17                                        0.33                                            0.00                                            0.17                                     0.17                                    0.17                             1.00                               0.33                                      0.17                                  0.67                                  0.67                                 0.50                              0.00                                        0.33                                      0.00                                     0.11                          6.17                      4.50                  6.33           17.00                                 0.21                                       3.15
Median                                0.50                              1.00                                       0.00                                     0.50                            1.00          1.00                 1.00            0.00        0.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.87                             0.00                                       1.00                                  1.00                                           0.67                       1.00                                    0.00                                        0.00                                            0.00                                            0.00                                     0.00                                    0.00                             1.00                               0.38                                      0.00                                  1.00                                  1.00                                 0.50                              0.00                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                          5.00                      4.50                  6.50           15.50                                 0.17                                       3.25

Scandinavian Legal Origin
Denmark                                0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   0                1           0                      1              0                               1                         0.63                              0                                          0                                     0                                             0.00                         1                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               0                                 0.13                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           4                         0                     10             14                                   0.13                                       2.55
Finland                                1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              0                               1                         0.63                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.25                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           10                        2                     7              19                                   0.26                                       3.14
Iceland                                1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              0                               1                         0.63                              1                                          1                                     1                                             1.00                         0                                      0                                            1                                              0                                               0                                         1                                       0                               1                                 0.38                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            1                                         0                                      0.33                           6                         3                     5              14                                   0.13                                       4.13
Norway                                 0                                 1                                          0                                       0.33                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.75                              0                                          1                                     1                                             0.67                         1                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               0                                 0.13                                        1                                    1                                     1                                   1.00                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           5                         3                     4              12                                   0.08                                       2.95
Sweden                                 1                                 1                                          0                                       0.67                             1              1                   1                0           0                      1              1                               1                         0.75                              0                                          0                                     1                                             0.33                         1                                      0                                            0                                              0                                               0                                         0                                       0                               1                                 0.25                                        0                                    1                                     1                                   0.67                               0                                            0                                         0                                      0.00                           11                        6                     4              21                                   0.32                                       2.98
Mean                                  0.60                              1.00                                       0.00                                     0.53                            1.00          1.00                 0.80            0.20        0.00                   1.00            0.40                            1.00                       0.68                             0.20                                       0.60                                  0.80                                           0.53                       0.80                                    0.00                                        0.20                                            0.00                                            0.00                                     0.20                                    0.00                             0.60                               0.23                                      0.60                                  1.00                                  1.00                                 0.87                              0.00                                        0.40                                      0.00                                     0.13                          7.20                      2.80                  6.00           16.00                                 0.18                                       3.15
Median                                1.00                              1.00                                       0.00                                     0.67                            1.00          1.00                 1.00            0.00        0.00                   1.00            0.00                            1.00                       0.63                             0.00                                       1.00                                  1.00                                           0.67                       1.00                                    0.00                                        0.00                                            0.00                                            0.00                                     0.00                                    0.00                             1.00                               0.25                                      1.00                                  1.00                                  1.00                                 1.00                              0.00                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.00                          6.00                      3.00                  5.00           14.00                                 0.13                                       2.98

Mean all countries                    0.63                              0.89                                       0.17                                     0.57                            0.97          1.00                 0.76            0.34        0.30                   0.73            0.52                            0.99                       0.71                             0.51                                       0.77                                  0.62                                           0.64                       0.36                                    0.11                                        0.63                                            0.18                                            0.16                                     0.42                                    0.22                             0.76                               0.36                                      0.49                                  0.79                                  0.83                                 0.70                              0.07                                        0.49                                      0.20                                     0.25                          7.97                      5.34                  7.17           20.48                                 0.30                                       3.53
Median all countries                  1.00                              1.00                                       0.00                                     0.67                            1.00          1.00                 1.00            0.00        0.00                   1.00            1.00                            1.00                       0.75                             1.00                                       1.00                                  1.00                                           0.67                       0.00                                    0.00                                        1.00                                            0.00                                            0.00                                     0.00                                    0.00                             1.00                               0.38                                      0.00                                  1.00                                  1.00                                 0.67                              0.00                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.33                          7.00                      5.00                  7.00           18.00                                 0.24                                       3.52

Tests of Means (t-stats)
Common vs. Socialist                  -4.32a -2.05b                                                                0.88                                     -3.29a                          -0.88         0.00                 -1.32           0.84        0.53                   -5.01a          -4.12a                          -0.61                      -3.38a -2.43b -3.75a -2.21b                                                                                                                                      -4.19a                     0.31                                    -0.67                                       1.29                                            -2.41b                                          -1.71c                                 -1.51                                -2.33b                                0.09                               -1.55                               -4.08a                                      -2.20b                                -0.62                                -4.53a                            0.12                                      2.15 b                                   -1.64                                       1.45                          -3.84a                    -1.00                 -2.41b         -3.38a                                -3.38a                                    -5.24a
Common vs. French                     -2.31b                            -1.80c                                     -4.47a                                   -3.85a                          -1.40         0.00                 -0.83           -2.89a      -5.50a                 -6.19a          -8.36a                          -0.98                      -7.97a -6.95a -4.90a                                                                                              -0.90                                          -6.29a                     0.79                                    0.67                                        0.86                                            -5.79a                                          -2.93a                                 -0.18                                -4.47a                                0.12                               -2.71a                                 -0.18                                    0.38                                  1.54                                 0.82                              -0.46                                  -5.51a                                   -6.73a                                         -7.42a                        -4.49a                    -3.79a -2.58b                        -4.63a                                -4.63a                                    -7.52a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a                               a                                                           a                                                                                                                               b                          b                                                                                                                                   b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c
Common vs. German                     -0.21                             -1.25                                      0.54                                     -0.59                           1.12          0.00                 0.20            -0.49       -0.50                  -3.06           -5.87                           -0.37                      -2.73                            -0.49                                      -1.43                                 -2.40                                          -2.25                      -1.45                                   -0.32                                       2.05                                            0.00                                            -1.12                                    1.12                                  -1.12                              -1.34                              -0.37                                     1.12                                  0.49                                  1.39                                 1.84                              0.67                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.30                          -0.11                     -0.20                 0.16           -0.11                                 -0.11                                      -1.12
Common vs. Scandinavian               -0.61                             -1.14                                      0.49                                     -0.79                           -0.49         0.00                 -0.43           0.19        0.80                   -2.79a          -1.45                           -0.34                      -1.35                            0.19                                       -0.32                                 -1.27                                          -0.75                      -1.94c                                  0.80                                        2.55 b                                          0.00                                            0.49                                     0.88                                    0.49                             0.77                               1.22                                   -0.82                                    -1.22                                 -0.80                                -1.70c                            0.61                                      -0.29                                       0.00                                     0.02                          -0.85                     1.25                  0.53           0.33                                  0.33                                       -1.03
Socialist vs. French                  2.57 b                            1.12                                       -3.38a                                   -0.21                           0.00          0.00                 0.73            -2.84a      -4.55a                 1.12            -1.61                           0.00                       -3.05a -2.38b                                                               0.90                                  1.52                                           -0.12                      0.28                                    1.22                                        -0.60                                           -2.37b                                          -0.67                                    1.35                                  -1.22                              0.00                               -0.74                                  3.89 a                                   2.42 b                                1.60                                 4.07 a                            -0.44                                  -7.96a                                   -3.48a                                         -6.47a                        -0.57                     -1.68c                0.07           -0.92                                 -0.92                                      -1.36
                                                                    a                                                                                                                   a                                                                                                                                     c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c                                                                                                                                                       a                                           b                                                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                      b                                                                          c                                     c
Socialist vs. German                  3.81                              0.00                                       0.00                                     3.81                            1.71          0.00                 1.11            -1.03       -0.83                  0.00            -1.81                           0.00                       -0.73                            0.93                                       1.71                                  -1.12                                          0.55                       -1.51                                   0.11                                        0.93                                            0.88                                            0.11                                   2.00                                      0.40                             -1.35                              0.67                                   5.41                                     2.70                                  1.68                                 7.13                              0.60                                      -1.68                                       0.60                                     -0.70                         2.39                      0.42                  1.30           1.78                                  1.78                                       3.23 a
Socialist vs. Scandinavian            3.11 a                            0.00                                       0.00                                     3.11 a                          0.00          0.00                 0.40            -0.34       0.57                   0.00            0.86                            0.00                       0.93                             1.42                                       3.11 a                                0.06                                           1.71                       -2.01c                                  1.02                                        1.42                                            0.80                                            1.02                                     1.70                                    1.23                             0.62                               2.35 b                                 1.96 c                                   0.00                                  -0.55                                1.36                              0.55                                   -1.96c                                         0.55                                     -0.95                         1.44                      1.38                  1.34           1.95 c                                1.95 c                                     2.81 b
                                                                                                                                                        b                                             a                                                                       b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c                                                                  c                                                                                                                                           b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a                                             b                                    a                         c                                                                          c                                     c
French vs. German                     0.96                              -0.68                                      2.06                                     1.40                            2.77          0.00                 0.66            0.92        2.05                   -0.68           -1.10                           0.00                       1.24                             3.09a                                      1.07                                  -1.96                                          0.78                       -1.95                                   -0.73                                       1.49                                            2.17                                            0.55                                     1.20                                    1.20                             -1.38                              0.96                                      1.20                                  0.29                                  0.42                                 1.02                              0.80                                      3.09                                     2.52                                        3.58                          1.87                      1.58                  1.19           1.88                                  1.88                                       2.72 a
French vs. Scandinavian               0.45                              -0.62                                      1.88 c                                   1.05                            0.00          0.00                 -0.05           1.43        3.08 a                 -0.62           2.22 b                          0.00                       2.55 b                           3.70a                                      2.75 a                                -0.86                                          2.32 b                     -2.45b                                  0.62                                        1.98 c                                          1.98 c                                          1.35                                     0.96                                  1.88 c                             0.70                               2.05 b                                 -0.73                                    -1.35                                 -1.26                                -1.64                             0.73                                      2.48 b                                   2.30 b                                      3.09 a                        1.23                      2.41 b                1.29           1.94 c                                1.94 c                                     2.45 b
German vs. Scandinavian               -0.30                             0.00                                       0.00                                     -0.30                           -0.90         0.00                 -0.45           0.45        1.00                   0.00            2.71 b                          0.00                       1.17                             0.45                                       0.81                                  1.11                                           0.99                       -0.45                                   0.90                                        0.45                                            0.00                                            0.90                                   -0.13                                     0.90                             1.81                               1.51                                   -1.51                                    -1.43                                 -1.43                                -3.32a                            0.00                                      -0.21                                       0.00                                     -0.21                         -0.57                     1.58                  0.29           0.44                                  0.44                                       -0.02
Tests of Medians (z-stats)
Common vs. Socialist                  -3.78a -2.00b                                                                0.88                                     -3.27a                          -0.88         0.00                 -1.31           0.85        0.54                   -4.20a          -3.64a                          -0.62                      -3.31a -2.33b                                                               -3.38a -2.14b                                                                        -3.66a                     0.32                                    -0.67                                       1.28                                            -2.31b                                          -1.68c                                 -1.49                                -2.24b                                0.09                               -1.55                               -3.61a                                      -2.13b                                -0.63                                -4.23a                            0.12                                      2.09 b                                   -1.62                                       1.42                          -3.82a                    -0.73                 -1.61          -3.10a                                -3.10a                                    -4.37a
Common vs. French                     -2.25b                            -1.77c                                     -4.02a                                   -3.51a                          -1.39         0.00                 -0.83           -2.76a      -4.58a                 -5.12a          -6.14a                          -0.98                      -6.12a                           -5.52a                                     -4.33a                                -0.90                                          -5.17a                     0.79                                    0.67                                        0.86                                            -4.89a                                          -2.80a                                 -0.18                                -4.02a                                0.12                               -2.76a                                 -0.18                                    0.38                                  1.52                                 0.43                              -0.46                                  -4.72a                                   -5.41a                                         -5.73a                        -3.98a                    -3.32a -2.14b                        -4.01a                                -4.01a                                    -5.87a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a                               a                                                           b                                                                                                                               b                          b                                                                                                                                   b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c
Common vs. German                     -0.22                             -1.24                                      0.54                                     -0.55                           1.12          0.00                 0.20            -0.50       -0.51                  -2.82           -4.49                           -0.38                      -2.40                            -0.50                                      -1.41                                 -2.29                                          -2.15                      -1.44                                   -0.33                                       1.98                                            0.00                                            -1.12                                    1.12                                  -1.12                              -1.33                              -0.47                                     1.12                                  0.50                                  1.38                                 1.95                              0.67                                        0.00                                      0.00                                     0.26                          -0.11                     -0.50                 -0.08          -0.38                                 -0.38                                      -1.09
Common vs. Scandinavian               -0.62                             -1.14                                      0.49                                     -0.79                           -0.49         0.00                 -0.43           0.19        0.80                   -2.60a          -1.43                           -0.35                      -1.54                            0.19                                       -0.32                                 -1.26                                          -0.74                      -1.89c                                  0.81                                        2.41 b                                          0.00                                            0.49                                     0.88                                    0.49                             0.78                               1.39                                   -0.83                                    -1.22                                 -0.81                                -1.75c                            0.61                                      -0.29                                       0.00                                     -0.04                         -0.78                     1.18                  0.81           0.17                                  0.17                                       -1.02
Socialist vs. French                  2.45 b                            1.12                                       -3.10a                                   -0.63                           0.00          0.00                 0.73            -2.67a      -3.82a                 1.12            -1.59                           0.00                       -2.82a -2.28b                                                               0.90                                  1.50                                           0.08                       0.28                                    1.22                                        -0.61                                           -2.27b                                          -0.68                                    1.34                                  -1.21                              0.00                               -0.98                                  3.47 a                                   2.32 b                                1.58                                 4.11 a                            -0.44                                  -5.45a                                   -3.17a                                         -4.90a                        -0.10                     -1.94c                0.05           -0.55                                 -0.55                                      -1.29
                                                                    a                                                                                                                   a                                                                                                                                     c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c                                                                                                                                                       a                                           b                                                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                      b                                                                          b                                     b
Socialist vs. German                  2.97                              0.00                                       0.00                                     2.97                            1.63          0.00                 1.10            -1.03       -0.84                  0.00            -1.72                           0.00                       -1.16                            0.94                                       1.63                                  -1.12                                          0.68                       -1.47                                   0.11                                        0.94                                            0.89                                            0.11                                   1.87                                      0.41                             -1.32                              0.58                                   3.53                                     2.37                                  1.61                                 3.88                              0.61                                      -1.61                                       0.61                                     -0.71                         2.14                      -0.11                 0.97           2.04                                  2.04                                       2.58 a
Socialist vs. Scandinavian            2.60 a                            0.00                                       0.00                                     2.60 a                          0.00          0.00                 0.41            -0.35       0.58                   0.00            0.87                            0.00                       1.26                             1.38                                       2.60 a                                0.06                                           1.51                       -1.88c                                  1.02                                        1.38                                            0.81                                            1.02                                     1.62                                    1.21                             0.63                               2.14 b                                 1.84 c                                                 .                       -0.56                                1.33                              0.56                                   -1.84c                                         0.56                                     -0.95                         1.21                      1.69 c                1.54           1.95 c                                1.95 c                                     2.48 b
                                                                                                                                                        b                                             a                                                                       b                                                                                                                                                      a                                                                                    c                                                                  c                                                                                                                                           b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a                                             b                                    a                         b                                                                          b                                     b
French vs. German                     0.96                              -0.69                                      1.99                                     1.55                            2.58          0.00                 0.66            0.93        1.96                   -0.69           -1.10                           0.00                       1.26                             2.83                                       1.07                                  -1.90                                          0.79                       -1.89                                   -0.73                                       1.47                                            2.08                                            0.56                                     1.20                                    1.20                             -1.37                              1.20                                      1.20                                  0.29                                  0.43                                 1.44                              0.80                                      2.83                                     2.38                                        3.10                          1.98                      1.52                  1.18           2.01                                  2.01                                       2.74 a
French vs. Scandinavian               0.45                              -0.63                                      1.83 c                                   1.22                            0.00          0.00                 -0.05           1.41        2.78 a                 -0.63           2.13 b                          0.00                       2.48 b                           3.26 a                                     2.56 b                                -0.86                                          1.74 c                     -2.32b                                  0.63                                        1.91 c                                          1.91 c                                          1.33                                     0.96                                  1.83 c                             0.71                               2.07 b                                 -0.73                                    -1.33                                 -1.25                                -1.73c                            0.73                                      2.35 b                                   2.19 b                                      2.77 a                        1.16                      2.39 b                1.36           2.06 b                                2.06 b                                     2.17 b
German vs. Scandinavian               -0.32                             0.00                                       0.00                                     -0.32                           -0.91         0.00                 -0.47           0.47        1.00                   0.00            2.12 b                          0.00                       1.23                             0.47                                       0.82                                  1.10                                           0.87                       -0.47                                   0.91                                        0.47                                            0.00                                            0.91                                   -0.14                                     0.91                             1.63                               1.43                                   -1.42                                    -1.36                                 -1.36                                -2.35b                            0.00                                      -0.22                                       0.00                                     -0.22                         -0.66                     1.51                  0.75           0.75                                  0.75                                       0.37
a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.
n.a.=Not applicable
.=Missing
