                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 POLICY-DRIVEN PRODUCTIVITY IN CHILE AND MEXICO IN THE 1980S AND 1990S


                                          Raphael Bergoeing
                                           Patrick J. Kehoe
                                          Timothy J. Kehoe
                                           Raimundo Soto


                                         Working Paper 8892
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8892


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




We thank the participants in the Minneapolis Fed’s “Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century” project,
especially Ed Prescott, for useful discussions. Jim MacGee provided invaluable research assistance.
Bergoeing thanks the Hewlett Foundation, and Kehoe and Kehoe thank the National Science Foundation,
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Raphael Bergoeing, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe and Raimundo Soto. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Policy-Driven Productivity in Chile and Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s
Raphael Bergoeing, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe and Raimundo Soto
NBER Working Paper No. 8892
April 2002
JEL No. E52, N6, O40



                                             ABSTRACT


        Both Chile and Mexico experienced severe economic crises in the early 1980s, but Chile
recovered much faster than did Mexico. Using growth accounting and a calibrated dynamic general
equilibrium model, we conclude that the crucial determinant of this difference between the two countries
was the faster productivity growth in Chile, rather than higher investment or employment. Our hypothesis
is that this difference in productivity was driven by earlier policy reforms in Chile, the most crucial of
which were in banking and bankruptcy procedures. We propose a theoretical framework in which
government policy affects both the allocation of resources and the composition of firms.




Raphael Bergoeing                                        Patrick J. Kehoe
Centro de Economía Aplicada                              Department of Economics
Universidad de Chile                                     University of Minnesota
Santiago, Chile                                          Minneapolis, MN 55455
raphaelb@dii.uchile.cl                                   and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
                                                         and NBER
                                                         pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

Timothy J. Kehoe                                         Raimundo Soto
Department of Economics                                  Instituto de Economía
University of Minnesota                                  Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                    Santiago, Chile
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis                  and Gerencia Investigación Económica,
tkehoe@atlas.socsci.umn.edu                              Banco Central de Chile
I.      Introduction

     Government policy is the primary cause of economic depressions. Exogenous shocks like the
deteriorations in the terms of trade and the increases in foreign interest rates that buffeted Chile
and Mexico in the early 1980s can cause a decline in economic activity of the usual business
cycle magnitude. Government policy, however, can turn such a decline into the severe and
prolonged drop in economic activity below trend that constitutes a great depression as defined by
Timothy Kehoe and Edward Prescott (2002).
     This view of depressions is supported by a collection of papers edited by Kehoe and Prescott
and published in the Review of Economic Dynamics (January 2002). These papers examine nine
depressions using dynamic general equilibrium models. Their striking finding is that the main
determinants of depressions are not the drops in the inputs of capital and labor that traditional
theories of depressions stress, but rather drops in the efficiency with which these inputs are used,
measured as total factor productivity (TFP). Here we sketch a theory of how government policy
drives these productivity drops by examining the depressions in Chile and Mexico in the 1980s,
which have been extensively studied by Raphael Bergoeing, Patrick Kehoe, Timothy Kehoe, and
Raimundo Soto (2002). We think the theory applies more broadly.
     Chile and Mexico, like most Latin American countries, experienced severe economic crises
in the early 1980s. Their recovery paths differed markedly. In Chile, output per working-age
person returned to a 2 percent trend growth path in about a decade and since then has grown
faster than trend, as shown in Figure 1. In Mexico, output never fully recovered and two decades
later is still 30 percent below trend.
     Comparing data from Chile and Mexico allows Bergoeing et al. (2002) to reject two popular
explanations for the economic performances of these two countries as explanations for the
difference: (1) That Chile’s rapid recovery was driven by export growth. During the late 1980s
and early 1990s, exports grew much faster in Mexico than in Chile, yet Chile grew while Mexico
stagnated. (2) That Mexico’s stagnation was due to a large external debt overhang that
discouraged new investment. The data show that Chile’s ratio of external debt to GDP was much
higher than Mexico’s, and we argue below that Mexico’s stagnation was not caused by the lack
of new investment.


                                              1
      Our explanation for the difference in economic performance in Chile and Mexico is based on
the different timing of structural reforms in the two countries. Chile undertook reforms in the
1970s and early 1980s in trade policy, fiscal policy, privatization, banking, and bankruptcy laws
that set the stage for the successful performance of the late 1980s and 1990s. Mexico postponed
these reforms and stagnated.
      Our numerical experiments indicate that the only reforms that can explain the difference in
economic performance are those that show up primarily as differences in productivity, not
reforms that show up as differences in factor inputs. This result rules out fiscal reforms, which
primarily affect the incentives to accumulate capital and to work. Moreover, the timing is not
right for fiscal reforms as an explanation: Both Chile and Mexico reformed their tax systems in
the mid-1980s, so these cannot account for the different paths.
      The matter of timing is crucial. We hypothesize that reforms in trade policy and privatization
were less important than those in banking and bankruptcy law precisely because Chile had
already reaped most of the benefits of these reforms while Mexico was starting to reap them
precisely when Mexico was stagnating and Chile was growing. The crucial difference is that
Chile was willing to pay the costs of reforming its banking system and of letting inefficient firms
go bankrupt while Mexico was not.

II.      Growth Model

      Figure 2 plots TFP for Chile and Mexico. (See Bergoeing et al. (2002) for details.) The
similarities between these data and those for GDP per working-age person in Figure 1 strongly
suggest that TFP differences were primarily responsible for the difference in economic
performance in Chile and Mexico. What about changes in factor inputs? Some changes in factor
inputs are induced by changes in TFP; others can be caused by frictions in factor markets. To
distinguish between these two types of changes factor inputs, we calibrate a growth model of a
closed economy in which consumers have perfect foresight over the TFP sequence. Our model
includes a fiscal reform meant to capture some features of the reforms implemented in both
countries in the 1980s that affected factor inputs. To demonstrate that differences in these
reforms did not drive the difference in the recoveries, we impose the same crude tax reform in
both countries.


                                               2
      In the model, the stand-in consumer chooses sequences of consumption Ct , capital K t , and

hours worked Lt to maximize


                               å             b t [g log Ct + (1 - g ) log( N t - Lt )]
                                   ¥
(1)                                t =1980



subject to a budget constraint in each period Ct + K t +1 - K t = wt Lt + (1 - t t )(rt - d ) K t + Tt and an

initial condition on capital K1980 . Here N t is hours available; wt and rt are factor prices; t t is the

income tax rate on capital income; and Tt is a lump-sum transfer that in equilibrium is equal to

tax revenue t t (rt - d ) K t . The feasibility constraint is Ct + K t +1 - (1 - d ) K t = At K ta L1t-a .

      Figures 3 and 4 report the results of numerical experiments of a model calibrated to 1960–
1980 data. We compare the data with equilibria in which consumers have perfect foresight
between 1980 and 1988, are surprised by a tax reform in 1988 that in Chile lowers t t from 0.51

to 0.12 and in Mexico lowers t t from 0.43 to 0.12, and have perfect foresight from then on. The

tax parameters have been calibrated from the data using the first-order conditions from the
consumer’s problem, but there is direct evidence that the sorts of tax reform that we have
imposed are sensible. In Chile, for example, the tax rate on firms’ income was lowered from 0.46
to 0.10 in 1984; it was increased to 0.15 in 1991.
      The results of our numerical experiments are striking: Differences in TFP — including
induced effects on factor inputs — drive all of the differences in the economic experiences of
Chile and Mexico. Tax reforms make Chile’s recovery stronger and Mexico’s depression less
severe than they would have been otherwise, but do not drive the difference. There is no
significant role left to be played by frictions in factor markets that do not show up in TFP.

III.     Explaining TFP Declines

      If TFP movements drove both the initial downturns in Chile and Mexico and the difference in
their recoveries, what drove the TFP movements? External shocks initiated the TFP drops. These
drops were magnified by existing government policies that made the financial sectors in both
economies fragile. In Chile, rapid policy reform led to a recovery of TFP. In Mexico, the policy
reaction to the initial shocks increased distortions, resulting in a prolonged decline in TFP.



                                                          3
   Economic theory suggests two obvious mechanisms for the initial TFP drops: (1) Higher real
interest rates make some previously profitable investment projects unprofitable and make the
capital involved unproductive. Our measure of TFP assumes full utilization of capital and, hence,
attributes this drop in utilization to TFP. (2) A deterioration in the terms of trade requires a
country to export more to obtain the same quantity of imports, so that more domestic resources
are needed to produce the same final output. Hence, in a closed economy model, negative terms
of trade shocks manifest themselves as declines in TFP.
   While these mechanisms can account for part of the initial TFP drops in both countries, they
cannot account for either the severity of these drops or the difference in the recovery paths. In our
view, mistakes in government policies made the financial systems in both countries fragile and,
hence, exacerbated the effects of the initial external shocks. But what drove the striking
difference in the patterns of recovery of TFP seen in Figure 2? Our view is that higher
productivity growth in Chile was driven by the timing of banking and bankruptcy reforms.

IV.    Policy-Driven Productivity

   Our hypothesis is that, before reforms, government policy distorted the allocations of
resources both within and across sectors in Chile and Mexico, pushing the economies inside their
aggregate production possibility frontiers. As reforms were implemented, first in Chile and later
in Mexico, each economy moved closer to its production possibility frontier. Here we propose a
theory of how distortions in the financial system and poorly designed bankruptcy laws can have
negative effects on productivity. We describe first the static effects of distortions on allocations
of resources and then the dynamic effects on the entry and exit decisions of firms.


Static Effects of Policy
   A government’s favored treatment of certain sectors can lead to a static misallocation of
resources. Suppose that the government favors some firms or sectors with low-interest-rate loans.
With the return on deposits held fixed, lower interest rates for some sectors must be paid either
by higher rates in unfavored sectors or by transfers to the financial system from the government.
   To see this in a simple model, suppress labor and let the production functions be Ai Kia ,
i = 1, 2 . Sector 1 receives a proportional subsidy t 1 on the interest rate that it pays on loans, and


                                              4
sector 2 pays a tax t 2 . We can think of these subsidies and taxes as being accomplished through
preferential lending by banks. Any net revenues required by banks are financed by the
government using lump-sum taxes or transfers. The first-order conditions for profit maximization
imply that the relative allocations of capital are given by
                                                    1           1
                                        K1 æ A1 ö1-a æ 1 + t 2 ö1-a
(2)                                        =ç ÷ ç              ÷ .
                                        K 2 è A2 ø è 1 - t 1 ø


In contrast to the efficient allocation, the distorted equilibrium has a higher fraction of the capital
stock allocated to the subsidized sector than is warranted by relative productivities and, hence,
lower aggregate output. If these distortions decrease the incentives to make loans, as they did in
Mexico, then they also lead to a lower aggregate capital stock and have an additional negative
effect on output.
      Despite the static nature of the inefficiency, this mechanism has the potential for explaining
some of the difference in TFP performance: Financial reform was the major reform that Chile
had done poorly in the 1970s and had to redo in the early 1980s. In Mexico, however, until at
least the early 1990s, the banking system remained nationalized, gave subsidized loans to some
firms, and rationed loans to others.


Dynamic Effects of Policy
      One way distortions in the financial system and poorly designed bankruptcy rules can lead to
lower aggregate productivity is by discouraging poorly performing firms from exiting from
production. By keeping firms operating that otherwise would have exited, these distortions and
bankruptcy rules can prevent new potentially productive firms from entering.
      The models developed by Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe (1995) and Tianshu Chu
(2001) can be used to address such issues. In these models, new firms enter with the newest
technology, stochastically learn over time, and then exit when their prospects for further
productivity improvements are poor. In these models, any policy that interferes with the natural
birth, growth, and death of firms based on current and prospective productivities can push the
economy further and further inside the production possibility frontier. Simulations by Chu (2001)
indicate that these dynamic distortions can have enormous effects over time.



                                                5
      To get some idea of how this sort of model works, consider Atkeson and Kehoe’s (1995)
model in which production is done in a continuum of plants. Each plant has its own level of
productivity A and is operated by a manager. A plant with productivity A has the production
function y = A1-n ( k a l 1-a )n . The manager’s span of control parameter, v < 1 , determines the
degree of diminishing returns at the plant level. A manager who decides to operate a plant
chooses capital k and labor l to maximize static returns

(3)                            dt ( A) = max A1-n (k a l 1-a )n - rt k - wt l - wtm ,
                                           k ,l



where wtm is the manager’s opportunity cost of not working or starting another plant. Let the

solutions be denoted k t ( A) and lt ( At ) . For a given distribution l t (A) of productivities across

plants, aggregate output is given by Yt = At1-n Kta L1t -a , where At = ò Alt (dA) is aggregate
                                                                                   A


productivity and K t = ò A k t ( A)lt (dA) and Lt = ò A l t ( A)lt (dA) are aggregate capital and labor.

That is, aggregate productivity is the mean productivity of the plants that are operating.
      Over time, the productivity of each plant evolves stochastically: A plant with productivity A
at t has random productivity Ae at t + 1, where e is drawn from a probability distribution p(e) .
The crucial decision for the manager of whether or not to operate a plant is dynamic and is
described by the Bellman equation

                                                                                1
(4)             Vt ( A) = max[0, Vt o ( A)] , where Vt o ( A) = dt ( A) +
                                                                             1 + Rt    òV
                                                                                        e
                                                                                            t +1   ( Ae )p (d e ) .


Here Rt is the market rate of interest between t and t + 1, Vt o ( A) is the value if the plant is

operated in the current period, and Vt (A) is the maximum of the returns from either closing the

plant or operating it. New plants can enter according to a similar process. The outcome of all the
managerial decisions to operate or not is a new distribution l t+1 ( A) over productivities in t + 1.

      In this simple version of the model, the probability distribution p(e) that generates shocks to
plant-specific productivity does not change with plant age. In the data, the labor employed and
output produced by a cohort of plants tend to start low when plants are young, grow for the next
20 years or so, and then gradually decline. To capture this sort of pattern, Atkeson and Kehoe
(1995) add a frontier level of new technology that grows over time, and they allow the mean


                                                      6
value of shocks to productivity to first increase and then decrease. In their model, new plants
enter with the newest technology, but little specific knowledge on how to use it. Over time, these
plants build up their specific knowledge and grow as they draw shocks to productivity from a
distribution with an increasing mean. After 20 years or so, the mean of the shocks e starts to fall,
as the learning process slows. Plants then decline in size and eventually exit.
    Now consider the effects of a distortion which the government encourages banks to lend at a
subsidized rate R1t = R$t (1 - t 1t ) to firms (identified with plants in the model) in sector 1 and to

lend to other firms at a relatively high rate R2 t = R$t (1 + t 2 t ) . The favored firms discount the
future less than the unfavored ones. In addition to the static effect of misallocating capital, this
distortion results in different solutions to the managers’ dynamic programming problems in
sectors 1 and 2. In particular, favored firms will choose to continue to operate in situations where
unfavored firms would choose to exit. Even if a favored firm experiences a low productivity A, it
will be more prone than an unfavored firm to borrow to cover its losses and to continue
operating, hoping for a favorable shock e to increase its productivity in the future.
    Consider next poorly designed bankruptcy procedures that make it difficult for firms to exit
or subsidize the losses of firms to keep them operating. These procedures cause firms to keep
operating for longer than they would have otherwise and impede the entry of new firms.
    Together, distortions in the financial system and poorly designed bankruptcy procedures
change the mix of firms that operate, leading to inefficiently many low-productivity firms
continuing. This leads to a lower value of aggregate productivity A .
    How would the removal of these distortions affect the path of productivity over time? Some
effects would be immediate. Upon removal, some previously favored firms that would have
continued will exit, and some unfavored firms that would have exited will continue to operate.
The subtler, and potentially more important, effects take more time to show up in aggregates. The
removal of distortions would encourage new firms to enter. These firms would have the newest
technologies, but would build up their organization-specific productivity only slowly.
Consequently, removing these distortions would show up with a lag in the aggregate productivity
statistics.




                                                 7
REFERENCES


Atkeson, Andrew and Kehoe, Patrick J. “Industry Evolution and Transition: Measuring
Investment in Organization Capital.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Research
Department Staff Report 201, 1995.


Bergoeing, Raphael; Kehoe, Patrick J.; Kehoe, Timothy J. and Soto, Raimundo. “A Decade
Lost and Found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s.” Review of Economic Dynamics, January 2002,
5(1), pp. 166–205.


Chu, Tianshu. “Exit Barriers and Economic Stagnation.” Manuscript, East-West Center, 2001.


Kehoe, Timothy J. and Prescott, Edward C. “Great Depressions of the 20th Century.” Review
of Economic Dynamics, January 2002, 5(1), pp. 1–18.




                                          8
Figure 1. Real GDP per working-age (15-64) person in Chile and Mexico,
                      detrended by 2% per year.




       130

       120
                                      Chile
       110

       100

         90

         80
                                          Mexico
         70

         60
          1980       1985          1990       1995     2000

                                   year




                               9
Figure 2. Total factor productivity in Chile and Mexico,
             detrended by 1.4% per year.




110


100                                Chile

 90


 80


 70
                                      Mexico

 60
  1980        1985          1990       1995      2000

                            year




                       10
Figure 3. Model experiment: Real GDP per working age (15-64) person in Chile,
                            detrended by 2% per year.




           130

           120

           110       model
           100

            90

            80
                     data
            70
              1980          1985         1990    1995      2000

                                         year




                                    11
Figure 4. Model experiment: Real GDP per working age (15-64) person in Mexico,
                          detrended by 2% per year.




            110


            100         model

             90


             80


             70
                                        data
             60
              1980        1985         1990     1995       2000

                                       year




                                  12
