NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLICY CONTEXT AND INFANT AND
TODDLER CARE IN THE WELFARE REFORM ERA

Ann Dryden Witte
Magaly Queralt
Robert Witt
Harriet Griesinger

Working Paper 8893
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8893

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
This paper is a product of the Wellesley Child Care Policy Research Partnership and of the Child Care Bureau’s Child
Care Policy Research Consortium. Our work was supported by Wellesley College under Grant #90YE0006 from the
Child Care Bureau, Administration for Children and Families (ACF), Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS). We are thankful to many people and organizations for their cooperation, feedback, and data. In particular, we
wish to thank Ardith Wieworka, MA Commissioner of Child Care Services (OCCS,) Irene Taylor-Wooten, former
Director of MDC Child Development Services (CDS) and Barbara Weinstein (President of Family Central) for their
support, as well as Rod Southwick (OCCS,) Pilar Feldman (MDC Information Technology Department) and Anita Platt
(R&R Director of Family Central) for data and research direction. Finally, we wish to thank Pia Divine, Ivelisse
Martinez-Beck, Martha Moorehouse, Elizabeth Peters and Karen Tvedt for their insightful comments on early drafts of
this paper. The cooperation and support of our sponsors and of these individuals and organizations in no way indicates
their concurrence with our analyses or conclusions. We alone are responsible for the views and opinions expressed in
this paper and for all errors and omissions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Ann Dryden Witte, Magaly Queralt, Robert Witt and Harriet Griesinger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Policy Context and Infant and Toddler Care in the Welfare Reform Era
Ann Dryden Witte, Magaly Queralt, Robert Witt and Harriet Griesinger
NBER Working Paper No. 8893
April 2002
JEL No. I38, H40, J22, I20

ABSTRACT
We provide descriptive evidence from Miami-Dade County (MDC), FL and from five
representative areas in Massachusetts (MA) that government policies governing welfare reform, the
child-care subsidy system and minimum-standards regulation have had considerable impact on the
availability, price, and quality of infant and toddler care, as welfare reform progressed from 1996 to 2000.
Among our more interesting findings are the following: (1) There has been more than a doubling of the
number of low-income infants and toddlers with child care subsidies in formal care in MDC, an area
where cash assistance recipients are required to be active when their youngest child is three years old; and
(2) Child care centers in both MA and MDC appear to be subsidizing their infant and toddler programs;
this helps to explain why it has been difficult to expand the amount of infant and toddler care available.

Ann Witte
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership
and NBER
awitte@wellesley.edu

Magaly Queralt
Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership
155 Ocean Lane Dr., Suite 812
Miami, FL 33149

Robert Witt
Department of Economics
University of Surrey
Guildford
Surrey
GU2 5XH
United Kingdom
and Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership
r.witt@surrey.ac.uk

Harriet Griesinger
Wellesley Child Care Research Partnership
23 Bellevue Ave
Cambridge, MA 02140
hgriesin@wellesley.edu

The Policy Context and
Infant and Toddler Care in the Welfare Reform Era
We provide descriptive evidence from Miami Dade County (MDC) in Florida
(FL) and from five representative areas in Massachusetts (MA) that government policies
governing welfare reform, the child-care subsidy system, and minimum-standards
regulations have had considerable influence on the availability, price, and quality of
infant and toddler care, as welfare reform progressed from 1996 to 2000. We suspect
that, in addition to the public policy environment, the very different situations for infant
and toddler care in MDC and MA have been influenced by the markedly higher
proportion of the population that is foreign born in MDC as well as by differences
between MDC and MA in income and educational levels.
The period of our study, from February 1996 to March 2000, spans the period
before and after welfare reform in FL (which started on October 1, 1996) and the period
before and after December 1, 1996 (which is the date when MA imposed time limits on
welfare recipients). During the period of our study, the budgets for child care subsidies
expanded markedly in both MDC and MA.
The purpose of our study is two fold. First, we provide a description of how child
care and the use of child care subsidies have changed as welfare reform has progressed.
Second, we combine our descriptive results with information on the policy and socioeconomic context of our research sites to generate a number of hypotheses that we feel
merit further study.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In the next section, we describe the data
we use. The section that follows contains our findings regarding: (1) the use of child care
subsidies, (2) the type of care, (3) the availability of care, (4) the quality of care and (5)
the price of care. For each topic, we begin by describing our results and then we present
the policy context related to the results. For selected results, we present hypotheses that
we believe merit further investigation. The final section of the paper contains our
conclusions.
Data Sources
For FL, we use data for Miami-Dade County (MDC). MDC, located in South FL,
is FL's most populous county and contains approximately 40% of the state’s welfare
population. MDC has a population of 2,253,362-- 57% Hispanic, 21% non-Hispanic
white, and 19% black (US Bureau of the Census, 2001). Hispanics in MDC are
predominantly Cuban, Nicaraguan, and Colombian. The non-Hispanic white population
has been dwindling, particularly after Hurricane Andrew, in large part due to the arrival
of continuous waves of immigrants from Latin America and the Caribbean. The black
population is split between Afro-Americans and Caribbean blacks. Haitians are the
poorest and largest segment of the county’s Caribbean black population. MDC’s poverty
rate is unusually high, approximately 38% among children (Queralt, Witte, & Griesinger,
2000b).
For MDC, our main sources of data are: (1) provider records maintained by the
two Resource and Referral (R&R) agencies serving the county; (2) observational
assessment records for providers receiving child care subsidies; (3) Gold Seal

3

accreditation records, and (4) administrative records for families receiving child-care
subsidies.
In MA, our study areas are: (1) the Boston metropolitan area, (2) the area west of
Boston, from Lowell to Framingham, (3) Hampden County (Springfield, Chicopee,
Holyoke and surrounding areas) and (4) the New Bedford/Fall River/Taunton area. See
Lemke, Witte, Queralt and Witt (2000, page 32) for a list of MA townships included in
our study sites. These areas were chosen by child care experts in the Massachusetts’
Executive Office of Health and Human Services to be representative of the
Commonwealth’s population. In 2000, the population in MA was 84% non-Hispanic
white, 6% Hispanic (of any race), 5% black, and 4% Asian. (U.S. Census, 2001). The
poverty rate for children under age 18 in 1998 for the state was 13.8% (Bennett and
Hsien-Hen Lu, 2000).
The MA data used in this study come from four sources: (1) provider records
maintained by the five R&R agencies serving our study areas, (2) monthly voucher
billing files received from the Office of Child Care Services (OCCS), from which we
obtained information on the use of and payments for child care subsidies, and (3) child
care licensing list received from OCCS, from which we obtained data on capacities
(slots).
The provider data we use contains information on all licensed centers and most
license-exempt centers. Head Start providers are included in both the MA and MDC
provider data. The coverage of family child care is more comprehensive in MA than in
MDC for two reasons. First, licensing requirements for family child care are somewhat
more stringent in MA than in MDC.1 Second, the available evidence indicates that there
are many fewer underground family child care homes in MA than in MDC.2 The provider
data does not contain information on informal providers, although the subsidy databases
we use contain information on families that use child care subsidies to purchase informal
care.
Findings
I. HOW HAS THE NUMBER OF INFANTS AND TODDLERS WITH CHILD CARE
SUBSIDIES CHANGED DURING THE COURSE OF WELFARE REFORM?
FINDING: The number of infant and toddlers in formal care has
increased during the course of welfare reform in both MA and
MDC. Compared to MA, the increase in the number of infants and
toddlers in subsidized care in MDC has been dramatic.

As can be seen in Figure 1, the number of infants enrolled in subsidized child care
in MDC grew markedly during the course of welfare reform. According to the records of
1

MA requires anyone who cares for an unrelated child on a regular basis to be licensed while
MDC requires licensure only if the provider cares for 2 or more unrelated children and receives pay for
caring for at least one child.
2
A study conducted for the Massachusetts Affordability Task Force (Marshall, et al., 1988) found
few unlicensed family child care homes. Our work in MDC has uncovered numerous unlicensed family
child care homes.

4

the subsidy management agency, in March 1996, the beginning of our study period and
six months prior to welfare reform, the number of infants from low-income families
receiving care in MDC under the child-care subsidy program was slightly less than 400.
By March 2000, almost 1,000 infants were in subsidized child care. This represents an
increase of almost 150%. This increase in the number of infants from current and former
cash assistance families receiving subsidized child care in MDC was particularly marked
after September 1998, the date that families began to be dropped from cash assistance
under FL’s 24-month time limit.3
The number of one-year-olds receiving subsidized child care in MDC also grew
rapidly during the period of welfare reform, although not as rapidly as the number of
infants. In March 1996, the number of one-year-olds from low-income families receiving
care under the child-care subsidy program was slightly less than 900. By March 2000, the
record shows over 2,000 one-year-olds were in subsidized child care. This represents an
increase of almost 125%. As for infants, the growth in the number of one-year-olds from
current and former cash assistance families receiving subsidized child care also increased
markedly after September 1998, when FL’s 24-month time limits began to kick in for
some families.
The number of two-year-olds receiving subsidized child care in MDC
approximately doubled between March 1996 and March 2000. In March 1996, the
number of two-year-olds from low-income families receiving care under the child-care
subsidy program was slightly over 1,100. By March 2000, almost 2,300 two-year-olds
were in subsidized child care. As in the case of infants and one-year-olds, the number of
two-year-olds in subsidized child care increased most rapidly after September 1998.
However, the growth in enrollments of two-year-olds in subsidized care was somewhat
less rapid than the enrollment of infants and one-year-olds. This may reflect the fact that,
prior to welfare reform, cash assistance recipients in FL were already required to
participate in the JOBS program when their youngest child was three years of age.
Table 1 shows the proportion of vouchers (i.e., child-care subsidies) used by
families for infant enrollment in different types of child care. These data are derived from
the monthly billing files of three representative Child Care Resource Agencies (CCRAs)4
for the month of May in 1997, 1998 and 1999. The number of infants from low-income
families receiving care under the voucher program in these three areas in MA increased
by 10 percent between 1997 and 1999, from 1157 to 1277. During this period, the
proportion of infants in centers declined from 44% to 34%, while the proportion of
infants in informal care increased from 27% to 34%.
3

The increased use of child care subsidies is not the direct result of families losing their eligibility
for cash assistance. Only approximately 1500 families statewide reached their 24-month time limit in
September 1998 and only about 1000 families reached their 36-month time limit in October 1999. The
increased use of child care subsidies in September 1998 probably results from the combined effects of
increased activity requirements for cash assistance recipients, particularly recipients with young children,
and accelerated departures from cash assistance as the 24-month and 36-month time limits became more
salient. The latter effect is particularly likely because the local Miami-Dade Wages Coalition that managed
welfare reform became fully operational and focused on moving cash assistance recipients from welfare to
work during the summer and fall of 1998.
4
The three CCRAs are Child Care Choices of Boston, New England Farm Workers Council in
Hampden County, and Child Care Works, which serves the Fall River/New Bedford/Taunton area of the
state. We were not able to use data for our other two study areas (the western suburbs of Boston) and the
Lowell/Framingham areas because of a redefinition of their service boundaries.

5

The proportion of vouchers issued by the same three CCRAs in MA and used by
families for toddler care increased somewhat more rapidly than the number of infants
receiving care under the voucher program (12% instead of 10%). Around 45% of the
vouchers for toddler care went to centers and 20% to informal caregivers. The percent of
vouchers for the care of infants and toddlers in MA going to family child-care homes
remained approximately the same throughout this period.
Policy Context
(1) Welfare Reform

For the purpose of understanding the change in the numbers of infants and
toddlers with child-care subsidies, two aspects of FL’s welfare reform are particularly
important. First, adults receiving cash assistance are required to be active when their
youngest child is three months of age. Second, FL’s time limits for cash assistance are
stringent. The time limit for most recipients is 24 months in any 5-year period and a
lifetime limit of 48 months of cash assistance.5 Given that welfare reform started in FL in
October 1996, these time limits began to kick in for some recipients after September
1998.
The implementation of welfare reform in FL was associated with a dramatic
increase in funding for child-care subsidies and, to a lesser extent, for other early
childhood education programs, such as Head Start, Early Head Start, and public-school
pre-kindergarten programs. During our study period, the budget for child-care subsidies
in FL rose from $180 million in July 1995 to almost $450 million in July 1999.6 This
increased funding for child care and early childhood programs was largely for the
purpose of enabling poor and low-income parents to move from welfare to work and to
maintain independence from the welfare system through employment.
In April 1995, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts requested a welfare reform
waiver from the federal government. MA’s plan included job training, a work
requirement, time limits, medical assistance, and centralization of the public assistance
system. The waiver was granted, except for the time limits. Overseen by the newly
formed Department of Transitional Assistance (replacing the MA Department of Public
Welfare as of July 1, 1995), these reforms, with the exception of time limits, were
initiated on November 1, 1995. After federal welfare reform, MA’s previously requested
time limits were implemented, as they became required for federal funding. Cash
assistance recipients in MA became subject to time limits beginning on December 1,
1996.
In MA, anyone subject to the time limits is permitted to receive Transitional
Assistance for Families with Dependent Children funds (TAFDC, as the TANF program
is referred to in MA) for a maximum of 24 months in any consecutive 60 months.
Anyone subject to work requirements must, within 60 days of receiving TAFDC funds,
be actively involved in some type of work for at least 20 hours per week. If the person
fails to find a job, s/he is required to perform 20 hours of community service per week. A
TAFDC recipient is exempt from the time limits and from the work requirement if her/his
5

Long-term welfare recipients (i.e., those who received AFDC for 36 of the last 60 months prior
to welfare reform) have a limit of 36 months of cash assistance in a 72-month period. They also have a
lifetime limit of 48 months of cash assistance.
6
Additional funds for child-care subsidies came from local match (either cash or in-kind
contributions), which is required in order to demonstrate local commitment to the subsidized child-care
program.

6

youngest child is under the age of two. The recipient remains work exempt, however,
until the youngest child is six years old. It is important to note that these are separate
requirements. If a person receives benefits while her/his youngest child is two and three
years old, thus exhausting the time limits, the time limit deadline comes into effect and
benefits are terminated, even though the recipient would otherwise remain classified as
work exempt for the next two years while the youngest child passes through the ages of
four and five.
Spending on child-care subsidies in MA increased from $180 million in Fiscal
Year (FY) 1996 (July1, 1995 to June 30, 1996) to $316 million in FY 2000. However,
welfare reform in MA did not generate an influx of infants and toddlers from low-income
families into child care. This was not unintended. As detailed below, child care for
infants and toddlers is very costly in MA.
(2) The Subsidized Child Care Program

Eligibility
FL law prescribes that every child younger than age 13 in an eligible family (i.e.,
a family with income below 150% of the Federal Poverty Level [FPL]) may receive
subsidized child care. In 1999 the maximum eligible income for a family of 3 was
$20,082. Child-care subsidies were an entitlement for active cash assistance recipients
and for those income-eligible recipients leaving the cash assistance program prior to
welfare reform. However, since the implementation of welfare reform on October 1,
1996, child-care subsidies are made available in FL only if resources are available.
Child-care subsidies in MDC are allocated on the basis of state established priorities for
participation, which favor children at risk of abuse and neglect, the children of cash
assistance recipients, and the children of families transitioning off cash assistance.7 FL’s
Transitional Child Care (TCC) program offers child care to working former cash
assistance recipients eligible for child-care services for up to 2 years after the family
leaves cash assistance. Low-income families that do not receive cash assistance and that
are not eligible for TCC, called Income-Eligible families, have lower priority for subsidy
receipt. However, during the period of our study the rapid increase in funding meant that
waiting lists for subsidies for infants and toddlers were small.8
According to MA’s law, in 1999 all families with children under the age of 13
with incomes below $23,172, 167% of FPL, could obtain child-care subsidies, to the
extent that funds are available. To facilitate welfare reform, MA has offered child-care
vouchers to all active recipients of cash assistance. MA also has provided one year of
7

In July 1996, FL set the following priorities for participation in the subsidized child care
program: (1) children at risk of abuse, neglect, or exploitation; (2) children of participants in the WAGES
program and those transitioning off WAGES, (3) children of migrant farm workers, (4) children of teen
parents, (5) children from other families at risk of welfare dependency due to a family income of less than
100 percent of the (FPL); and (6) children of working families whose family income is equal to or greater
than 100 percent but does not exceed 150 percent of the FPL. In order to further facilitate welfare reform,
the FL Legislature, on July 1, 1997, split the budget for the two main subsidized child-care programs. One
part of the budget was set aside for child-care subsidies for current and former welfare recipients. The
other part was designated for families at risk of welfare dependency and other working families eligible on
the basis of low-income. These latter programs are referred to in FL as “Income-Eligible” child care.
8
The child-care subsidy administration files in MDC show limited numbers of infants and toddlers
waiting for care. The January 2001 files, for example, show 27 infants, 37 one-year-olds, and 40 two-yearolds from income-eligible families and 56 infants, 58 one-year-olds, and 68 one-year-olds from families
receiving cash assistance waiting for care.

7

Transitional Child Care assistance (TCC) to those who leave cash assistance. In the
interest of providing continuing care, MA has also made child care subsidies available to
former cash assistance recipients after they exhaust their TCC benefits for as long as they
are income eligible.
Child-care subsidies in MA are available to income-eligible low-income families
that are not current or former cash assistance recipients only to the degree that funds are
available. Detailed information for these state contracted slots was not available.
However, throughout our study period, MA had a substantial waiting list for IncomeEligible child-care subsidies. In November 2000, for example, there were 2412 infants
and 3602 toddlers (among children of other ages) from Income-Eligible families on the
waiting list.
HYPOTHESIS: The number of infants and toddlers receiving
child-care subsidies will depend on state regulations
governing the age (of the children) at which parents must be
active under welfare reform and the budget for child-care
subsidies.

II. WHO CARES FOR CHILDREN WITH CHILD CARE SUBSIDIES?
FINDING: In MDC the majority of providers serving infants and
toddlers are centers, whereas in MA, family child care homes are
the predominant providers serving infants and toddlers.
FINDING: Family child care homes are far more likely to
participate in the subsidized child-care program in MA than in
MDC.

As noted in Queralt, Witte & Griesinger (2000a), centers constitute a much larger
proportion of the provider community in MDC than in other areas of FL or the US.
Throughout our study period, centers comprised almost 50% of the providers in MDC.
By way of contrast, centers comprised less than 20% of the providers in MA (Witt, et al.,
2000).
Figure 2 shows that over 80% of the providers participating in the subsidized
child care program and serving infants in MDC are centers; however, only 53% of the
providers serving infants but not participating in the subsidy program are centers. In
contrast, in both the subsidized and unsubsidized sectors in MA, over 80% of the
providers serving infants are family child care homes.
Similarly, we found that 80% of the providers serving toddlers and participating
in the child care subsidy program in MDC are centers, while only 65% of the providers
serving toddlers but not participating in the subsidy program are centers. In contrast, in
MA over 80% of the providers (subsidized and unsubsidized) serving toddlers are family
child care homes.
Information for both infant and toddler programs makes clear that family child
care homes are far more likely to participate in the subsidized child-care program in MA
than in MDC. One reason for this striking difference may be that MA has overcome the
added administrative costs of dealing with small providers that enter and exit the market
frequently, such as family child care homes, by establishing family child care networks.
8

These networks deal with the subsidy agencies, recruit new homes, and handle the
administrative tasks for a group of family child care homes.
Policy Context

In Florida, child-care providers may choose to enter into an agreement or contract
with the child-care subsidy agency to take clients receiving subsidies. The contracted
providers are required to accept subsidized children, but they are not guaranteed that any
subsidized children will enroll. The subsidy management agencies refer child-care
subsidy recipients who ask for help in locating care to those providers who have entered
into contracts with the agency. Subsidy clients can select a provider from the list of
contracted providers or they can elect to receive a voucher that can be used at any
provider or to purchase informal care.
During the period covered by the MDC data (February 1996 to March 2000), 95%
of the child care subsidies (i.e., vouchers) issued in MDC were used to purchase care
from providers with purchase-of-service contracts with the subsidy management agency.
The remaining child care subsidies (5%) were used to pay non-contracted providers.
Ninety-nine percent of the child care subsidies issued to pay non-contracted providers
were used for informal care. We surmise that at the time of our study parents mostly
used contracted providers largely because, when using contracted providers, they were
only responsible for the co-payment and for any late fees or transportation fees. In
contrast, use of vouchers to pay for care by non-contracted providers required parents to
pay the full price of care in order to be reimbursed at the end of the month. This system
was changed in 2000.9
MA operates a “mixed” child care subsidy system that provides current and former
cash assistance recipients with vouchers and Income-Eligible children with “slots”
purchased directly by the state from selected licensed providers. As operated during our
study period, the MA voucher program provided families with greater choice than
MDC’s purchase of service contract system.
HYPOTHESIS: The way in which the child-care subsidy system is
administered can greatly affect the type of care that is
purchased by the system.

III. WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO THE AVAILABILITY OF CARE
FINDING: The large and rapid increase in the full-time center
enrollment of subsidized infants and toddlers after September
1998 in MDC may have displaced some infants and toddler
without access to child care subsidies.
FINDING: The growth in the full-time enrollment of infants and
toddlers at subsidized centers in MDC has been far less dramatic
than the increase in the number of child care subsidies for infant
and toddler care issued by child-care subsidy agencies.

9

Under the new system established in early 2000, parents are no longer required to pay for care up
front to be reimbursed. The payment for care now goes directly to the provider receiving the voucher, just
as it does for providers with contracts.

9

Figure 3 summarizes the total slots available (capacities), enrollments, and
vacancies reported to the R&Rs by MDC child care providers who were serving infants
for the period spanning February 1996 to March 1999. As can be seen, enrollments at
providers serving infants and accepting child care subsidies (i.e., vouchers) started to
increase in February 1998. By the end of our study period (March 1999), enrollments at
such providers had increased 11%. Note also that the vacancies reported by providers
accepting subsidies began to decline in late 1997. In contrast, Figure 3 shows that
enrollments at providers serving infants but not accepting child care subsidies (i.e., no
vouchers) declined slightly during the period.
Figure 4 shows that full-time infant (i.e., age <12 months) enrollments at centers
accepting vouchers, as reported by center providers to the R&Rs, increased slightly
during the study period, from about 1,000 infants at the beginning of the period to 1,150
at the end of the period, an increase of 15%. Conversely, during the same period, fulltime infant enrollments at centers not accepting vouchers declined from about 1,160 to
1,000.10
It is interesting that, as reported by center providers, the growth in full-time infant
enrollments at subsidized centers is far less dramatic than the over 150% increase in the
number of child care subsidies issued by the child-care subsidy agencies in MDC for
infant care (see Figure 1). Specifically, the number of vouchers issued for infant care
increased from approximately 400 to almost 1,000 between February 1996 and March
1999. There are a number of possible explanations for this discrepancy. For example, it
is possible that many vouchers for infant care were for part-time care.11 It is also possible
that infants with child-care subsidies increasingly displaced other infants without
subsidies. The fact that the full-time enrollment of infants at providers with subsidies
increased while the enrollment of infants at unsubsidized providers declined provides
some support for the displacement hypothesis. It is also possible, particularly for the
income-eligible group, that families formerly paying the full cost of care are now
receiving subsidies.
Figure 4 also shows that, over the study period, the number of one-year-olds and
two-year olds in full-time care at subsidized providers increased at rates of 17% and 13%,
respectively. In contrast, enrollment of one-year-olds and two-year-olds in full-time care
at unsubsidized providers decreased by a similar amount.
HYPOTHESIS: Large influxes of subsidized infants and toddlers
into formal child care can, at least in the short term, displace
unsubsidized children.

IV. WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO THE QUALITY OF CARE?
Quality child care and early education fosters children’s intellectual, social, and
10

The reader should note that these enrollment-by-age figures reported by providers to the MDC
R&Rs are not considered to be as reliable as the overall enrollments they report.
11
Not all individuals receiving child-care subsidies were working on a full-time basis. For
example, during our study period, only 30% of cash assistance recipients with subsidies were working and
among those working only 23% worked 20 or more hours per week. However, 93% of those receiving
Transitional Child Care Assistance (TCC) were working (88% of those in this group were working at least
20 hours per week) and 99% of Income-Eligible subsidy clients were working (95% of those in this group
were working at least 20 hours per week).

10

emotional development, gets them ready for school, and puts them on the right path
toward healthy and productive citizenship.12 Providing quality care makes good
economic sense. Specifically, early intervention has been shown to reduce later public
expenditures for special education, grade repetitions, public assistance payments,
delinquency and crime. See Vandell and Wolfe (2000) for a recent survey of the literature
on the impact of quality care on child development.
Our study examines quality on the basis of several structural measures derived
from the provider records maintained by the R&R agencies in FL and MA. In addition,
for providers participating in the subsidized child care program in MDC we obtain
structural and process quality ratings from the Child Care Program Assessments. No
outcome measures were available from any source.
FINDING: During the course of welfare reform in MDC, the
range in the educational attainment of staff at subsidized
centers offering care for infants and toddlers has been
widening. Specifically, we observe an increase in the
proportion of staff with less than a high school education as
well as an increase in the proportion of staff with AA and BA
degrees.
FINDING: Staff at subsidized centers offering infant or
toddler care in MDC are significantly less likely to have a high
school diploma than staff at unsubsidized facilities.
FINDING: Staff at subsidized centers in MDC offering toddler
care, as compared to the staff at unsubsidized centers, are
significantly less likely to have an AA or BA degree.
FINDING: In MA family child care providers who do not take
child care vouchers and who are serving infants and toddlers
are more likely to have a BA degree than those who accept
vouchers.

One recognized aspect of quality in the child care and early childhood education
world is the educational level of the staff. We obtain information on the academic

12

There are three important aspects of quality child care--structural, process, and outcome. The
Early Childhood Education community refers to structural quality as the quality of the resources or inputs
used in the production of child care services. These are generally observable and measurable and relatively
easy to regulate by licensing bodies. They include such things as caregiver-to-child ratios, group sizes, and
education and training of the staff. Process quality refers to the quality of the social environment and social
relations between teachers or caregivers and children, the emotional tone of the classroom, the level of
stimulation children receive, and the quality of the activities in which children engage while in care. These
things are best measured by direct observation. Outcome quality refers to the effects of the care received
by children in terms of developmental outcomes such as ability to understand and use language, preacademic skills such as ability to count and recognize letters, later academic performance, and presence or
absence of problem behaviors such as aggression, dependency, sad or angry feelings, and so on. To
measure outcome quality it is necessary to follow up children over a period of time.

11

credentials of child-care staff at centers with infant and toddler programs in MDC from
the R&R databases.
Staff employed at subsidized centers with infant programs are somewhat less
likely to have a high school diploma than the staff employed by other providers in MDC.
Specifically, an average of 88% of the staff at subsidized centers with infant programs
have a high school diploma or higher credentials, compared to an average of 89% of the
staff at centers that do not participate in the child care subsidy program. While this
difference is small, it is statistically significant (p-value=.005). Over the four-year period
of our study, the average percent of staff with a high school education at subsidized
providers decreased slightly.
For centers with infant programs in MDC, there is no significant difference in the
average proportion of staff with AAs or BAs between providers participating in the
subsidized child care program and those that do not participate. The percent of staff with
an AA degree increased from approximately 36% at the beginning of our study period to
39% at the end of our study period. Similarly, the percent of staff with BAs increased
from 11% at the beginning of the period to 13% at the end of the period.
Staff employed at centers with toddler programs and participating in the
subsidized child care program in MDC are less likely to have a high school diploma, an
AA degree or a BA degree than the staff employed by other providers in MDC. To be
more specific, on average, 88% of the staff at centers with toddler programs participating
in the subsidized child care program have a high school diploma, 35% have an AA and
10% have a BA. By way of contrast, on average, 91% of the staff at centers with toddler
programs and not participating in the subsidized child care program have a high school
diploma, 38% have an AA and 12% have a BA. The difference in educational credentials
between centers that enroll toddlers and participate in the subsidized child care program
and those that do not participate is statistically significant.13 As for infant programs in
MDC, the proportion of staff with a high school diploma at centers with toddler programs
declined slightly during the period of our study, while the proportion of staff with AA
and BA increased slightly.
We have no information on the credentials of staff at child care centers in MA
because such data are not collected by R&Rs in Massachusetts. The only information
available in the MA R&R records during our study period is for family child care
providers. Somewhat less than 7% of family child care providers (in our sample) caring
for infants and toddlers in MA had AA degrees in 1999. Providers that take child care
vouchers were less likely to have an AA than those who did not. However, the difference
in the percent with an AA degree in the two groups is not statistically significantly.
Providers serving infants and toddlers who did not accept vouchers were much more
likely to have BAs than those who did throughout our study period. To be more explicit,
13% of providers who served infants and who did not accept vouchers and 14% of
providers who served toddlers and who did not accept vouchers had BAs, while only 5%
of providers that served infant and toddlers and who accepted vouchers had BA. The
differences in the proportion of providers with BAs are statistically significant.
The proportion of family providers with college degrees in MA is approximately
the same as the proportion of center staff with college degrees in MDC. The unusually
13

The p-value for each of the tests for significant differences in average credentials is 0.00.

12

high proportion of family providers with BAs in MA is likely related to the higher overall
educational level of the population in MA, as compared to MDC.
HYPOTHESIS: On average, providers participating in the child
care subsidy program will have lower educational levels than
providers that do not participate in the child care subsidy
program.

FINDING: Less than 3% of the child care and early education
facilities serving infants and toddlers in MDC were accredited.
In contrast, of the facilities serving infants and toddlers in MA,
at least 30% of the centers accepting child-care vouchers and
over 20% of those that do not them were accredited.

Accreditation by a nationally recognized professional organization is widely
recognized in the child-care field as an indicator of quality. This is because, to be
accredited and re-accredited by a nationally recognized organization such as the National
Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), a child care facility must
pass periodic and extensive reviews of all aspects of its program.
We found that only a very small fraction of the child care and early childhood
education facilities serving infants or toddlers in MDC were accredited during the 38month period of our study. Two percent of centers that were not participating in the
subsidized child care program and that were offering infant care (a total of 4 of 196
providers) were accredited in February 1996, compared to 1.5% of centers offering infant
care and participating in the subsidized child care program (a total of 3 of 196 providers).
By March 1999, an additional provider in both the subsidized and unsubsidized sectors
had become accredited. However, the level of accreditation in both sectors remained
strikingly low.14 Unsubsidized center providers serving toddlers were more likely to be
accredited (i.e., approximately 3% at both the beginning and end of our study period).
However, subsidized center providers serving toddlers were no more likely to be
accredited than those serving infants.
It is interesting to note that, for the period of our study, the majority of accredited
facilities in MDC were run by religious organizations (e.g., Christian [nondenominational], Jewish, Congregational, Catholic, Lutheran, Presbyterian), including a
number of accredited facilities run by various religious charities in poor neighborhoods;
several of the accredited facilities were Head Start programs; and several were employer
run (e.g., Florida Power and Light and Ryder Corporation). Many accredited facilities
were in areas with large numbers of migrant farm workers (for example, Homestead or
Florida City). The number of private, non-religious, accredited providers in MDC was
minimal as of the end of our study period in March 1999.
The percent of nationally accredited child care and early education facilities in
MDC is unusually small for a major metropolitan area. In contrast, in the five
representative areas of MA we studied and during the period of our study, 32% of centers
with infant programs and accepting vouchers were accredited, as well as 21% of centers
14

For our analysis of the accreditation situation, we used Gold Seal program records going back to
the inception of this program in 1996. These records were kept by the state’s R&R Network (The Florida
Children’s Forum). We also used the on-line NAEYC records (National Academy of Early Childhood
Programs, 2000).

13

with infant programs that did not accept vouchers. The rate of accreditation for toddler
programs in MA (30% for programs accepting vouchers and 25% for those not accepting
vouchers) was also reasonably high.
Policy Context

In FL, under the Gold Seal Quality Care program established on July 1, 1996,
providers accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting association whose standards
substantially meet or exceed those of the National Association for the Education of
Young Children (NAEYC), the National Association for Family Child Care, or the
National Early Childhood Program Accreditation Commission are designated as Gold
Seal providers. Beginning in July 1, 1998, Gold Seal providers have been paid up to 20%
higher reimbursements for providing subsidized child care, as long as this rate does not
exceed their private pay rate. 15 During the period of our study, MA did not provide
financial incentives for accreditation. However, providers were required to be accredited
or to have applied for accreditation in order to participate in the MA Department of
Education Community Partnership for Children (CPC) program, which provides
substantial amounts of funding for the care of 3- and 4-year-old children.
Given the policy context in MA and MDC, one might reasonably expect higher
levels of accreditation, particularly for subsidized providers, in MDC than in MA. Yet we
find the reverse. Why?
HYPOTHESIS: MA has a substantially higher proportion of
accredited child-care centers than MDC because of
substantially higher market prices for care and
substantially higher reimbursement rates.

Supporting information: As will be described in greater detail below, prices for
infant and toddler care in MDC are substantially lower (even after accounting for
differences in child-care regulations and in the cost of living) in MDC than in MA (see
Tables 2 and 3). In part reflecting market prices, reimbursement rates for infant and
toddler care in MDC are substantially below the reimbursement rates for infant and
toddler care in MA. For example, in the fall of 1998, the weekly reimbursement rate for
full-time center care of children less than 12 months old was $95 in MDC, $182.50 in
Western MA and $225 in the Boston area.
The subsidy management agencies in MDC have found that many providers
wishing to become Gold Seal providers are unable, for financial reasons, to make the
needed changes in staff, facilities, resources, and programs. To overcome the financial
barriers, the Miami Dade School Readiness Coalition, with child care quality
enhancement funds from the state, recently has begun to award a limited number of
grants to providers wishing to upgrade in order to achieve Gold Seal status.
Becoming accredited, which may take two years or even more time to achieve (in
the case of accreditation by NAEYC) requires that providers make considerable
investments in improving their facility and the credentials of their staff. As facilities
increase quality, they must be able to charge higher prices or obtain grants to cover their
increased costs. Raising the price of care is hard, given the low median income and high
level of poverty of families with children in MDC.
15

Beginning in February 2000, the private pay ceiling was relaxed for Gold Seal providers in FL,
so that they currently need to have only 5% of their private clients paying top price in order to qualify for
the pay differential.

14

Hypothesis: MA has a substantially higher proportion of
centers accredited than MDC because the proportion of
the MA population that is native born is higher and the
level of income and education of the population is higher.

Supporting information: The proportion of the population that is native born was
almost 90% in MA in 1999, while only 55% of the population was native born in MDC in
1990. Conservative estimates place the proportion of the population that is native born in
MDC today at less than 40%.16
Using data from the March 2000 Current Population Survey, the Census Bureau
estimates that 85% of MA residents had completed high school and 33% had BAs or
higher degrees. The estimated proportion of the populations with high school degrees in
MDC in March 2000 was 75% and the proportion of the population with a BA or higher
degrees was 23%. The Census Bureau estimates that the median household income in
MA in 1997 was $43,015 while the estimated median household income in MDC was
$30,000. Sixteen percent of young children in MA live in poverty while 38% of young
children in MDC live in poverty.
FINDING: In MDC, center-based infant and toddler programs
that accept children with child care subsidies rely heavily on the
CDA credential for their staff, while those that do not accept
children with subsidies place less reliance on the CDA and more
on formal education, such as a high school diploma, AA or BA
degree.
FINDING: In MA, family child care providers are more likely to
have an AA or a BA than a CDA.

Centers with infant programs in MDC and participating in the subsidized child
care program have a higher percent of their staff with the CDA credential (on average,
over 50%) than do centers with infant programs that do not participate (on average, 40%).
The difference in the average percent of staff with CDA in the two groups is statistically
significant (p-value=0.00). Centers with toddler programs and participating in the
subsidized child care program in MDC also have a higher percent of staff with CDAs (an
average of 52% with CDAs) than centers with toddler programs that do not participate
(an average of 43% with CDAs).
During the period of our study less than 20% of providers in MDC reported to the
R&R that their staff had the 30-hours of training required by FL’s minimum standards
regulation. Given the limited proportion of staff at centers with infant or toddler
programs in MDC reporting compliance with the 30-hour training requirement, one may
infer that either this information is not consistently gathered by the R&R or the
requirement is not as actively enforced as the CDA requirement.
We have no information on the CDA credentials of staff at child care centers in
MA because such data is not collected by MA R&Rs. However, few family child care
providers in MA have the CDA. This is not too surprising since MA law does not require
16

This estimate considers only the 297, 531 new legal immigrants reflected in INS statistics
through 1998.

15

the CDA but rather, as described below, accepts a reasonably wide range of early
childhood education and training.
Policy Context

Beginning on July 1, 1996, the FL law requires that for every 20 preschool
children enrolled in a licensed child-care facility operating 8 hours or more per week, one
of the child-care personnel in the facility must have a Child Development Associate
(CDA) credential or an educational credential that is equivalent or greater.17 FL also
requires that all child-care personnel hired on or after October 1, 1992 and all operators
of family day care homes take an approved 30-clock-hour introductory course in child
care.18
Effective October 16, 1996, MA law requires that lead teachers for infants and
toddlers be at least 21 years of age and fulfill certain minimum education, training and
experience requirements. A number of different training/education/experience
combinations can meet the requirements. For example, either of the following
combinations would qualify: (1) a high school diploma or equivalent plus 12 college
credits including credits in infant and toddler care plus 36 months of work experience, or
(2) a BA or advanced degree in early education plus 12 college credits in infant and
toddler care and 9 months of work experience.
HYPOTHESIS: The education and training observed at
child care centers will be heavily influenced by minimum
standards regarding the education/training/experience of
child care staff.
HYPOTHESIS: Minimum standards that are not enforced
will be violated.

FINDING: In MDC, subsidized centers serving infants or toddler
are more likely than unsubsidized centers to report that they
have a child development program.

Recent research has shown the importance of child development activities for
infants and toddlers. See National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000) for
a recent survey of the literature. Children who receive primarily custodial care often
develop developmental deficits that are difficult to overcome in subsequent years.
We looked at the proportion of centers with infant programs in MDC that report
to the R&R that they offer a child development program. Over 70% of centers with infant
programs and participating in the subsidized child care program indicate that they have
child development programs, while only 63% of non-participating centers with infant
programs indicate that they have a child development program. The difference in the
average percent of programs indicating that they have a child development program is
statistically significant (p-value=0.00). It is interesting to note that, over the study period,
the proportion of centers with infant programs that indicate that they have a child
development program increases more substantially for programs that do not participate in
17

The CDA may be the national credential or a state-approved CDA equivalency. Personnel with
equivalent or higher formal educational credentials can be counted as meeting this requirement.
18
Those in continuous employment since before October 1, 1992 are allowed to go by the previous
child care training requirement of 20 hours.

16

the subsidized child care program than for those that participate, but they remain
consistently below the levels for subsidized programs. The situation for centers in MDC
with toddler programs is similar.
FINDING: Below-standard “generic” observational assessment
scores at facilities offering infant and toddler care in MDC have
approximately doubled (from 5% of programs in 1996 to 11% of
programs in 1999) during the course of welfare reform.
FINDING: From January 1997 to March 1999 in MDC, among
providers participating in the subsidized child care program, 20
infant programs, 17 toddler programs, and 24 programs serving
two-year-olds received below-standard observational
assessment scores.
We examined the assessment scores given to child-care providers participating

in the subsidized child care program in MDC from January 1997 to March 1999. On
average, providers received high ratings and, over the 2¼ years covered by our data,
provider “generic” ratings (i.e., ratings of program management, staff development and
resources, group sizes, and parent involvement) increased slightly. However, the scores
for programs serving infants and two-year-olds decreased and scores received by
programs serving one-year old children remained essentially unchanged.
Consistent with overall county standards, we considered any programs with a
score below 80% on the Infant Program, One-Year-Old Program, Two-Year-Old
Program or Generic Program assessment to be below standard. During the period of our
study, 20 infant programs, 17 toddler programs, and 24 programs serving two-year-olds
received below-standard scores.19 The proportion of infant and toddler programs and the
proportion of facilities serving infants and toddlers that received below-standard generic
ratings increased during the period we consider. Specifically, in 1997, 5% of the centers
with infant programs received below-standard generic ratings, whereas in 1998 and in the
first quarter of 1999 11% of the programs did so. Six percent of the toddler programs
received below standard generic ratings in 1997, while 11% did so in 1998 and in the first
quarter of 1999.

19

It should be understood that it is possible for a given facility to pass the observational
assessment with an overall score of 80 or better, even though some of the age-group programs may get
below-standard ratings.

17

Policy Context

Florida’s child care law prescribes that agencies in charge of administering the
CCDF-subsidized child care program can enter into a service contract only with providers
that achieve an overall score of at least 70% on the Child Care Program Assessment.
(Beginning on July 1, 1998, MDC raised the minimum acceptable score to 80%.) Once a
provider is cited for non-compliance and is given an evaluation stating specific
deficiencies, the provider must bring the program into compliance within 90 days. If the
provider fails to achieve compliance within 90 days, the department must withhold any
further payment.
Six different assessment tools are used for the Child Care Program Assessment.
The “generic” tool covers areas such as program management, staff development and
resources, group sizes, and parent involvement. The other five tools used are for each
age group in care (i.e., infant, toddler, two-year-old, preschool, and school-age) and cover
things such as physical environment (indoor and outdoor), learning environment,
staff/child interaction, developmental program, parent involvement, health, and nutrition.
(Copies of the assessment tools are included in the Appendix to Queralt, et al., 2000).
HYPOTHESIS: A substantial influx of infants and toddlers into
care can lead to a decline in the quality of care at providers
with infant and toddler programs.

V. WHAT PRICES ARE CHARGED FOR INFANT AND TODDLER CARE?
FINDING: Prices for infant and toddler care in MA are more than
2 ½ times the equivalent prices in MDC.

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the prices of infant and toddler care
reported in the R&R databases in the five study areas in MA for the period 1997-1999.
Table 3 provides prices for similar types of care in MDC for the same period of time. The
median full-time price of infant care during this period across the five areas in MA was
$218 per week for providers participating in the voucher program and $234 per week for
providers not participating. By way of contrast, the median price of infant care in MDC
was $85 per week for provider participating in the child care subsidy program and $75
per week for providers that did not participate.
In MA the median weekly full-time price of toddler care was $194 for providers
participating in the voucher program and $214 for non-participating providers. For
toddler care as for infant care, prices in MDC are substantially less than half those in the
five MA areas. See Table 2 and Table 3.
In MA, prices charged by providers that do not accept children with child-care
vouchers are significantly higher than prices charged by providers that accept vouchers.
The situation in MDC is the reverse, that is, prices charged by providers participating in
the child care subsidy program are significantly higher than the prices charged by
providers that do not participate.
Policy Context

FL and MA, like most states, require that centers maintain certain minimum
caregiver-to-child ratios. Minimum standards regarding caregiver-to-child ratios and
group sizes are likely to have substantial impacts on prices. States have set these
minimum standards because of a large literature that indicates that lower caregiver-to18

child ratios are associated with higher quality care. See Vandell and Wolfe, 2000 for a
survey of this literature. The establishment and enforcement of minimum standards
require political support. Thus, public demand for higher quality and safer and healthier
care for children is generally reflected in more stringent standards for care.
In FL, the state sets minimum caregiver-to-child ratios for different age levels to be
maintained by centers. For infants (under the age of 1 year), the minimum caregiver-tochild ratio is 1-to-4, for one-year old children it is 1-to-6, and for two-year olds it is 1-to11. FL does not regulate group sizes.
Like FL, MA sets minimum caregiver-to-child ratios that a center must maintain.
MA’s minimum standards are more stringent than FL’s, particularly for toddlers. This is
one indication that demand for quality child care is higher in MA than in FL. The
minimum caregiver-to-child ratio for infants (ages 1 to 15 months) in MA is 1-to-3 and
the minimum ratio for toddlers (ages 15 to 33 months) is 1-to-4. The Commonwealth also
sets maximum group sizes. Specifically, there can be no more than 7 children in an
infant group and 9 children in a toddler group.
HYPOTHESIS: Market prices for child care will reflect the
costs of providing care (i.e., the supply side) as well as the
demand for care in local child-care markets.
Supporting Information: The median price of infant and toddler care in MA is
more than 2 ½ times the median price of infant and toddler care in MDC. The cost of
labor and other items needed to provide child care is between 10% and 34% higher in
MA than in MDC.20 MA’s more stringent minimum-standard requirements mean that
centers providing infant care in MA will have labor costs that are 32% higher than
centers providing infant care in MDC. Minimum standards cause labor costs that are 50%
higher in MA than in MDC for children between 15 and 24 months old and labor costs
that are 275% higher for children 24 months to 33 months old.
We conclude that the costs of meeting higher minimum standards account for
most of the observed difference in the price of care for 24 to 33 month old children in
MA and MDC, but only partially explain the differences in prices charged for the care of
children less than two-years old. Consequently, demand-side influences must account for
much of the remaining price differences observed between MA and MDC with respect to
the care of infants and one-year olds. The existing literature suggests that the income and
educational levels of the population are strongly related to the demand for higher-quality
child care. See Vandell and Wolfe (2000) for a survey of this literature. The much higher
educational and income levels reported earlier for MA, as compared to MDC, are likely
to account for much of the remaining price difference (after adjustment for cost) between
MA and MDC with respect to the care of infants and one-year-olds.
FINDING: Both the median and 75th percentile of the prices
charged by subsidized providers tend to converge to the
maximum allowed state reimbursement rate. This type of price

20

For example the overall cost of living is 34% higher in Boston than in MDC and the cost of
living in the western part of MA is 10% higher than the cost of living in MDC. The median child care
worker’s wage in MA is approximately 10% higher in MA than in MDC ($8.59 per hour in MA and $7.79
per hour in MDC).

19

movement is often observed when a regulatory agency sets a
price ceiling.
FINDING: In both MA & MDC, unsubsidized providers charge a
wider range of prices for the care of infants and toddlers than
subsidized providers. The range of prices charged by providers is
particularly limited in the subsidized sector in MDC.

At the beginning of our study (March 1996) and until September 1997, the state
weekly provider reimbursement rate for center full-time care of infants in MDC was $85.
On October 1, 1997, this rate was increased to $95. The line in Figure 5 depicts these
provider reimbursement rates for the care of infants. Figure 5 also represents, as bars, the
medians and 75th percentiles of prices recorded in the MDC R&R databases for the first
quarter of 1996 through the first quarter of 1999. Figure 5 shows that the maximum
reimbursement rates for the care of infants was set at the 75th percentile of the prices
recorded in the MDC R&R database prior to October 1997. After October 1997, the
maximum reimbursement rates for the care of infants (as well as for one-year-olds) was
set above the 75th percentile of the prices recorded in the MDC R&R database.
Figure 5 shows separately the medians and 75th percentiles of weekly prices
charged in MDC for full-time infant care by center providers participating in the
subsidized child care program and by those that did not participate. At the beginning of
our study period, both the medians and 75th percentiles of prices for providers
participating and not participating in the subsidized child care program were virtually the
same. Beginning in the third quarter of 1996, the median price of care for subsidized
providers increased until it equaled the 75th percentile, while the median price for nonparticipating providers remained unchanged. This type of price movement is often
observed when a government or other agency set a price ceiling. The longer the price
ceiling is in effect, the more the prices charged by providers who sell to the government
or other agency converge to the ceiling.
Note in Figure 5 that at the beginning of the third quarter of 1997, the 75th
percentile of weekly infant prices charged by center providers that do not participate in
the subsidized child care program begins to rise and exceeds the 75th percentile of prices
charged by participating providers. It appears that market forces caused an increase in the
prices of care at this time.
In the fourth quarter of 1997, maximum reimbursement rates were raised from
$85 to $95 per week. After this rate increase, the reimbursement rate in MDC exceeded
the 75th percentile of prices derived from the R&R database for both participating and
nonparticipating programs. Following this rate increase, the 75th percentile of weekly
prices of providers accepting child care subsidies begins to rise in the second quarter of
1998 to a level equal to the 75th percentile of prices charged by providers not accepting
children with subsidies.
One additional insight that can be gained from comparing differences between the
median prices and 75th percentile of prices for subsidized and unsubsidized care in Figure
5 is that the dispersion (i.e., the difference between the two measures) of prices charged
by subsidized providers is much more limited than the dispersion of prices charged by
unsubsidized providers. This is also apparent in Tables 2 and 3 by comparing the CVs
(coefficients of variation) for subsidized and unsubsidized programs. Only a very limited
20

range of prices is observed for providers taking child care subsidies because the prices of
providers taking subsidies tend to converge to the government’s maximum
reimbursement rate.
Reimbursement rates for infant and toddler care in MA were approximately
double those in MDC. This reflects in part the higher market prices in MA (compare the
prices in Table 2 with those in Table 3). In the fall of 1998, the reimbursement rate for
full-time infant care was $225 per week in the Boston area and $182.50 per week in the
western part of the Commonwealth. For the same period, the reimbursement rate for fulltime toddler care was $200 per week in the Boston area and $167.50 per week in the
western part of the Commonwealth.
Policy Context

In FL as well as in MA, state payments to providers vary depending on the age of
the child in care, the type of care, and the area of the state. Federal regulations governing
the CCDF child-care subsidy programs require states to set provider reimbursement rates
at levels that offer “equal access” to children with child-care subsidies. According to
regulations, states must justify that their reimbursement rates provide equal access by
referencing a “market-rate” survey that is no more than two-years old. Reimbursement
rates set at the 75th percentile of the local market price are presumed to provide equal
access.
FL and MA have taken quite different approaches to setting provider
reimbursement rates. In FL, the child-care law places the Department of Children &
Families (DCF) in charge of establishing procedures to reimburse providers participating
in the subsidized child-care program at the prevailing market rate for child-care services.
“Prevailing market rate,” according to FL law, means “the annually determined 75th
percentile of a reasonable frequency distribution of market rates in a predetermined
geographic market at which licensed child-care providers charge a person for child care
services.” However, provider reimbursement rates cannot exceed the private pay rate a
provider charges.
To comply with the law, DCF in FL contracts with the central agencies that
manage the subsidized child care program and provide local R&R services to survey all
providers in all areas of the state in the spring of each year. The survey the R&Rs conduct
serves the dual purpose of updating the R&R provider databases throughout the state and
providing information on local market prices. In general, R&Rs collect “list prices” not
market prices. As can be seen in Figure 5, our analysis of the R&R database in MDC
does not seem to coincide with the analysis of the market rate survey after October 1997.
During the period of our study, MA took a different approach to setting
reimbursement rates. Periodically, MA hired an outside contractor to survey providers to
determine the “arms-length” market price providers charged for care. In contrast to using
R&R data, this approach obtains prices for care that is actually purchased (not list prices)
and requires that the care be unsubsidized and that the buyer and seller be “unrelated.”
The Office of Child Care Services (OCCS) in MA uses the market rate survey to
substantiate a request to the Legislature for an increase in provider reimbursement rates.
On July 1, 1996, the MA Legislature approved reimbursement rates set at the 55th
percentile of the local market price of care, determined by a 1994 market rate survey. The
Legislature increased reimbursement rates again in September 1998.
The CCDF regulations and state policies create an interesting connection between
market prices and provider reimbursement rates. The connection is tightest when states
21

conduct annual surveys and set rates based on such surveys.21 Under this type of
reimbursement rate system, reimbursement rates can only increase when the providers
that do not take subsidies raise their prices. The ability of unsubsidized providers to raise
prices, of course, depends upon local market conditions.
HYPOTHESIS: Provider reimbursement rates set on the basis
of market prices that do not cover the cost of quality care will
not allow for improvements in the quality of care.

Supporting Information: In MDC, reimbursement rates generally have been set at
or above the 75th percentile of prices in the R&R database. In MA, reimbursement rates
throughout the study period have been set below the 75th percentile of the local market
price of child care. Yet, the quality of care in Massachusetts (as measured by
accreditation rates), particularly in the subsidized sector, is quite high, while quality of
care in MDC (as measured by accreditation rates) is quite low.
FINDING: The prices paid for the weekly full-time center care of
infants and one-year-olds in MDC are less than 10% apart, even
though the labor costs to provide infant care, given FL’s
minimum caregiver-to-child ratio requirements, should be about
50% higher than the labor costs to provide care for one-yearolds.
FINDING: The prices paid for the weekly full-time center care of
infants in MA are approximately 12% more than prices paid for
toddler care, even though the labor costs to provide infant care,
given MA’s minimum caregiver-to-child ratio requirements,
should be about 32% higher than the labor costs to provide care
for one-year-olds.
FINDING: The prices paid for the weekly full-time center care of
infants and two-year-olds in MDC are at most 32% apart, even
though the labor costs to provide infant care, given FL’s
minimum caregiver-to-child ratio requirements, should be about
175% higher than the labor costs to provide care for two-yearolds.
FINDING: These price ratios suggest that centers that comply
with the state-promulgated minimum standards must be
subsidizing their infant care using funds from sources other than
the prices paid by parents for the care of their infants or state
reimbursements for such care.

As noted earlier, the required minimum caregiver-to-child ratios in Florida imply
a cost of labor to provide care for infants that is 50% more than the labor costs associated
with providing care for one-year-olds and 175% more than the labor costs of care for
two-year-olds. In MA, minimum caregiver-to-child ratio requirements imply that the
21

The Florida system appears to have this type of system, but Figure 5 suggests that the system is
not followed rigorously.

22

labor costs of providing infant care that meets the minimum standards are 32% higher
than the labor costs associated with providing toddler care.
Figure 6 gives the ratio of the median weekly full-time price of infant care to twoyear-old care for centers participating and not participating in the subsidized child care
program in MDC. It also provides the ratio of the full-time weekly provider
reimbursement rate for the care of infants to the rate for the care of two-year olds. Note
that unsubsidized providers charge 20% to 30% more to care for infants than to care for
two-year olds. This price differential, however, does not cover the labor cost differential
(175%) implied by FL’s minimum ratio requirements. The reimbursement rate paid by
the state to providers for the care of infants also is only 8-12% higher than the
reimbursement rate for two-year-olds. This is strong evidence that the costs of providing
infant care that is in compliance with state-imposed standards is not covered by either the
prices parents or the state pay. Providers providing infant care must be subsidizing the
provision of such care from other sources. Anecdotal evidence indicates that many
providers subsidize their infant and toddler programs by charging prices that exceed costs
for the care of 3-4 year-olds and school-age children.
The situation in MA, while not as stark, also indicates that centers must be using
other sources to subsidize the infant care they provide. As can be seen by comparing the
price of infant and toddler care in Table 2, the price of infant care in MA is only
approximately 12% higher than the price of toddler care. MA provider reimbursement
rates for infant care are 12.5% higher than the state’s reimbursement rates for toddlers in
Boston and 9% higher in the western part of the state. Yet, minimum standards imply
labor costs that are 32% higher.
To further examine the relationship of costs to prices for infant care, consider the
implied costs of meeting minimum caregiver-to-child standards. We estimate that during
the period of our study a provider would have to charge $129 per week for full-time
infant care in FL and $190 in MA to cover the costs of providing care that meets
minimum caregiver-to-child standards.22 As can be seen in Figure 5, neither prices nor
reimbursement rates ever exceed $95 per week in MDC during the period of our study.
The conclusion is that in MDC providers are not being paid enough either by parents or
by the state to cover the costs of meeting state-imposed standards. By way of contrast, as
can be seen in Table 3, the price of infant care in MA is sufficient to cover the cost of
state-imposed minimum caregiver-to-child standards. We do not know whether or not the
MA prices are sufficient to meet other state standards (e.g., group size requirements).
The fact that reimbursement rates often do not meet the costs of providing infant
and toddler care is one explanation for the slow expansion of infant and toddler care
during welfare reform.
HYPOTHESIS: The relative prices for full-time center care of
infants are generally not set at levels that reflect stringent, stateset minimum caregiver-to-child standards for infant care.

22

To obtain these numbers, we assumed that staff costs are approximately 75% of the total costs
of providing care, with the remaining 25% of the cost of care being attributable to space and other facility
costs. We also assumed the median child care worker wages, $7.79 hour in FL and $8.59 in MA (see
Lemke, et al, 2001 and Queralt, Witte, & Griesinger, 2000) and a fifty-hour work week.

23

HYPOTHESIS: In some areas, neither center prices nor state
reimbursement rates cover costs of providing infant care that
meets state minimum caregiver-to-child ratio requirements.
CONCLUSIONS
We provide descriptive evidence from MDC in FL and from five representative
areas in MA that government policies governing welfare reform, the child-care subsidy
system, and minimum-standards regulations have had considerable influence on the
availability, price, and quality of infant and toddler care as welfare reform progressed
from 1996 to 2000. We suspect that the markedly different socio-cultural settings in
MDC and MA also have had some influence on the very different situations for infant
and toddler care in MDC and MA.23
Our data suggest that child-care regulations, market prices, and provider
reimbursements in MDC are not in synchrony. Specifically, the prices charged by
providers in MDC for the care of infants and the reimbursements providers receive from
the state for infant care do not appear to be sufficient to cover the costs of providing
infant care that meets the state-imposed minimum standards. This is different from the
situation we observe in the five areas of MA we studied, where prices, reimbursements,
and regulations are more closely aligned.
Given the current caregiver-to-child ratio requirements for the care of infants and
toddlers in FL and MA, we compute that, during the period of our study, a center-based
provider would have to charge $129 per week for full-time infant care in FL and $190 in
MA to cover the costs of providing care meeting the minimum ratio requirements. We
find that the vast majority of center providers in MDC charged less than $100 per week
for infant care. In addition, the state-set reimbursements paid to centers in MDC for
providing full-time infant care never exceeded $95 per week during the period of the
study. These prices and reimbursements in MDC were not sufficient to cover the costs of
providing infant care that met the high regulatory standards. In contrast, during the same
period, we find that MA market prices and provider reimbursement rates for the full-time
center care of infants were sufficient to cover the costs of providing care in compliance
with the state-imposed caregiver-to-child ratios.
We find that prices of infant and toddler care in MDC are strikingly lower than in
MA, even after adjusting for the higher cost of living and the more stringent regulatory
environment in MA. We suspect, and provide some evidence, that this marked difference
reflects, at least in part, lower average quality of infant and toddler care in MDC than in
MA. This is worrisome, given the large numbers of low-income infants and toddlers in
formal child care in MDC.
In recent years, MDC has seen rapid increases in the number of infants and
toddlers receiving child care subsidies. FL’s stringent, work-first welfare reform requires
cash assistance recipients to be active when their youngest child is three-months-old.
This has led to very rapid rates of increase in the number of low-income infants and
toddlers in formal child care settings. The increase in the number of infants and toddlers
23

Mindful of the many factors that affect the child care and early education situation in MDC, the
Miami-Dade School Readiness Coalition launched a campaign in the Fall of 2001 to educate parents about
the importance of early care and education.

24

in care became particularly striking after September 1998, when cash assistance
recipients began to be removed from the rolls because of time limits. MA’s less stringent
welfare reform, which requires that cash assistance recipients be active when their
youngest child is six years old, has been associated with a rate of increase in the number
of infants and toddlers in care that is very much lower than the rate of increase
experienced in FL. For example, during our study period the number of infants in care
increased by 150% in MDC and by only 10% in MA.
In MDC, enrollments at facilities with infant and toddler programs that accept
child care subsidies increased moderately during the period of our study, while
enrollments at providers that did not take children with subsidies declined. We suggest
that the fact that the growth in the full-time enrollment of infants and toddlers at
subsidized facilities has been far less dramatic than the increase in the number of child
care subsidies issued for infant and toddler care may be indicative of a displacement of
infants and toddlers from unsubsidized families by those with child-care subsidies. This
scenario seems particularly likely given that, during the period of our study, payments to
providers accepting child care subsidies exceeded the median prices charged by providers
that did not participate in the subsidized child care program.
One fundamental difference in the formal care of infants and toddlers in MDC as
compared to MA is that in MDC care is much more likely to take place at child care
centers and much less likely to take place at family child care homes. There are a number
of possible explanations for this difference. We suspect that the difference can be
explained by some combination of a more pronounced racial and ethnic diversity, higher
poverty levels, and a much larger unlicensed, family child care underground economy in
MDC than in MA.
The measures of quality of infant care we use in this study are limited, although
more extensive than those used in many other large-scale studies that use administrative
data. In terms of education and training, we find that the CDA credential is prominent in
FL, in part because of regulatory requirements, but it is not very important in MA. In
MDC in the period surrounding welfare reform, we find evidence of a widening range of
educational attainment among the staff at centers with infant and toddler programs that
participate in the subsidized child care program. Specifically, in the course of welfare
reform, the proportion of center staff with less than a high school education at subsidized
centers increased, at the same time that the proportion of staff with AA and BA degrees
also increased. Observational assessments of the quality of infant and toddler programs
at centers participating in the subsidized child care program in MDC indicate that the
proportion of low-quality infant and toddler programs has approximately doubled (from
5% of programs in 1996 to 11% of programs in 1999) during the course of welfare
reform.
The level of accreditation of centers with infant and toddler programs in MDC
(less than 2% during the period of our study) is distressingly low. By way of contrast,
over 30% of centers with infant and toddler programs that take vouchers in MA are
nationally accredited and between 20% and 25 % of those that do not take vouchers also
are accredited. The low level of accreditation in MDC exists despite the fact that, under
FL’s Gold Seal program, subsidized providers can receive up to a 20% increase in
reimbursements if they become accredited. By way of contrast, the MA subsidized child
care program does not offer higher reimbursements to providers with accreditation.

25

Figure 1
Infant Enrollment in Subsidized Child Care
By Program
Number of Infants 0 - 12 Months Enrolled

1000

Miami-Dade, FL--March 1996-March 2000

900
800

Other

700
600
500

Cash Assistance

400
300

Income Eligible
200
100

Transitional Assistance
0
6
96 l-96 -96 -96 -97 r-97 -97 l-97 -97 -97 -98 r-98 -98 l-98 -98 -98 -99 r-99 -99 l-99 -99 -99 -00 r-00
-9
yp
p
p
p
ar
ay
a
ay
ay
ov Jan Ma
ov Jan Ma
ov Jan Ma
ov Jan Ma
Ju Se
Ju Se
Ju Se
Ju Se
M
N
N
N
N
M
M
M
M

120%

Figure 2
Providers of Serving Infants
Miami-Dade County (MDC) and Massachusetts (MA)
1996-1999
MDC-Centers

100%

MDC-Family
MA-Centers

Percent of Providers

80%

MA-Family

60%

40%

20%

0%
No Vouchers

Vouchers

27

Figure 3
Providers With Infant Programs Capacities, Enrollment and Vacancies
Miami-Dade County, FL

25000

Have Vouchers:
Capacity
Have Vouchers:
Enrollment
Have Vouchers:
Vacancies
Do Not Have Vouchers:
Capacity
Do Not Have Vouchers:
Enrollment
Do Not Have Vouchers:
Vacancies

15000

10000

5000

0
Fe
bM 96
ay
Au 96
gN 96
ov
Fe 96
bM 97
ay
Au 97
gN 97
ov
-9
Fe 7
bM 98
ay
Au 98
gN 98
ov
Fe 9 8
b99

Number of Slots

20000

Date

Figure 4
3000

Changes in Full-Time Center Enrollment of Infants and Toddlers
Vouchers versus No Vouchers
Miami-Dade County, FL

2500

Vouchers: <12 Mos
Vouchers: 12-24 Mos

Number of Children

Vouchers: 24-36 Mos
No Vouchers <12 Mos

2000

No Vouchers 12-24 Mos
No Vouchers 24-36 Mos

1500

1000

500
8
9
6
7
7
8
8
6
6
7
8
6
7
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
-9
v
v
v
y
y
y
b
b
b
b
g
g
g
o
o
o
a
a
a
Fe
Fe
Fe
Fe
N
N
N
Au
Au
Au
M
M
M

29

Vouchers: Median
Vouchers: 75th%tile

$100

Maximum Reimbursement

$90
$85
$80
$75
$70
$65
$60

Q
119
99

Q
419
98

Q
319
98

Q
219
98

Q
119
98

Q
419
97

Q
319
97

Q
219
97

Q
119
97

Q
419
96

Q
319
96

Q
219
96

$55
Q
119
96

$ per Week of Full-Time Care

$95

Figure 5
Weekly Full-Time Prices & Reimbursement Rates for Infant Care
No Vouchers: Median
Centers Accepting & Not Accepting Vouchers
Miami-Dade
No Vouchers: 75th%tile
February 1996-March 1999

30

140%

Ratio Median Weekly Full-Time Price of Infant Care to Two-Year-Old Care
Miami-Dade County, FL
February 1996-March 1999
No Vouchers, Price Ratio: Infant/2 Year
Vouchers, Price Ratio: Infant/2 Year

130%

Reimbursement Ratio: Infant/2year

120%

110%

100%

90%
Q
119
96
Q
219
96
Q
319
96
Q
419
96
Q
119
97
Q
219
97
Q
319
97
Q
419
97
Q
119
98
Q
219
98
Q
319
98
Q
419
98
Q
119
99

Median Price of Infant Care to Median Price 2Year-Old Care

Figure 6
Relative Prices of Center Care for Infants and Two-Year-Olds

Quarter

31

Table 1
Vouchers for Infants by Type of Provider in Massachusetts
using three Monthly Billing Files for 1997, 1998 and 1999
Type of Provider
Centers
FCC System
FCC Independent
Informal
Total

1997
1998
1999
Frequency Percent Frequency Percent Frequency Percent
503
223
118
313
1157

43.5
19.3
10.2
27.1
100.0

396
256
173
448
1273

31.1
20.1
13.6
35.2
100.0

430
255
156
436
1277

33.7
20.0
12.2
34.1
100.0

32

Table 2
Weekly Non-Zero Prices of Center-Based Child Care and Early Childhood Education
Five Representative Areas of Massachusetts--1997-1999

Infant full-time (<15m)
Toddler full-time (15m-33m)

Prices of Programs Participating in the
Prices of Programs not Participating in the
Subsidized Center-Based Care Programs
Subsidized Center-Based Care Programs*
#Obs.
Mean Median SD
CV
#Obs.
Mean Median
SD
CV
535 $218.08
$217 45.30
0.21
157 $233.65
$240
54.01 0.23
714 $194.12
$194 40.61
0.21
229 $210.66
$214
51.08 0.24

*The non-subsidized market prices are the non-zero prices charged by providers other than FCC's, head start, public schools, nonpublic schools and those centers participating in the subsidized child care program.

Table 3
Weekly Non-Zero Prices of Center-Based Child Care and Early Childhood Education
Miami-Dade County--1997-1999

Infant full-time (<12m)
One-Year Old (12m-24m)
Two-Year Old (24m-36m)

Prices of Programs Participating in the
Subsidized Center-Based Care Programs
#Obs.
Mean Median SD
CV
575-638 $84.92
$85 12.44
0.15
700-746 $79.25
$79 11.09
0.14
784-842 $76.73
$76 12.16
0.16

Prices of Programs not Participating in the
Subsidized Center-Based Care Programs*
#Obs.
Mean Median
SD
CV
491-527
$78.60
$75
18.76 0.24
620-654
$74.24
$70
17.63 0.24
932-1011 $72.00
$70
17.66 0.25

*The non-subsidized market prices are the non-zero prices charged by providers other than FCC's, head start, public schools, nonpublic schools and those centers participating in the subsidized child care program.

33

References

Bennett, N.G. & Hsien-Hen Lu. (2000). Child Poverty in the States: Levels and
Trends from 1979 to 1998. Childhood Poverty Research Brief 2. New York: National
Center for Children in Poverty. Available at:
http://cpmcnet.columbia.edu/dept/nccp/cprb2txt.html.
Lemke, R.J., Witte, A.D., Queralt, M., & Witt, R. (March 2000). Child Care and
the Welfare to Work Transition. Working Paper 7583. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research. Available at: http://www.nber.org/papers/w7583
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000). From Neurons to
Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood Development. Committee on
Integrating the Science of Early Childhood Development. Jack P. Shonkoff and Deborah
A. Phillips, eds. Board of Children, Youth, and Families, Commission on Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Marshall, N., et al. (1988). The Economics of Child Care in Massachusetts.
Boston: Massachusetts Department of Human Services.
Queralt, M,. Witte, A., and Griesinger, H. (2000a). “Championing our Children”:
Changes in the Quality, Price and Availability of Child Care in the Welfare Reform Era,
Working Paper #2000-07. Wellesley, MA: Department of Economics, Wellesley
College. Available at: http://www.wellesley.edu/Economics/wkpapers/index.html.
Queralt, M., Witte, A., and Griesinger, H. (2000b). Changing Policies, Changing
Impacts: Employment and Earnings of Child-Care Subsidy Recipients in the Era of
Welfare Reform. Social Service Review, 74(4): 588-619.
Vandell, D.L. and Wolfe, B. (May, 2000). Child Care Quality: Does It Matter
and Does It Need to Be Improved? Washington, DC: Office of the Assistant Secretary
for Planning and Evaluation. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Available
on the Internet at : http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/ccquality00/ccqual.htm.
Witt, Robert; Queralt, Magaly; & Witte, Ann (2000). Changes in the Availability,
Quality and Price of Child Care Services in Massachusetts between 1997 and 1999.
Wellesley College Department of Economics Working paper 2000-12. Available at:
http://www.wellesley.edu/Economics/wkpapers/index.html.

