NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPORTS AND MANUFACTURING PRODUCTIVITY IN EAST ASIA:
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS WITH FIRM-LEVEL DATA

Mary Hallward-Driemeier
Giuseppe Iarossi
Kenneth L. Sokoloff

Working Paper 8894
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8894

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002
We wish to thank Dee Sutthiphisal, Dennis Tao and Hairong Yu for their tremendous assistance in organizing the
database, To Nhu Dao for excellent research assistance, and Francis Colaco, David Dollar, and Dominique DworFrecaut, whose support and guidance were instrumental to the survey initiative. We also benfited from valuable
discussions with Bee Yan Aw, Andrew Bernard, Stanley Engerman, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Zorina Khan, Edward Leamer,
Ricardo Lopez, Rob Porter, and participants in the Dartmouth College Conference on Firms and Trade, the World Bank
Macroeconomics Seminar, and the UCLA Workshop in International Economics. The cooperation and participation of
National Development Planning Agency (BAPPENAS) and Bada Pusat Statistik in Indonesia, Korea Institute for
Industrial Economics and Trade (KIET), the Economic Planning Unit in the Prime Minister’s Office in Malaysia, the
National Statistics Office and the National Economic and Development Authority in the Philippines and the Thai
Ministry of Industry are gratefully acknowledged. Financial support for collecting the data was received by the Policy
and Human Resource Development Fund (Japan) and the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) Trust Fund. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of The World Bank, its Executive Directors
or member countries. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Giuseppe Iarossi and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Exports and Manufacturing Productivity in East Asia:
A Comparative Analysis with Firm-Level Data
Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Giuseppe Iarossi and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 8894
April 2002
JEL No. O3, O1, O4, F1

ABSTRACT
This paper uses new firm level data from five East Asian countries to explore the patterns of
manufacturing productivity across the region. One of the striking patterns that emerges is how the extent
of openness and the competitiveness of markets affects the relative productivity of firms across the region.
Firms with foreign ownership and firms that export are significantly more productive, and the
productivity gap is larger the less developed is the local market. We exploit the rich set of firm
characteristics available in the database to explore the sources of export firms' greater productivity. We
argue that it is in aiming for export markets that firms make decisions that raise productivity. It is not
simply that more-productive firms self-select into exporting; rather, firms that explicitly target export
markets consistently make different decisions regarding investment, training, technology and the selection
of inputs, and thus raise their productivity.

Mary Hallward-Driemeier
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
mhallward@worldbank.org

Giuseppe Iarossi
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
giarossi@worldbank.org

Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095

I. INTRODUCTION
The spread of sustained and rapid economic growth throughout East Asia over the
last forty years has attracted much attention from policymakers and economists. Although
most agree that the remarkable record of progress has generally been based upon countries
exploiting their comparative advantages in manufacturing, there remains much controversy
over the patterns of these industrial expansions. One group of observers has contended
that these economies not only realized extensive growth by mobilizing underutilized
resources from other sectors to support dramatic expansion of export-oriented
manufacturing, but that further gains came as competition in broad international markets
with elastic demand induced improvements in productivity.1 Domestic firms that targeted
global markets had substantial incentives to invest in improving the efficiency of their
operations, and foreign firms had incentives to support technology transfer through a
variety of means to economies with favorable factor endowments -- including direct
investment. Proponents of this view also suggest that the rates of total factor productivity
growth were unusually high because of the great potential for improving productivity that
is typically present in early-industrializing economies, where many unproductive firms
have long persisted, insulated from competition by local or otherwise segmented markets.
They contend that a substantial one-time increase in productivity can be realized as rapid
expansion of markets leads to better utilization of the resources in such firms as better (if
not best) practices are adopted in order to survive or take advantage of the radical change
in the environment. The breadth of international markets and opportunities for technology
transfer offered East Asian economies during the late-20th century were rather

1

See, for example, Pack and Westphal (2000) and Dollar and Sokoloff (1990).

3

unprecedented, and this made possible an exceptional record of industrial development and
progress.
An alternative perspective is that the rapid industrial growth stemmed virtually
exclusively from rapid rates of factor accumulation – not of total factor productivity
growth. In this view, the East Asian economies were remarkably effective at mobilizing
and sustaining high rates of investment, but diminishing returns to, if not misallocation of,
capital kept productivity growth at a quite modest pace. Those who share this perspective
are typically skeptical of the notions that manufacturing productivity growth benefited
particularly from the increased focus of East Asian firms on broad export markets, or from
enhanced flows of foreign direct investment and technology transfer more generally.
Alwyn Young (1992, 1995), for example, has argued that high rates of capital
accumulation accounted for the bulk of the increase in manufacturing labor productivity
over time in East Asian Tigers such as Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan.2
Doubts about whether the expansion of exports led East Asian economies to realize
more rapid productivity advance in manufacturing have been further reinforced by several
recent studies that raise questions about the causal mechanisms underlying the well known
empirical association across firms or industries between productivity and export
orientation. Working with micro-level panel data from a number of different countries,
scholars have found that firms tend to increase their productivity before beginning to
export, rather than afterwards. Many have interpreted such findings as implying that it is
productivity increase at the firm level that leads to greater export of output, rather than
production for export leading to productivity advance.3

2
3

Young (1992 and 1995).
See, for example, Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998), Bernard and Jensen (1999).

4

One of the reasons that this controversy endures is that the available data have not
generally been rich enough to conclusively distinguish between the competing views.
Specifically, most of the empirical work to date on East Asian manufacturing has had to
rely on industry-level information over time. A great deal can and has been learned from
investigations relying on such evidence, but the inability to directly examine whether and
how productivity is related to firm characteristics leads to some uncertainty about the
inferences that can be drawn. This problem may be particularly relevant to early
developing economies where the initial stages of industrialization are often associated with
substantial changes in manufacturing organization and technology, and poorly integrated
markets allow firms with quite different levels of productivity to coexist during periods of
transition.4 Another issue that has complicated efforts to study the sources of productivity
with aggregate or industry-level time series data is that estimates of rates of growth are
quite sensitive to the quality of the price indexes. Obtaining accurate and representative
information on prices is always important for scholars of productivity, but the severity of
the problem is ameliorated somewhat when the focus of analysis is on cross-sectional
variation across firms within the same industry and economy.5
Concern with improving knowledge of manufacturing development has stimulated
efforts to systematically collect and examine detailed information at the establishment
level. Such data are often useful for studying the relationship between characteristics such
as export orientation or access to broad markets and productivity. Among the crosssectional samples of manufacturing establishments that have become available are a new
4

Many examples of this pattern can be drawn from the economic histories of now developed countries. For
discussion of a relevant case during the early industrialization of the U.S., see Sokoloff (1984).
5
This problem is admittedly more relevant to the older literature that focused on estimating productivity
growth over time from industry- or sector-level data than it is to the more recent work that employs panel
data on firms.

5

set of surveys conducted across a wide range of countries with the encouragement and
support of the World Bank. Although similar surveys have been carried out before, the
recent emphasis on encompassing many countries and on comparability has made them
more attractive and useful for researchers concerned with growth. This paper employs the
first wave of these surveys, which were administered in five East Asian economies during
the late 1990s: Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand.
Although the surveys enumerate establishments from only a limited number of
industries within each economy, they are extremely rich in the information they contain.
Not only is there extensive detail about the inputs consumed and outputs produced, but the
data also include information on the governance of the firm, the ownership of the firm, the
year in which the firm was established, the share of outputs exported, the use of outside
auditors, the source of technology, and many other characteristics of the firms. There are
typically two sorts of problems with cross-sectional studies of factors that might be related
to productivity. One is that competition between firms typically limits the amount of
variation in productivity that can be observed; hence estimates of systematic differentials
in productivity tend to be downward biased in well-integrated markets. The second issue
has to do with what is exogenous, what is endogenous, and what can be inferred about the
sources and extent of productivity increase from an empirical association between
productivity and firm characteristics.
In this paper, we show that, despite the questions that arise in working with such
data, these cross-sectional surveys of firms can contribute much to our understanding of
manufacturing productivity in East Asia. Although competition in well-integrated markets
narrows the range of observed variation in firm performance, we find substantial

6

advantages in productivity associated with firms that are in various senses more “open” to
the rest of the world: those that foreigners have a greater ownership share in, those that use
outside auditors, and those that choose to focus on the export market. Strikingly, we find
that the magnitude of the differences in productivity related to these characteristics are
extremely large in less-developed economies such as Indonesia and the Philippines, but are
virtually absent in more-developed South Korea. This pattern is highly robust, and
conforms well with the idea that there are major gains in productivity to be realized during
the very early stages of industrial development.
We focus particular attention on the question of whether firms self-select to
compete in world markets and make the appropriate investments that boost productivity
and allow them to be successful in that broader arena, or whether relatively exogenous
realizations of higher productivity allow the favored firms to export their output. To
explore this issue, we take advantage of information collected by the surveys on whether or
not the firm was an exporter during its first year of existence. In our view it is reasonable
to take the behavior of the firm during its year of establishment as reflecting a relatively
exogenous decision by the firm’s creators about which market (export or exclusively
domestic) to target. We show that firms that began as exporters not only have higher
levels of productivity years later than other classes of firms, but that they also differ
systematically in the training of their work forces, the vintage of their capital equipment,
the use of auditing, and other aspects of their production processes and operations. We use
this evidence to argue that it is in aiming for export markets that firms make a series of
decisions that raise their productivity, and that such practices distinguish firms from their

7

domestically oriented counterparts operating in less competitive or fully integrated local
markets.
In sections II and III, we describe the manufacturing surveys we employ, and
provide some descriptive statistics on what they reveal about the manufacturing sectors in
the respective countries. We present our multivariate analyses in section IV. Section V
concludes.

II DATA
This paper uses new and comprehensive data from approximately 2700
manufacturing establishments in five East Asian countries: Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand.6 Instead of being restricted to a single country, this database
provides comparable information on a wide set of firm characteristics for all of these five
countries during the 1996-1998 period. With the assistance and advice of a World Bank
team, similar instruments and sampling procedures (including industries selected for
coverage) were employed to facilitate the cross-country comparisons. Enumerators
personally gathered information from four to seven hundred firms in each country.
The survey questionnaires called for both qualitative and quantitative information.
The qualitative section covered topics such as ownership structure, technology acquisition,
views on the business environment, and relationships with banks and other financial
institutions. The quantitative section included questions on production, financial accounts
and human resources. In addition to collecting information on current operations, the
survey asked for retrospective reports on the core quantitative variables over the previous
6

We will use the terms firms, establishments, and plants interchangeably in the course of this paper, but it
should be emphasized that the unit surveyed was the establishment – not the overall firm. For a more
detailed description of the database, see Hallward-Driemeier (2000).

8

year or two. The basic structure of the questionnaire employed was roughly the same
across the countries.
The participating governments were particularly interested in issues related to the
competitiveness of firms in manufacturing industries where there was potential for exports,
and the survey was designed accordingly. In each country a large sample of establishments
was selected from five to seven of the following industries or sectors: food processing,
textiles, garments, chemicals, machinery, electronics, auto components, and wood
products. The selected industries accounted together for more than half of the entire
manufacturing value added, and of manufacturing exports, in each of the respective
economies. Only registered firms with at least 20 employees were included in the
population frame.7 This restricted population frame, assembled by each national statistical
agency with technical assistance from the World Bank, was then used to randomly choose
the sample of small, medium and large establishments to be interviewed.
Although considerable effort was directed at obtaining representative sets of
establishments from the respective countries, there are some issues of sample selection to
be considered. In drawing the sample, larger firms were over-sampled relative to their
numbers in the overall population. A pure random sample would have resulted in very few
observations of large firms, just as coverage of small firms would have been quite limited
if the sample was based on the contribution to GDP. The proportions vary somewhat by
country, but roughly a third of the sample is from each of the three size categories to allow
7

There are two caveats. First, the Malaysian government was interested in building on a previous survey
that had used the entire population of industrial firms, regardless of size. To make the sets of firms we
worked with more comparable across countries, we excluded firms in Malaysia with less than 10 employees
from our analysis. Despite this restriction, small firms account for a much higher proportion of the firms in
the data we work with than they do for the other countries. See Table 1. The other point is that the size
restriction employed in the design of the original samples was applied using information from the respective
industrial registries. Some of the firms that had been listed in the registry as having 20 or more workers
evidently experienced decreases in their labor force by the time they were surveyed.

9

for a significant number of firms of each size to draw statistically significant inferences
about each category. Within each size category, the establishments to be surveyed were
selected randomly.8 One concern is whether our procedures for sampling by size
categories captured the full extent of the differences in performance across sizes of firms.
It is possible that by restricting our sampling frame to establishments with 20 or more
employees, we constructed a sample that would be biased against finding differences in
productivity across size. The surveys were completed in early 1999, but the samples of
firms to be surveyed were drawn from various industrial registries that had generally been
assembled one or two years before. Thus, newly established firms were underrepresented
in our sample.
Another caveat is that we did not get full participation from all firms selected to be
in our sample. Approximately 10% of sampled firms were either listed with an incorrect
address or had failed between the time of the industrial registry and the interview. From
the size, location and sectoral information we had from the registry lists, there appears to
have been somewhat more attrition among the smaller firms, but no systematic differences
across sectors or locations. In addition to this survivorship bias, there is some variation in
response rates, particularly with regard to financial information. We were unable to
receive outside verification of the accounting information supplied. And, despite our
detailed instructions and examples, we cannot ensure that all firms used the same
accounting definitions, particularly among smaller firms. While these caveats should be
kept in mind, we have been careful in checking for the sensitivity of our qualitative

8

The representation of large establishments is of course even greater if evaluated on the basis of their labor
force allocation, with 90% of the workers employed by establishments in this largest size category. This
result is driven in part of by a very few extremely large firms, i.e. with over 10,000 workers.

10

findings and are not aware of any plausible sample selection biases that would lead to the
robust results we report below.9
The one systematic test of representativeness we have been able to carry out was to
compare the distribution of firms across industries (within each country) in the sample (see
Table 1) to the distribution of firms across the same industries in the respective country’s
aggregate totals. Encouraging results were obtained; by the Mann-Whitney two-sample
method, we could not reject the hypothesis that the sample was representative of the
underlying population.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics from the sample, with the upper panel relating
the distributions of firms across particular categories and the lower panel providing the
distributions of the labor force (firms weighted by the size of their labor forces) across the
same categories. Several features of the data stand out. First, although the surveyed firms
were drawn from some of the principal tradable goods sectors, many are not exporters.
Overall, slightly more than half of all firms in the sample export some of their output, with
the figures ranging from 75% in Korea to 39% in Indonesia. Because firms that export
tend to be larger than those that do not, the shares of the labor force that work in firms that
export some of their output (nearly 83% overall) are correspondingly higher. The
proportion of firms that report some foreign ownership is not quite a quarter; of this
quarter, foreigners own a majority share in 60%. Again, however, since larger firms are
more likely to have foreign owners (in all countries but Korea), the prominence of foreign
ownership is greater if the gauge is based on where the labor force is employed. In
general, there seems to be much less foreign direct investment in Indonesia and Korea, and
9

In addition to the conventional problems of data retrieval and entry, we have also had to be concerned with
whether firms followed good or standard accounting procedures, especially with smaller firms. See the data
appendix for a detailed description of our treatment of outliers.

11

more in the Philippines (as well as in Malaysia if we consider the size of firms surveyed).
These orderings are not the same as those implied by figures on the overall share of FDI in
GDP, but part of the discrepancy may be due to FDI in resource extraction industries
(which is especially important in Indonesia and Malaysia).

III LEVELS OF DEVELOPMENT AND THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTEXT
The availability of comparable data for a number of developing East Asian
economies provides an additional dimension along which to explore hypotheses about how
and why conditions such as market size and intensity of competition generally, or export
orientation in particular, are related to firm productivity. Simply put, theories that
highlight mechanisms through which broader markets lead to higher levels of productivity
among surviving firms imply that the gap in productivity between exporting and nonexporting firms should be larger in less developed economies where output markets are
typically more segmented and limited in extent. A testable implication, therefore, is that
the magnitude of the productivity differentials between firms that are more open
(exporters) and less open (non-exporters) to broad international markets should diminish
with the level of development. In contrast, the view that productivity improvements at the
firm level are exogenous to the breadth of markets the firm faces does not yield a clear
prediction about how the productivity differential varies across countries.
It should not be surprising that context may matter in making sense of the evidence,
and in Table 2 we try to provide a sense of perspective through a conventional set of
macroeconomic indicators and some statistics gleaned from the sample of manufacturing
firms. Korea is obviously the most industrialized of the five countries. With a per capita

12

income exceeding $11,000, it qualified to join the OECD in 1996. Beginning in the 1960s,
the Korean government aggressively pursued industrial policies designed to promote
manufacturing and exports. Often heralded as one of the ‘miracle economies’, its growth
through the mid-1990s was indeed spectacular. As is suggested from it having the highest
manufacturing share of GDP (36.8 percent), as well as the lowest agricultural share (5.8
percent), Korea has largely completed the transition from a substantially agricultural
economy to a highly industrial urbanized one. With its high per capita income and
elaborate infrastructure, Korea has the largest and most sophisticated domestic market of
the five countries. This is also evident from its having the highest labor productivity and
rate of investment in new machinery and equipment. The relatively low coefficient of
variation in total factor productivity (TFP) is also consistent with the view that Korea has
a more competitive and integrated market for manufacturing products.
The other four countries included in our data are all much less industrialized than
Korea, but Malaysia would likely be judged as the most developed among them. Its GDP
per capita is much higher than Thailand’s (which in turn has a far higher GDP per capita
than in the Philippines or Indonesia), even though the sectoral compositions of the two
economies are quite similar.10 Although the latter’s share of manufacturing in GDP is
comparable, and its rates of investment overall and in new machinery are impressive,
productivity remains much lower than in Korea or Malaysia, and Thailand has still not yet

10

Another distinctive feature of the Malaysian economy is that, like in Korea, the government has been
active in trying to direct the path of development. In recent years, the government has aggressively advocated
specific sites as industrial areas, particularly focusing on attracting foreign firms in high technology
industries. Another longstanding goal, however, has been to ensure that the indigenous population also
benefited. In addition to various other affirmative action measures, the Bumiputras laws mandate that 30%
of ownership must be in the hands of native Malays.

13

managed to effect the transition from a focus on low value added manufacturing to one on
higher value added activities.
The Philippines and Indonesia are clearly the least developed economies of the
five, with per capita incomes and investment rates that are much lower than those of their
neighbors. These two multi-island countries also have large and geographically dispersed
populations, posing additional obstacles to the integration of markets. It is, accordingly,
not at all surprising that agriculture accounts for a much larger share (and manufacturing
smaller) of national output, nor that the coefficient of variation in manufacturing
productivity is much higher, in these economies than in the other three countries.
While GDP per capita is a reasonable proxy for the extent of markets, we would
also call attention to the relevance of the degree of dispersion in manufacturing
productivity. When local or regional markets are not well integrated, a circumstance
typical of less-developed countries, inefficient firms can survive because they are insulated
from competition with more efficient enterprises – leading to greater productivity
dispersion. Figure 1 depicts our gauge of the degree of dispersion, the coefficient of
variation in manufacturing productivity, within each of the five countries. The dispersion
patterns line up as would be expected from our knowledge of the development of the
countries, with the highest variation in Indonesia, and lowest in Korea. There are some
differences in relative dispersion across sectors, but in general the lower the level of
development (as gauged by per capita income), the greater the relative number of less
productive firms and the greater the dispersion in total factor productivity.11 This cross-

11

Haddad and Harrison (1993), Harrison (1994) and Levinsohn (1993) find consistent results that
productivity dispersion decreased with greater competition post trade liberalization.

14

country pattern is quite consistent with the view that the extent or integration of domestic
markets can help understand the variation in manufacturing productivity.

IV. SYSTEMATIC PATTERNS IN TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY
The manufacturing surveys are a valuable resource for the study of manufacturing
productivity in the newly-industrializing countries of East Asia. Not only do they provide
researchers with detailed information at the firm level, but they also have the advantage
of encompassing comparable industries (generally those with a marked potential for
export) from a set of economies at much different levels of development. Thus, we can
analyze variation in productivity and in other characteristics across firms within a
country, as well as employ inter-country comparisons to check for robustness or to test
implications of theories that bear on how patterns of productivity might vary across
different market environments.
Our measures of total factor productivity (TFP) were derived from a Cobb-Douglas
production framework (see Appendix for more details). We estimated a variety of
different specifications of production functions in logarithmic form for each country
separately. In one basic specification, output (calculated as total sales plus the change in
inventories) was the dependent variable and the independent variables consisted of total
assets, total employment, material inputs and energy, with dummy variables for sectors
and years.12 Output, inputs and total assets were converted to 1995 constant US dollars.

12

The Malaysian questionnaire gathered information on the value of sales of the firm’s most important
product alone. However, for roughly half of the respondents the figures on total sales could also be retrieved.
These four hundred observations were used to estimate the ratio of sales of the most important product to
total sales, controlling for sector, size of firm, export status, ownership, and location. These fitted ratios were
then used to estimate the values of total sales for the observations where that variable was not reported
directly. In estimating the production functions, both the whole sample and the sub-sample for which we

15

In the other basic specification, value added (calculated as output minus the value of raw
materials and energy costs) was the dependent variable and the independent variables
were total assets and total employment.
We carried out extensive sensitivity analysis in estimating these production
functions, experimenting with different measures of the inputs and outputs as well as with
the precise subset of observations over which the functions were estimated. Concerned
about possible simultaneity bias, we also followed procedures suggested by Olley and
Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2000) to generate semi-parametric estimates of
productivity that would be consistent even in the presence of input shares being
influenced by private knowledge of a firm’s productivity.13 The basic patterns in the data
are so strong that the qualitative results are extremely robust to the use of different
procedures or specifications.14 The production function parameters we employed for the
analyses of systematic variation in total factor productivity presented below were
estimated over a sub-sample of establishments that employed 10 or more workers and had
provided the required information; extreme outliers were excluded.15

knew the total sales were used. The former demonstrated larger scale effects. This would be consistent with
smaller firms producing a larger number of products on a made to order basis.
13
Our use of these procedures was of course confined to the production functions estimated with total output
as the dependent variable. Although these procedures have come to be commonly used to adjust for the
possible simultaneity bias that conventional methods of production function estimation suffer from, they too
are based on strong and somewhat implausible assumptions. For discussion, see Ackerberg (2002).
14
One concern is that given the timing of the survey, we might get significant variation across years.
However, while there are shifts in the average productivity in 1998, the hypothesis that the input coefficients
are equal over time cannot be rejected. Thus, we opted to include year dummies in the regressions. We also
ran the regressions for each year separately and the qualitative results held.
15
About 20 firms in each country were excluded on the basis of one or more of the relevant variables, such as
the capital to labor ratio or measures of productivity, were more than 4 standard deviations from the mean.

16

In Table 3, we report the sets of output elasticities obtained from four different
specifications of production functions, with each normalized to sum to one.16 As is clear,
they vary across countries, but are generally within ranges suggested by the work of other
investigators.17 These country-specific output elasticities were then used to compute sets
of establishment-level estimates of TFP, corresponding to the different specifications of
production functions. The basic qualitative results of the multivariate analyses presented
below are again highly robust to the selection of production function specification the
respective measure of TFP is based on.18
In order to explore the systematic patterns in manufacturing productivity, we
estimated a variety of multivariate regressions across the firms within each country, with
different measures of the log of total factor productivity as the dependent variable, and a
set of dummy variables controlling for sector, year, firm size, whether the firm was
located in the capital city, the extent of foreign investment in the firm, whether output
was exported during the year the firm was established, whether the firm was not
established as an exporter but became an exporter later, and a variety of other
characteristics included as independent variables. We report, in Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c, the
results from the regressions based on TFP measures derived from the two different
16

The estimates suggest that there were scale economies in four of the five countries, with their magnitude
being greatest in the least-developed economies such as Indonesia and the Philippines. In the lower panel,
we report the point estimates of the scale coefficient for each country, as derived from the series estimator.
17
These output elasticities were estimated from production functions that included dummy variables for
industries. We did not allow for output elasticities that varied across industries, because inclusion of such
interaction variables did not significantly increase the explanatory power of the production functions.
Moreover, the qualitative results we report below were robust to how we treated this issue.
18
While the basic qualitative results are robust, the size of the coefficients does vary. In particular, as is
typical in production function estimation, the use of specifications with output rather than value added as the
dependent variable reduce the estimates of the extent of scale economies as well as differences in
productivity between classes of firms substantially. Intuitively, this results from there being relatively
limited variation in the output to materials ratio over firms, because the scope for producing a unit of output
without certain raw materials is limited. The differences can be seen across Tables 4b through 4d, when one
compares the regressions using estimates of TFP based on gross output with those based on value added as
the measure of output.

17

production function specifications: the series estimator (based on the Levinsohn-Petrin
procedure for dealing with simultaneity) and the more conventional OLS Cobb-Douglas
specification with value added as the measure of output. What is immediately striking
about the results of these regressions is how similar they are across the five countries, as
well as how sensible the empirical regularities are.
First, the evidence is broadly consistent with the notion that there are substantial
economies of scale during the earliest stages of industrial development. As foreshadowed
by the scale coefficients we reported in the lower panel of Table 3, even when we control
for many other characteristics, the estimated coefficients on the dummy variables for
establishment size suggest that smaller firms are far less productive than their larger
counterparts in the less-developed economies such as Indonesia and Thailand, but are
essentially just as productive in more-developed Korea.19 This contrast is perhaps not
surprising, in that the more extensive and competitive product markets associated with
higher levels of development would be expected to be more effective at selecting out
firms with markedly lower productivity, and accordingly reduce the range of observed
productivity differentials across size and other firm characteristics. Presuming the
reasonableness of drawing inferences from comparisons of cross-sectional results over
economies at different stages of development, the implication seems to be that there may
be a substantial one-time gain in manufacturing productivity during the early stages of
development, associated with the shift of resources out of traditional small-scale

19

This qualitative result held across virtually all specifications we estimated. It does not hold for the
Philippines when we use the measure of TFP obtained from the series estimator, and also control for other
establishment characteristics (such as whether the firm has foreign owners and exports), but it is robust to the
series estimator if one doesn’t control for these other variables that are highly correlated with size (see the
lower panel of Table 3). As noted above, the surprisingly extensive scale economies estimated for Malaysia
may be related to problems in the way output was reported in that country. See footnote 12.

18

establishments to larger enterprises operating with more modern organizations and
technologies.
Another factor that has been suggested as an important source of manufacturing
productivity growth in developing countries is the involvement of foreigners. The basic
logic is that when foreign individuals and companies, who are thought to be more familiar
with technological opportunities, have direct interests in the performance of a firm, they
will have a greater ability or incentive to invest in diffusing or implementing
improvements in technology or management. These stimuli to technology transfer lead
firms that have closer associations with foreigners to raise their productivity above the
level at which they would otherwise operate. Our data make it possible to examine this
hypothesis directly, and we find that even after controlling for sector, size, and export
orientation, firms in which foreigners have a substantial ownership share have markedly
higher productivity than those that are domestically owned in four of the five countries
surveyed.20 Moreover, comparing the coefficients on the two variables reflecting
different extents of foreign ownership implies that firms with foreign ownership shares of
over 50 percent stand out especially in productivity. That this discontinuity in the
estimated relationship between foreign ownership and productivity conforms so well with
the intuition that foreigners would be more inclined, and capable, of investing in transfer
of technology where they have a controlling share in the firm bolsters confidence in the
interpretation that the result is not an artifact, and that the principal line of causation went
from foreign ownership to productivity. Moreover, that the estimated productivity
20

Malaysia deviates from this pattern somewhat in that the result that firms with foreign ownership are more
productive is not robust. In some specifications, and especially if all firms with any foreign ownership are
grouped together, the point estimate of the association with productivity is positive. It may be the case that
the relationship is different in Malaysia because of the special programs there to obtain a significant
ownership share for native Malays.

19

differentials are largest in the least developed countries of Indonesia and the Philippines,
where the estimates are around 40 percent by the series-estimator measure of TFP (as
compared to 15 to 20 percent in Korea and Thailand), is generally consistent with this
idea.21
One of the most controversial potential sources of productivity growth in developing
countries is the orientation toward the export market. There is a longstanding view in
economics that firms are more productive in more extensive markets. Several
mechanisms have been proposed, including economies of scale, notions that more
extensive markets put more competitive pressure on firms to keep up with the
technological edge, and the idea that larger markets, with presumably more elastic
demand, offer greater returns to investment in invention or in other means of increasing
value per unit cost. Based on this tradition, as well as abundant evidence from
developing countries of general associations between the importance of exports and
productivity across industries or firms, many have argued that firms that focus on the
export market do realize increases in their productivity. Indeed, additional reasons for
why orientation towards exports might promote higher productivity have been suggested,
such as it making it easier to learn about advanced technologies employed elsewhere.22
Proponents of this school contend further that developing economies should specialize in
those goods in which they enjoy a comparative advantage, to boost rates of productivity
and economic growth.

21

The data contain information about the nationality of the foreign owners, but we find no significant
relation between any particular nationality and firm productivity.
22
Prominent among them are that firms might raise productivity over time through learning by doing, or
through advice or technical assistance provided by foreign customers – directly or through intermediaries.
Kraay (1999) and Bigsten et. al. (2000) provide evidence of the importance of learning by exporting in China
and several African economies. Also see Pack and Westphal (1998) and Westphal (2001).

20

Although intuitively appealing, it has been difficult to substantiate the view that if
firms focus more on exports they will come to realize higher productivity. Skeptics have
noted how a reverse path of causation might be able to account for an empirical
association between exports and productivity. For example, a recent study by Clerides,
Lach, and Tybout (CLT) (1998), uses firm-level panel data from Colombia, Mexico, and
Morocco to make the case that productivity may be higher among exporters because firms
are better able to export after they increase productivity. In other words, the empirical
pattern follows from higher productivity to exports, not from involvement in the world or
export to higher productivity.23 In these panels, CLT found a roughly constant
differential in productivity over time between firms that exported throughout the period
covered by the data and those who never exported during those years. Hence these
groups had roughly the same rate of productivity growth. The only firms that appeared to
register higher average rates of productivity growth over the sample periods were those
that moved from being non-exporters to exporters; moreover, most of the relative
productivity increase (or decrease in costs of production) preceded the shift to exporting.
Similarly, the firms that transitioned from exporting to not exporting manifested a
decrease in productivity before changing status.
Clerides, Lach and Tybout were especially concerned with exploring whether
exporting affects the productivity of firms through learning-by-doing. They reasoned that
if so, firms should “exhibit a change in the stochastic process that governs their
productivity growth” after beginning to export, and thus their analysis focused on a
comparative examination of the productivity trajectories of different classes of firms.

23

Similar conclusions of the importance of the selection of higher productivity firms into export markets are
found in Bernard and Jensen (1999) and Aw, Chung and Roberts (2000).

21

Although their treatment was meticulous and richly informative, the more general
question of whether there is an impact of a firm exogenously choosing to focus on exports
may not be fully resolved by their findings. There are two issues we have in mind. First,
there may be constraints on the ability to observe persistent differences in productivity
trajectories when the samples are confined to surviving firms. More specifically, the
productivity trajectory of the low-productivity firms that survive in competition with the
high-productivity firms may be determined by the rate at which the latter increase their
productivity. Low-productivity firms that lag further and further behind will eventually
fail --and that process of attrition puts bounds on the magnitude of the productivity
differentials revealed by the data. The second issue is how to date the effect of a firm
deciding to export. If a firm must make preparations or investments beforehand in order
to compete in the world market, the effects of exporting on productivity may begin early,
and indeed might be evident before any goods are actually exported.24
The East Asia enterprise surveys contain on the years when firms were established
and on when they began to export, and thus allow us to apply an alternative method of
trying to sort out the different paths of causation behind the association between
exporting and productivity. Our approach is based on taking the orientation of the firm at
the time of its establishment (whether or not they exported within a year of beginning
operations) as exogenous, and comparing domestic firms that began as exporters with
both domestic firms that began as non-exporters but made the transition to exporting, and
domestic firms that never exported. The logic is that firms that export during their first
24

In other words, we are asking whether it is more reasonable to think of firms deciding to focus on the
export market and then making investments that would allow them to compete in that market, or to think of
the improvements that CLT observe prior to exporting as being realized exogenously with respect to
involvement in the export market. See Westphal (2001) for a discussion of how exporting firms often are
established with commitments from foreign buyers already in hand.

22

year in existence must have intended to compete in the broader international market
before commencing operations, and thus the choice of their orientation was exogenous
with respect to productivity.25 Figure 2 presents the distributions, for each country, of the
length of time that passed between the year the firm was established and the year it first
exported. Up to two-thirds of the firms that were exporters in our sample began exporting
within two years of beginning operations. Thus, for a significant number of firms the
decision to export was likely made before any realization of productivity. One of the
reasons why this figure is so high is that only a very tiny fraction of firms that were
established as exporters had stopped exporting by the time the manufacturing surveys
were conducted.26 In support of our view that firms that were established as exporters are
quite different from those that were not, in Figure 3 we present for three classes of firms
the distributions of firms by the shares of output that are exported in the year of the
survey: domestic firms that were originally established as exporters (that is, export in the
year of establishment); domestic firms that were originally non-exporters but exported at
some point before the survey; and firms that had foreign owners. As is evident, domestic
firms established as exporters resemble foreign-owned firms in having higher export
shares or being much more specialized at the export market than those that transitioned to
exporting later in their histories. Such evidence tends to bolster our claim that a
substantial, if not dominant, proportion of firms that export were likely intended right
from their initial organization to focus on the export market. We contend that this class
of firms is an especially interesting one to focus on, both because they can provide insight
25

Although the logic seems compelling, it must be admitted that the success at carrying through on that
orientation – actually exporting during the first year of operations – may not be strictly exogenous with
respect to productivity.
26
The pattern is even stronger in that virtually all of the firms that ever exported part of their output were
exporting at the time of the surveys.

23

into the effects of an exogenous decision to compete in a broad international market, and
because the class accounts for a quantitatively important share of domestic firms that
export.27
Given the logic of our approach to getting at the impact of involvement in export
markets, and because most of the theories about the export-productivity linkage relate to
domestically-owned firms, we interact export orientation during the first year and whether
the firm is domestically owned in the total factor productivity regressions. Table 4a
presents the results of the regressions where this interaction term is included (and where
the measure of TFP is derived from the production functions with the series estimator). It
is striking in that four of the five countries (all but relatively-advanced Korea), the
coefficients imply that the domestically-owned firms that had been exporters during the
year of their establishment were much more productive than their counterparts that had
not begun as exporters, with the differentials largest in the least-developed economies:
the Philippines and Indonesia, followed by Thailand and Malaysia. Moreover, the
qualitative results are quite robust and hold across alternative measures of TFP or whether
or not we distinguish between the firms that made the transition to exporter status after
establishment from the persistent non-exporters (see Table 4b and 4c). In this latter case,
the point estimates of the productivity advantage for the original exporters consistently
exceed those for the firms that made the transition from non-exporters to exporters in

27

There are, of course, several potential problems with our interpretation. First, we are not actually
observing all of the firms that were organized with the intent of focusing on the export market, but rather
firms that were so organized and were successful. Second, there is an unobserved heterogeneity problem in
that owners of firms organized to aim for the export market may be more talented than those that are content
to target the domestic market. In principle, these issues may help account for our results. Our efforts to
address these concerns are discussed below.

24

each of the four countries, although they are not quite always significantly different from
each other.28
It should be noted that the results we obtain are not inconsistent with the results of
CLT. The data are organized a bit differently, but in both studies the early exporters are
markedly more productive than the non-exporters, and those firms that began exporting
later have an average productivity that falls between the two extreme groups. Our
interpretation of this pattern is different, however, in that we suggest that firms choosing
to export tend to change the manner of operating so as to be able to compete effectively in
the more competitive wider market. In our view, producing for the export market can
lead to higher productivity through mechanisms other than learning (or the form of
learning as specified in CLT), such as through inducing firms that seek the potentially
higher rewards available to exporters to make new investments to upgrade their efficiency
even as they are just beginning their operations.
The substantial differences in total factor productivity between domestic firms that
were established as exporters and domestic firms that were not (and especially those that
do not export) we observe in the less-developed East Asian economies are certainly
consistent with our view that entrepreneurs that decide to focus on the export market
make a conscious decision to operate differently from those that rely on the domestic
market, and thus realize greater value per unit of input. Before accepting this
interpretation, however, there are several fundamental issues that must be resolved. First,
28

Korea is the exceptional case. As has been suggested before, one would expect to observe smaller
differentials in productivity across classes of firms in a relatively more developed economy such as Korea.
Thus, the small and insignificant difference between original exporters and other domestically-owned firms
is not surprising. The pattern across countries also helps to assuage doubts about the effect of the crisis
driving our results. In Korea, a country that did experience the crisis in 1998, exporters were not more
productive than non-exporting firms. In the Philippines, however, a country that largely escaped the crisis,
the same pattern holds as in Thailand and Indonesia.

25

there is the question of how the evident co-existence of firms in the same industry with
such radically different levels of productivity can be explained. If these firms were
competing directly against each other, the less productive firms would not have been able
to survive and we should not be able to observe such a dramatic gap. If the less
productive firms were insulated from competition, and thus able to survive despite much
lower productivity, what factors could have accounted for that protection? Conditions
such as poor infrastructure and high transportation costs, which are generally recognized
as obstacles to integrated product markets in less-developed economies, surely play some
role, especially in making sense of the extensive scale economies observed in the leastdeveloped societies. However, the most important barrier or source of market
segmentation may be in the quality of specifications of the product items. The textile
goods produced for export in Indonesia, for example, are likely to be very different from
those produced for the domestic market. If the more productive of the available
technologies is linked to producing the higher quality of product demanded in the
international market (but not to the same degree in the home market), a situation that
seems quite reasonable if the newer technologies are developed abroad, then it is quite
possible to observe a difference in average productivity between firms focusing on the
export market and those focusing on the domestic market.
Few would dispute the idea that the quality or specifications of products could be a
powerful factor in accounting for segmented product markets in less-developed
economies. Skeptics might ask, however, whether it is reasonable to compare the
productivity of classes of firms producing very different products, even if they are
nominally classified as being within the same industry. We argue that it is entirely

26

reasonable in this context, particularly because the differences in the character or nature
of the inputs being utilized in the respective production processes are either small or
captured in market prices (such as the evaluation of the capital stock). In our view, given
that different products are assessed and aggregated with market prices, comparisons of
the amount of total value produced per unit of input are very useful indicators of relative
productivity in manufacturing – just as they are in agriculture. This perspective rests to
some degree on the inputs, at least those not evaluated at market prices, being rather
similar in nature. The composition of the labor force is the obvious subject of concern
here, but, as shown in Table 5, domestic firms established as exporters have a labor force
much like that of those that were not established as exporters (in the four countries where
this information was collected). Although firms with a significant foreign-ownership
share have a markedly more educated workforce than either, the two classes of domestic
firms have a close resemblance in this regard. Such evidence that the inputs being used
are comparable supports the logic of drawing inferences about relative productivity from
information about how much value the respective classes of domestic firms generate per
unit of input.29
Even accepting that the inputs being used by the firms that export are quite similar,
or appropriately evaluated by market prices, another problem about the comparability of
the productivity estimates could be raised. It might be argued that the technologies
employed by the two classes of firms are so different that in computing total factor

29

We were able to run TFP regressions with controls for the proportions of the labor force that had different
levels and types of education (i.e. primary, secondary, vocation, or tertiary) in the four of the five countries
that reported such information (all but Indonesia). The coefficients on the variables controlling for the
education of the workers had the expected signs and were statistically significant, but the effects were small
in magnitude. The qualitative results concerning the relative productivity of foreign-owned, domestic
exporters, and domestic firms focused on the domestic market were not at all sensitive to such controls.

27

productivity, the use of the output elasticity estimates for capital and labor obtained from
a single production function is a source of bias and could affect the qualitative results.
Specifically, given that the export-oriented firms were more capital intensive than those
directed at the domestic market, our procedures could make the former seem relatively
more productive than they actually were if they led to an underestimation of their output
elasticity of capital relative to that of labor. This possibility might seem plausible if the
different technology that exporters employed was capital-augmenting in some way, and if
our measures of the value of the capital stock were inadequate. We explored the
significance of this potential problem in two ways. First, we estimated production
functions over domestically-owned firms with interaction terms between the inputs they
employed and a dummy variable for whether they were exporters; the estimated
coefficients on these terms were very small and insignificantly different from zero in
statistical terms. We also reran the same regressions with TFP measures based on the
value added conception of output we reported above, but with much higher elasticities or
weights (0.8 and even 0.9) on the capital input than is feasible. Employing such
unrealistically high weights on capital definitely biases the productivity estimates against
the more capital-intensive export-oriented firms, yet the basic qualitative results we
reported hold. The clear implication is that the amounts of output produced by the
domestically-owned firms relative to inputs are so high, as compared to the same ratio
among those firms geared toward the domestic market, that the qualitative findings are
extremely robust to reasonable variation in the ways the estimations and comparisons are
carried out.

28

Thus far, both evidence and theory seems quite consistent with our view that after
choosing to focus on exports, entrepreneurs made investments in to raise the productivity
of their plants and the quality of the goods they produced so as to be able to compete
effectively in the potentially more lucrative international market. Another obvious test of
our hypothesis, however, is to examine whether firms that export conduct themselves
very differently from those that do not. If our perspective is to offer any explanatory
power, we should see evidence that exporting firms were distinctly different in their mode
of operations, other than in simply getting more value of output per unit of input. One of
the most basic elements of how a firm operates is the types and amounts of inputs it
employs, and we accordingly examined how different classes of enterprises, as defined by
their export status and whether they are domestic, varied along this dimension. As is
evident from the regressions presented in Table 6a and 6b, domestic firms that export are
substantially different in their capital intensity and vintage of capital equipment from their
counterparts that do not, and indeed more closely resemble the enterprises that are foreign
owned. After controlling for the age of the firm, size, sector, year, and establishmentlevel reports of their rate of capacity utilization, we find in Table 6a that in all five
countries domestic firms that exported as well as foreign-owned firms are both markedly
more capital intensive (as judged by the ratio of assets to the number of workers) than
domestic firms that do not export. Moreover, as demonstrated in equation Table 6b the
same classes of firms are generally (though not in Indonesia) also distinguished by having
larger shares of their capital stock composed of equipment of recent vintage (0-4 years
old), even after controlling for the age of the firm. Foreign-owned firms typically went
even further than domestically-owned exporters in pursuing both of these types of

29

investments, which would normally be thought of as conducive to increasing
productivity. What is more relevant here, however, is that even after controlling for size
and other firm characteristics, domestic firms that export make significantly different
choices about their production techniques than those that do not. They more closely
resemble the foreign-owned firms in both these decisions, as well as in realizing
significantly higher levels of productivity.
In Table 7, we examine in more detail the differences in practice across classes of
firms by presenting descriptive statistics for two industries, textiles and electronics,
surveyed in each of the five countries. Reported are the median number of workers, the
median capital per worker, the share of firms who used outside auditors to review
accounts, the share of firms with formal training programs, the share of firms that indicate
they were using technology obtained from abroad. The figures lend further support to the
notion that even within the same industry domestic firms that export operate very
differently from those that do not, with the exporters looking more like firms with foreign
owners in how they are run. The finding that both classes of domestic exporters (those
that were established as exporters and those that began exporting later) and foreignowned firms are typically substantially larger than the domestic firms that focus on the
local market is perhaps not surprising, but it is interesting to note that the differences are
generally greatest in the less developed economies like Indonesia, the Philippines, and
Thailand, and smallest in Korea. Even more striking are the contrasts in the use of
independent auditors and formal employee training programs, where again firms with
foreign owners and domestically-owned enterprises that export are much more
progressive than those who produce only for the domestic market. In Thailand’s textile

30

industry, for example, the proportion of domestically-owned exporters that use outside
auditors is roughly the same (indeed slightly higher) as that for firms with foreign owners
(50 and 61 percent to 48 percent), and all are much higher than for enterprises that
confine themselves to the domestic market (27 percent). The pattern is similar for
employee training programs, with 50 and 26 percent of the two classes of domesticallyowned exporters having them, as compared to 46 percent of firms with foreign owners
and only 17 percent for those selling domestically. Although the numbers bounce around
somewhat, largely due we think to small cell sizes, the only country of our group of five
that deviates from this pattern is the more developed Korea (especially with electronics).
Overall, the evidence suggests that domestic enterprises that choose to produce for the
export market make systematically different choices about how to operate, and that their
choices lead them to function more like foreign-owned firms, realize higher productivity,
and more effectively compete in an international market.
Some might question whether the features we have highlighted in our comparison
could really be all that significant in accounting for the higher productivity of domesticowned exporters. It could, for example, be argued that the greater prevalence of practices
such as formal employee training and the use of outside auditors among this class of
enterprises might merely reflect the larger size or ownership structure of these firms. The
regressions reported in Tables 8a-b and 9a-b, however, tend to undercut that possibility.
Returning to the specification where the log of total factor productivity is the dependent
variable (and using measures of TFP based on the series estimator and the value added
approach respectively in 8a and 8b), we add dummy variables for the use of outside
auditors and of employee training programs, as well as for different ownership structures

31

(sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation) to the same list of independent variables
used above. Although the results are not fully robust to all countries and specifications,
the results indicate that even after controlling for size and a wide range of other
characteristics, enterprises that use outside auditors and employee training programs
generally have higher productivity than their peers that did not. The significant
association of these practices with productivity is all the more remarkable in that there is
no consistent relationship (see regressions in Table 9a and 9b) between productivity and
the variables reflecting the ownership structure (such as whether the firm is a partnership,
publicly listed corporation, or whether its shareholders have limited liability). Given the
recent emphasis by many economists on corporate governance issues, the contrast
between the relative insignificance of these variables in explaining differentials in
productivity across firms relative to other factors is impressive.30
We have, up to now, given only limited attention to the conditions or individual
characteristics behind the decisions by entrepreneurs to aim at the export market, and to
carry out investments to boost productivity and prepare for competition in that arena. Our
treatment, however, has implied that more entrepreneurs would tend to move in this
direction as fundamental factors associated with the process of growth as well as national
policies improve the effective degree of access of domestic producers to foreign markets.
Our analysis suggests that such changes in the orientation toward exports lead to
increases in the productivity of resources employed in manufacturing, but this effect
would depend to some degree upon the supply of entrepreneurial talent. For example, it
might be argued that individuals with the talent and other characteristics necessary for

30

It is unclear why Thailand seems to depart from this pattern, largely due to its single proprietorships being
markedly less productive than other types of firms.

32

great success as entrepreneurs are particularly scarce in the less-developed East Asian
economies, and that the relatively high productivity of domestically-owned exporters we
find in such countries was due entirely to the concentration of scarce entrepreneurial
talent in those firms. If this were true, our interpretation of the cross-sectional patterns
might change, and implications for the growth over time of manufacturing productivity of
a country encouraging exports would depend on how elastic, in both the short- and longrun, the supplies of entrepreneurial talent were.
We are unable to measure the quality of entrepreneurs directly, but we have sought
to investigate the significance of the relative scarcity of such talent in the less-developed
countries by using information from the surveys on whether the founder of the firm had
previous experience in the industry, and whether the experience was with a local or
domestically-owned firm, a foreign-owned firm, or a joint venture. In Table 10, we
report TFP regressions (based on the series estimator), with dummy variables for the
backgrounds of the founders of the firms employed, in addition to the basic variables
included above, as the independent variables. The results indicate that firms with
founders that had previous experience in the industry, and especially experience at joint
ventures, were significantly more productive than their counterparts in all countries
except for Korea.31 This pattern is quite consistent with the notion that the scarcity of
entrepreneurial talent is greater in less-developed economies. Despite this evidence that
the experience of the founder is related to the productivity in the least-developed
economies, it is perhaps even more striking that the qualitative finding of productivity
being higher among firms established as exporters is robust to such controls for the

31

This association between the experience of the founder and the productivity of his firm is suggestive of
there being positive externalities stemming from foreign investment.

33

characteristics of the entrepreneur. As before, the productivity gap between the domestic
firms that began as exporters and those that did not is: large, positive, and statistically
significant in Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand; positive but only marginally
significant in Malaysia; and essentially zero in most-developed Korea. Although there
are many other relevant characteristics of entrepreneurs that we are unable to discern, the
lack of sensitivity of the cross-sectional patterns to this control for heterogeneity in the
quality of entrepreneurs provides further support for our interpretation.

Overall, the evidence suggests that increasing the orientation of enterprises toward
exports, and promoting greater openness more generally, is likely to stimulate more rapid
productivity growth in manufacturing, especially in the least developed economies, whose
domestic markets might be expected to be less competitive or more segmented on the
basis of quality of goods. First, firms that are foreign-owned, and particularly those
controlled by foreign owners, have higher productivity than domestic firms – even after
controlling for other characteristics. Given that, at least among these countries, foreigners
should have greater access to knowledge about technology and management techniques
as well as to capital, the qualitative finding may not be surprising. One implication of the
rather large productivity differentials, however, is that the less developed among the
industrializing countries do indeed make more productive use of their resources when
they receive foreign investment, and that openness toward such flows is good policy.
Another important finding of this cross-sectional analysis is that orientation toward
exports is associated with higher productivity. Although more study is needed, our
attention to the experience of enterprises that begin to export from the very first year of

34

their establishment suggests that the lure of broader markets does induce firms to operate
more like foreign-owned firms and, as a result, realize higher productivity and compete
more effectively in the international arena. We believe that our new approach to getting
around the problem of causation in considering the relationship between productivity and
export, does contribute to a better understanding of the phenomenon.

V. Conclusion
In this paper we have employed firm-level surveys to study manufacturing
productivity in five East Asian economies. In contrast to the aggregated time series used
by many previous investigators, our data offer rich detail about the operations of firms.
Moreover, although only a limited number of industries were surveyed, each is quite
diverse with respect to firm characteristics such as size, the extent of foreign ownership,
the orientation toward the export market, and the structure of ownership and governance.
Our results suggest strongly that in early-industrializing Asian economies total
factor productivity has generally been much higher among firms that are integrated into
broader markets. This pattern is reflected in the estimation of economies of scale, as well
as in the higher productivity among firms that export, firms that foreigners have a
significant ownership stake in, and among firms that employ outside auditors. These
findings are all the more striking in that no other variables, including those that many have
speculated about -- such as whether the firm is organized as a sole proprietor, partnership,
or corporation – had a consistent relationship with productivity.
Another feature of the evidence that lends further support to our interpretation is
that the magnitude of the estimated differentials in productivity are largest in the least

35

developed economies of Indonesia and the Philippines, still substantial in Thailand, and
smallest in the most developed economies of Malaysia and especially South Korea. That
is, it is in the least developed economies, where less-integrated markets protect less
efficient firms from competition and allow them to survive, that we observe major gains in
productivity among firms that are clearly integrated into broader markets. In the more
industrialized countries such as South Korea, however, where domestic markets are likely
already quite integrated, firms focused on the domestic market are roughly equivalent to
their peers producing for the broad international market. One implication drawn about
changes over time from these cross-sectional patterns, is that the early industrializers of
East Asia, such South Korea, may have realized a substantial (if one-time) advance in
productivity as their markets expanded and became more integrated during their initial
stages of industrial development. To those concerned with the design of policy (whether in
countries such as Indonesia or in the U.S.), the message would be that it is the least
developed economies that have the most to gain from measures that would broaden the
markets they face.
Skeptics have often objected to drawing inferences about the beneficial effects of
broader markets on productivity from observations of an empirical association between
productivity and a proxy for involvement in broader markets such as the export of output.
They have correctly pointed out that the causation underlying such an association can work
in either direction. Recognizing the importance of this point, we tackled this problem by
exploiting information contained in the surveys on the year the firm was established and
the year the firm first exported part of its product. Although very few, if any, phenomena
are ever purely exogenous, we have argued that it is reasonable to treat firms that exported

36

from their time of establishment as having focused on preparing to compete in the broad
international market before their productivity was realized. Finding that this class of firms
was more productive than those that came to export later or never exported is consistent
with causation operating from an entrepreneur’s decision to effectively compete in broader
markets to higher productivity. Our data do not allow us to probe very deeply into the
circumstances that led some entrepreneurs to aim for the export market while others did
not. Nevertheless, the robustness of our findings to controlling for the backgrounds of the
firm founders, as well as intuition, provide support for the notion that the expansion of
opportunities to export in less-developed economies (such as through reductions in the
trade barriers they face) would lead more entrepreneurs to focus on the export market, and
thus to increases in overall manufacturing productivity. The results of this analysis may
not be conclusive, but they do highlight the significance of one of the processes involved
in the growth of manufacturing productivity in newly-industrializing East Asian economies
that is difficult to isolate in aggregated data. A clear implication is that more work with
micro-level evidence needs to be done if we want our understanding of manufacturing
productivity growth in developing economies to be at all comprehensive.

37

Appendix: Estimation Procedures
Productivity is assumed to be an unobserved plant-specific effect that can be
recovered from an estimated production function as the difference between actual and
predicted output. Such an approach raises econometric issues regarding the possible bias
of coefficients on input variables due to simultaneity bias. The concern is that the
productivity of the firm itself affects the input decisions, introducing correlation between
the plant effect and the input coefficients. If there is simultaneity bias, simply running
OLS will lead to biased estimates of the input coefficients32. Three means of addressing
this problem are examined here.
The most common approach is to assume that the unobserved firm heterogeneity is
time-invariant so that a fixed effects estimators is appropriate. However, such an approach
dispenses with all variation between firms. With a short panel, and with an expectation
that the cross-sectional variation will be more important (and better measured) than the
time series dimension, we do not have much confidence in this approach. Indeed a number
of authors have pointed out the shortcomings of such an estimator.
A second approach is to use instrumental variables, selecting variables that would
be correlated with the factor’s share, but not with the productivity shock. Additional
assumptions regarding the nature of the productivity shock have to be made. Firms would
have to have some advance private knowledge of their productivity shock and adjust their
fixed factors accordingly. Thus, recognizing the needed lead time to invest, firms may
increase their capital stock in anticipation of a positive productivity shock. The instrument
we use is the lagged share of energy costs. This will be correlated with the capital stock,
but not with any change in expected productivity. Such a technique is also justified to
address the possible concern of measurement error in the capital stock. However, if
productivity shocks are correlated over time, the instrument is no longer valid.
An alternative approach is one advanced by Olley-Pakes (1996) and modified by
Levinsohn-Petrin (2000). Productivity can be thought of as having two components ωit +
ηit. ηit is truly random each period, but ωit could be known to the firm, although
unobserved to the econometrician. In such a situation, firms could adjust their inputs
based on their knowledge of the anticipated or known productivity component, introducing
the simultaneity bias. Olley-Pakes assume that labor and materials are freely variable
inputs, but capital is treated as a state variable, affected by the distribution of the
productivity shock, ωit, conditional on the information at t-1 and past values of ωi. Their
insight is that other observable firm decisions will be a function of the productivity of the
firm, and that inverting such a function allows for the anticipated but unobserved
productivity shock to be controlled for using the observed variables. They argue that
investment is a function of the anticipated productivity shock and provided a monotonicity
assumption holds, they can invert the function, with productivity as a function of
investment.
32

While the bias on labor and on capital could go either way, most commonly, there would be an upward
bias on the labor coefficient and a downward bias on the capital coefficient. That selection cannot be
controlled for could exacerbate the biases.

38

One drawback of the approach is simply practical. The technique requires non-zero
investments by firms, a criteria that would imply half our observations be dropped. Noting
this likely difficulty, Levinsohn-Petrin instead argue that intermediate input demand
functions can play the same role. They use the demand for electricity to illustrate their
point. It is an input used by all firms. And as it cannot be stored, it closely tracks the
productivity term over time. We follow their example here33.
Thus, the regression (l = labor, m = materials, e=energy, k = capital) is:
(1)

= a + β l lit + β m mit + β e eit + β k k it + ω it + η it

y it

The productivity shock ωit is unobserved, but is assumed to be correlated with eit
and kit so that estimates of βe and βk are biased. However, as the demand for electricity is
a function of ωit and kit, e(ωit, kit), and assuming it is invertible, ωit can be rewritten as a
function of eit and kit.34
(2)

ωit = h(eit, kit)

Substituting (2) in (1), one can estimate the following equation in the first stage of the
procedure:
(3)

y it

= a + β l lit + β m mit + β e eit + β k k it + h(eit , k it ) + η it

Not knowing the functional form of h(eit, kit) -- in particular not knowing if it also has a
linear terms in eit and kit -- one cannot sort out the coefficients βe or βk. We included a
fourth-order polynomial expansion in eit and kit (including all the interaction terms) to
approximate the form of h(.). The inclusion of the polynomial removes the difficulty in
estimating the coefficients on variable inputs; βl and βm will be consistent. From this stage
we also have an estimate of the fourth order polynomial in eit and kit, call it ϕit.
(4)

ϕ it

= β e eit + β k k it + h(eit , k it )

Rearranging, h(eit , k it ) = ϕ it − β e eit + β k k it
Looking at the expectation of yi,t+1 - βl li,t+1 - βm mi,t+1 and assuming ωit is serially
correlated, one can then rewrite ωit+1 as a function of ωit (i.e. of h(eit, kit)). As h(eit, kit) is a
function of eit and kit instead of eit+1 and kit+1, one no longer has βeeit and βkkit in both the
main and the h(.) parts of the equation. Not knowing the functional form, we again used a

33

While we follow the logic of Levinsohn and Petrin’s paper and use electricity demand rather than the
investment equation, our estimation procedures are closer to those suggested by Olley-Pakes. Levinsohn and
Petrin favor local least squares and a GMM estimator in the last stage, while we found the series estimator to
be easier to implement. However, Olley-Pakes suggest both a kernel and series estimator, favoring the
former as its limiting distribution is known. They note that the two estimates are very similar. Following
Pavcnik’s (2000) example, we also use the series estimator and boot-strap the standard errors.
34
A second assumption is that markets are competitive so that all firms face the same prices.

39

fourth order polynomial expansion in h(.) and substitute in h(eit , k it ) = ϕ it − β e eit + β k k it .
Using non-linear least squares, the coefficients βe and βk can then be estimated.
(5)

y it +1 − β l lit +1 + β m mit +1

= c + β e eit +1 + β k k it +1 + h(⋅) + h 2 (⋅) + h 3 (⋅) + h 4 (⋅) + η it

Thus, following on these two papers, we use a semi-parametric estimator that
provides a plant-specific, time-varying productivity measure. It does not require a specific
functional form, requiring few restrictive assumptions. The coefficients are unbiased,
providing a tractable solution to the simultaneity problem.
An additional source of potential bias regards the selection of firms that remain in
the sample. While the data covers three years, all firms were in operation in the last year
so we do not have information on firms that would have been in operation but exited
during the time covered by the study. While the available data will not allow us to
estimate and control for selection bias, we note that it is an issue, and that the capital
coefficient could likely be biased downward and the labor coefficient biased upwards.
The production function is run separately for each country. We did not want to
make assumptions that technology used across countries was the same or to restrict input
coefficients to be the same across countries. For each country, we have 5 to 7 sectors. We
did pool the sectors within a country and run a single production function for each country.
We then tested the restriction that the input coefficients were the same across sectors.35
While the null hypothesis that such a restriction was valid was not rejected in Indonesia,
Thailand and Korea, it was rejected for Malaysia and the Philippines. While we reported
the pooled results, we also reran the equations separately for each sector within each
country. One drawback of such a procedure is that the sample size for some sectors is
quite small, decreasing the confidence in some of the estimates. For the second stage of
the paper, where the productivity measures are then regressed on a number of firm
characteristics, the overall qualitative results still hold whether or not one uses the
constrained or unconstrained regressions.
Input variables are expressed in logarithms so the coefficients can be interpreted as
elasticities.

35

Such tests were made using the OLS regressions.

40

Bibliography
Ackerberg, Daniel. (2002) “Notes on the Structural Estimation of Production Functions,”
unpublished working paper.
Aitken, Brian, Gordon Hanson and Ann Harrison. (1997) “Spillovers, Foreign Investment
and Export Behavior.” Journal of International Economics, 43(1/2): 103-132.
Aitken, Brian and Ann Harrison (1999). “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Foreign Direct
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela.” American Economic Review. 89 (3): 605618.
Aw, Bee Yan, Sukkyun Chung and Mark Roberts. (2000). “Productivity and the Turnover
in the Export Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan
(China),” The World Bank Economic Review, 14 (1): 65-90.
Aw, Bee Yan and A.R. Hwang. (1995) “Productivity and the Export Market: A Firm-Level
Analysis,” Journal of Development Economics, 47, pp. 313-332.
Bayoumi, Tamim, David Coe and Elhanan Helpman. (1999) “R&D Spillovers and Global
Growth,” Journal of International Economics, 47 (2): 399-428.
Bernard, Andrew and Bradford Jensen. (1999) Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,
Effect, or Both?” Journal of International Economics. 47 (1): 1–25.
_________. (1997) “Why Firms Export: Experience, Entry Costs, Spillovers and
Subsidies,” unpublished working paper (Yale University).
Bigsten, Arne, Paul Collier, Stefan Dercon, Marcel Fafchamps, Bernard Gauthier, Jan
Willem Gunning, Jean Habarurema, Abena Oduro, Remco Oostendorp, Catherine
Pattilo, Mans Soderbom, Francis Teal and Albert Zeufack. (2000) “Exports and
Firm-Level Efficiency in African Manufacturing”, Centre of the Studies of African
Economies, Working Paper Series 2000-16.
Blomstrom, Magnus and Ari Kokko. (1996) “The Impact of Foreign Investment on Host
Countries: A Review of the Empirical Evidence”, The World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper Series, No. 1745.
Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach and James Tybout. (1998) “Is ‘Learning-by-Exporting”
Important? Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico and Morocco”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (4): 903-947.
Dollar, David and Kenneth Sokoloff. (1990) "Patterns of Productivity Growth in South
Korean Manufacturing Industries, 1963-1979", Journal of Development Economics,
33 (4): 309-327.
Dollar, David and Mary Hallward-Driemeier. (2000) “Crisis, Adjustment and Reform in
Thailand’s Industrial Firms,” World Bank Research Observer, 15 (1):1-22.
41

Dwor-Frecaut, Dominique, Francis Colaco, and Mary Hallward-Driemeier (eds.). (2000)
Asian Corporate Recovery: Findings from Firm-Level Surveys in Five Countries,
Washington DC: The World Bank.
Haddad, Mona. (1993) “The Link Between Trade Liberalization and Multi-Factor
Productivity: The Case of Morocco.” World Bank Discussion Paper Series, No. 4.
Haddad, Mona and Ann Harrison. (1993) “Are There Spillovers from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Morocco.” Journal of Development
Economics.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary (2000). “Asian Corporate Crisis and Recovery Firm-Level
Survey: A Database of 4000 Firms in Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines
and Thailand," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 2515.
Harrison, Ann. (1994). “Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Reform”, Journal
of International Economics, 36 (1): 53-73.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai. (1999) “Productivity Growth and Factor Prices in East Asia,” American
Economic Review. Vol. 89 (2): 133-138.
Kraay, Aart. (1999) “Exports and Economic Performance: Evidence from a Panel of
Chinese Enterprises,” Revue d’Economie Du Developpement, (2): 183-207.
Levinsohn, James. (1993) “Testing the Imports-As-Market-Discipline Hypothesis,”
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 35, (1/2): 1-22.
_________. (1996) “Firm Heterogeneity, Jobs and International Trade: Evidence from
Chile,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 5808
(Cambridge MA).
Levinsoh, James and Amil Petrin. (2000) “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
Control for Unobservables,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
No. 7819 (Cambridge MA).
Liu, Lili and James Tybout. (1996) “Productivity Growth in Chile and Columbia: The Role
of Entry, Exit and Learning,” in M. Roberts and J. Tybout (eds.) Industrial Evolution
in Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olley, Steven and Ariel Pakes. (1996) “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64 (6): 1263-1297.
Pack, Howard and Larry Westphal. (1998). “Industrial Strategy and Technological Change:
Theory versus Reality,” in Industrial Policy and Competitive Advantage, David
Audretsch (ed.).
Pavcnik, Nina. (2000) “Trade Liberalization, Exit and Productivity Improvements:
Evidence from Chilean Plants,” unpublished working paper (Dartmouth College).
42

Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson. (1999) “Confronting Competition: Investment
Response and Constraints in Uganda,” unpublished working paper (World Bank).
Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. (1996) Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries:
Micro Patterns of Turnover, Productivity and Market Structure. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rodrik, Dani. (1997) “TFPG Controversies, Institutions and Economic Performance in East
Asia.” National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper, No. 5914
(Cambridge, MA).
Sokoloff, Kenneth L. (1984) “Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the NonMechanized Factory Associated With Gains in Efficiency: Evidence from the U.S.
Manufacturing Censuses of 1820 and 1850,” Explorations in Economic History, 21
(4): 351-382.
Tybout, James. (2000) “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well do they
do and Why?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 38 (1):11-45.
Tybout, James and Daniel Westbrook. (1995) “Trade Liberalization and the Dimensions of
Efficiency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries”, Journal of International
Economics, 39 (1): 53-78.
Wacziarg, Romain. (1998) “Measuring the Dynamic Gains from Trade,” unpublished
working paper (World Bank).
Westphal, Larry E. (2001) “Technology Strategies for Economic Development in a Fast
Changing Global Economy,” unpublished working paper (Swarthmore College).
Young, Alwyn. (1995) “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of
the East Asian Growth Experience.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (2): 641680.
_________. (1992) “A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in
Hong Kong and Singapore.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

43

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
Share of firms with Different Characteristics
Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

TOTAL

61.7
38.3
67.3
32.7

25.0
75.0
80.9
19.1

52.5
47.5
52.1
47.9

47.1
52.9
43.7
56.3

43.4
56.6
55.7
44.3

46.1
53.9
62.6
37.4

84.2
15.8
6.9
93.1

83.1
16.9
51.1
48.9

73.5
26.5
29.8
70.2

64.7
35.3
33.5
66.5

69.5
30.5
70.7
29.3

76.0
24.1
38.8
61.2

26.6
26.7
46.7

23.1
42.2
34.8

47.4
25.3
27.3

23.0
24.0
53.0

31.5
30.8
37.7

30.6
30.2
39.1

31.7
12.7
13.9

23.2

23.9
15.1
23.2

10.1
22.2
31.8

28.4
17.6
16.9
13.9

22.1
7.0
19.4
14.4
16.7
7.1
9.8
3.5

20.5

16.4
19.5

18.0
15.7
16.6
3.1
19.5
5.3
14.9
6.9

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

TOTAL

27.6
72.4
64.8
35.2

7.5
92.5
54.7
45.3

15.9
84.1
33.1
66.9

14.6
85.4
31.8
68.2

15.5
84.5
41.5
58.5

17.3
82.7
48.4
51.6

69.4
30.7
5.4
94.6

56.8
43.3
87.8
12.2

40.0
60.0
20.1
79.9

40.3
59.7
29.0
71.0

46.2
53.9
66.9
33.1

54.0
46.1
42.6
57.5

1.8
5.2
93.1

2.0
10.4
87.5

3.6
12.2
84.3

1.4
5.1
93.6

2.7
9.1
88.1

2.1
7.9
90.0

25.4
18.6
22.5

20.1

21.1
7.7
21.7

21.7
15.2
25.6

23.1
11.6
34.0
11.2

8.6
14.5
7.2
12.7
14.7
7.8
28.5
6.1

39.3

22.5
15.1

16.0
16.0
15.6
1.6
15.2
3.7
26.4
5.6

694

607

424

406

2,718

Export Orientation
Non-Exporter
Exporter
of which: Domestic
FDI
Foreign Owned
No (<10% of equity)
Yes (≥ 10% of equity)
of which: Minority (<50%)
Majority (≥50%)
Size
Small (<50 workers)
Medium (50-149 workers)
Large (≥ 150 workers)
Industries
Food
Textiles
Garments
Const. Materials
Chemicals
Machinery
Electronics
Autoparts

29.2
12.6

17.3

Distribution of Labor Force
Export Orientation
Non-Exporter
Exporter
of which: Domestic
FDI
Foreign Owned
No (<10% of equity)
Yes (≥ 10% of equity)
of which: Minority (<50%)
Majority (≥50%)
Size
Small (<50 workers)
Medium (50-149 workers)
Large (≥ 150 workers)
Industries
Food
Textiles
Garments
Const. Materials
Chemicals
Machinery
Electronics
Autoparts
Total number of firms

19.3
14.2
587

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999.

10.3

Table 2. Indicators of Level of Development

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia Philippines Thailand

$1,105

$11,467

$4,625

$1,122

$3,017

Gross Domestic Investment,% GDP

31.8

34.2

42.8

24.8

33.3

Manufacturing Value Added, % GDP

25.6

28.9

27.8

22.8

28.2

Agricultural Value Added, % GDP

16.7

5.8

11.7

20.6

11.1

Urban Population, % of total

37.7

79.7

55.2

20.6

55.8

18.1
15.1

36.4
29.3

23.8
22.1

24.4
19.9

21.7
22.4

3.1

39.2

10.0

5.0

6.7

5.03

0.20

0.70

1.84

0.92

Macro
GDP per capita

Micro
Share of New Machinery
& Equip-t (less 4yr old)
in 10-19 yr old firms
in 20-29 yr old firms
Median Value Added/worker
($’000 ppp)
Coefficient of variation of TFP

Source: World Bank, 2001 World Development Indicators, Washington DC (data refer to 1997) and World Bank,
Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

45

Table 3
Normalized Output Elasticities Obtained from Different
Production Function Specifications
Indonesia Korea
OLS with Value Added Measure of Output
Labor
0.49
0.38
Capital
0.51
0.62
OLS with Gross Output Measure of Output
Materials
0.49
Labor
0.21
Capital
0.20
Energy
0.10

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.74
0.26

0.56
0.44

0.61
0.39

0.21
0.28
0.43
0.08

0.40
0.30
0.16
0.14

0.51
0.23
0.13
0.13

0.64
0.19
0.09
0.09

Fixed Effects
Materials
Labor
Capital
Energy

0.44
0.21
0.19
0.16

0.31
0.21
0.40
0.09

0.31
0.30
0.15
0.24

0.43
0.25
0.09
0.23

0.67
0.07
0.03
0.23

Series Estimator
Materials
Labor
Capital
Energy

0.46
0.19
0.28
0.07

0.22
0.23
0.49
0.06

0.33
0.32
0.32
0.03

0.46
0.20
0.18
0.16

0.58
0.18
0.23
0.02

Scale Effects
Series Estimator

Indonesia
1.18

Korea
1.01

Malaysia
1.09*

Philippines
1.16

Thailand
1.12

* Calculated using subsample of firms which report total sales and just not sales of most important product.
See Appendix for discussion on production function estimation.
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

46

Table 4a
Pooled Cross-Section Variation in Total Factor Productivity Across Firms, by Countries:
Regressions using TFP Measures from Series Estimator Production Functions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.206

-0.005

0.149

0.228

0.133

(3.26)**

(0.15)

(1.62)

(3.23)**

(2.38)*

0.078

-0.030

0.074

0.012

(1.89)

(0.30)

(1.56)

(0.35)

0.375

0.158

-0.012

0.352

0.221

(6.16)**

(4.42)**

(0.13)

(6.99)**

(3.67)**

0.082

0.004

0.342

0.046

0.092

(1.83)

(0.16)

(5.57)**

(1.07)

(2.64)**

0.332

0.014

0.233

0.062

0.083

(7.47)**

(0.47)

(2.46)*

(1.49)

(2.29)*

0.041

0.072

0.155

0.102

0.047

(0.96)

(2.98)**

(2.28)*

(2.94)**

(1.31)

-0.043

0.006

0.240

0.019

-0.065

(1.15)

(0.17)

(3.86)**

(0.51)

(1.95)

Observations

842

1644

967

780

748

R-squared

0.26

0.39

0.35

0.54

0.30

Domestic, Established as Exporter1

Minority Foreign Ownership2

Majority Foreign Ownership3

Medium (50-149)

Large (150 plus)

Capital city

Age Dummy4

The dependent variable is the productivity measure constructed using the sector by sector series
estimator. Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Note:
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm established 10 or more years ago; 0=otherwise
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

47

Table 4b
Pooled Cross-Section Variation in Total Factor Productivity Across Firms, by Countries:
Regressions using TFP Measures from Series Estimator Production Functions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.236

0.012

0.218

0.285

0.121

(3.71)**

(0.30)

(2.31)*

(3.90)**

(1.96)

0.082

0.024

0.151

0.146

-0.023

(1.69)

(0.79)

(1.96)

(2.94)**

(0.61)

0.096

0.040

0.134

0.002

(2.01)*

(0.39)

(2.57)*

(0.05)

0.408

0.175

0.060

0.409

0.212

(6.45)**

(4.10)**

(0.62)

(7.64)**

(3.35)**

0.061

0.002

0.308

0.020

0.096

(1.38)

(0.08)

(4.83)**

(0.45)

(2.64)**

0.299

0.009

0.195

0.028

0.090

(6.25)**

(0.31)

(2.02)*

(0.65)

(2.25)*

0.044

0.073

0.152

0.096

0.049

(1.03)

(2.99)**

(2.20)*

(2.74)**

(1.34)

-0.047

0.002

0.238

0.023

-0.064

(1.26)

(0.06)

(3.83)**

(0.59)

(1.92)

Observations

842

1644

967

780

748

R-squared

0.26

0.39

0.35

0.55

0.30

Domestic, Established as Exporter1

Domestic, Became Exporter2

Minority Foreign Ownership3

Majority Foreign Ownership4

Medium (50-149)

Large (150 plus)

Capital city

Age Dummy5

Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
Note:
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
5
Dummy variable: 1=firm established 10 or more years ago; 0=otherwise
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

48

Table 4c
Variation in Total Factor Productivity across Firms: Pooled Cross-Section Regressions
with TFP Measures Based on OLS Value Added Production Functions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.579

0.061

0.387

0.594

0.343

(4.58)**

(1.25)

(2.92)**

(4.16)**

(2.48)*

0.308

0.084

0.229

0.236

0.167

(3.12)**

(2.37)*

(1.95)

(2.23)*

(1.85)

0.172

0.266

0.378

0.173

(3.46)**

(1.74)

(2.70)**

(1.98)*

0.836

0.305

0.093

0.971

0.497

(6.88)**

(6.56)**

(0.67)

(7.90)**

(4.01)**

0.069

-0.024

0.398

0.191

0.258

(0.74)

(0.89)

(4.19)**

(1.90)

(3.28)**

0.414

-0.013

0.233

0.175

0.320

(4.47)**

(0.38)

(1.51)

(1.74)

(3.91)**

0.090

0.114

0.306

0.277

-0.009

(0.98)

(4.02)**

(3.00)**

(3.54)**

(0.11)

Observations

846

1651

1118

798

755

R-squared

0.14

0.04

0.07

0.15

0.14

Domestic, Established as Exporter1

Domestic, Became Exporter2

Minority Foreign Ownership3

Majority Foreign Ownership4

Medium (50-149)

Large (150 plus)

Capital city

Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Note:
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned.
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

49

Table 5
Composition of the Work Force By Level of Education

Domestic
Not Estab. as Exporter
(%)
Indonesia

Domestic
Estab. as Exporter
(%)

Foreign
Owned
(%)

na

na

na

Primary
Secondary
Vocational
Tertiary

14.2
54.3
na
31.6

10.4
59.7
na
30.0

7.1
50.1
na
42.8

Primary
Secondary
Vocational
Tertiary

49.8
34.7
8.6
9.6

54.8
35.6
7.6
7.0

43.3
40.8
9.8
10.1

Primary
Secondary
Vocational
Tertiary

6.7
46.2
11.0
28.9

4.6
39.9
11.0
26.2

2.5
44.8
9.9
23.8

Primary
Secondary
Vocational
Tertiary

56.4
38.0
10.6
4.5

54.6
39.9
10.8
4.4

37.9
50.6
14.0
6.3

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

Notes: The categorization of schooling levels are useful for examination of differences across
firms within countries, but are not strictly comparable across countries.

50

Table 6a
Regressions with Log of Capital-Labor Ratio as Dependent Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

FDI1

1.320
(8.53)**

0.279
(4.64)**

0.679
(4.26)**

0.569
(4.41)**

0.861
(7.26)**

Domestic Exporter2

0.540
(5.01)**

0.153
(3.28)**

0.299
(2.44)*

0.308
(2.48)*

0.477
(4.88)**

Capacity Utilization

-0.001
(0.68)

0.001
(0.76)

-0.001
(0.42)

-0.006
(2.40)*

-0.004
(2.04)*

Age3

0.009
(0.78)

0.007
(1.63)

0.008
(0.66)

0.015
(1.66)

0.020
(1.26)

Age^2

-0.000
(0.59)

0.000
(1.04)

0.000
(0.40)

-0.000
(0.59)

-0.000
(0.16)

Large

0.379
(3.39)**

0.373
(8.92)**

-0.071
(0.60)

0.425
(3.93)**

0.484
(5.13)**

Observations

806

1615

1141

780

766

R-squared

0.25

0.18

0.12

0.17

0.30

Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Note:
Dummy variable: 1=firm has at least 10% of equity foreign owned, 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=exporter with less than 10% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
3
Number of years since establishment
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

51

Table 6b
Regressions with Fraction of Assets in Recent Vintage of
Capital as Dependent Variable
(1)
% of
equipment
< 4 yr

(2)
% of
equipment
< 4 yr

(3)
% of
equipment
< 4 yr

(4)
% of
equipment
< 4 yr

(5)
% of
equipment
< 4 yr

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

1.381
(0.36)

3.152
(1.32)

4.494
(1.86)

15.684
(5.21)**

-2.939
(1.09)

-5.542
(1.57)

0.571
(0.24)

1.366
(0.45)

2.739
(0.63)

9.197
(2.74)**

-1.162
(0.44)

2.889
(1.57)

5.498
(2.72)**

8.193
(2.69)**

5.886
(2.45)*

0.086
(1.80)

-0.016
(0.35)

0.190
(5.12)**

-0.066
(1.01)

0.046
(0.98)

-1.935
(0.73)

1.311
(0.84)

8.400
(4.39)**

4.868
(1.98)*

6.603
(2.97)**

Age

-1.186
(4.18)**

-1.653
(8.17)**

-0.759
(3.37)**

-1.068
(4.96)**

-1.743
(4.03)**

Age^2

0.012
(3.01)**

0.021
(6.23)**

0.008
(2.44)*

0.011
(3.88)**

0.025
(2.85)**

Observations

763

1541

1122

710

737

R-squared

0.08

0.08

0.09

0.17

0.13

1

FDI

Domestic, Established
2
Exporter

Domestic, Became
3
Exporter

Capacity Utilization

Size Dummy

4

5

Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Note:

1

Dummy variable: 1=firm has at least 10% of equity foreign owned, 0=otherwise.
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 150 or more employees; 0=otherwise.
5
Number of years since establishment.
2

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

52

TABLE 7
Characteristics of Firms by Export and Ownership
TEXTILES
FDI

Estab
Export

ELECTRONICS

Becme Domestic
Export No Exp.

FDI

Estab
Export

Becme
Export

Domestic
No Exp.

Median Employment
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand

711
132
187
212
138

317
101
158
57
250

589
120
133
112
153

85
80
17
51
46

739
239
352
345
392

442
79
76
218
245

213
104
181
425
83

55
89
156
47
55

17.25
149.04
31.85
23.68
18.04

3.57
75.57
9.74
16.30
12.61

29.33
141.95
25.54
17.51
39.08

43.07
111.11
36.95
8.48
3.23

10.06
97.2
52.32
9.93
21.51

11.11
109.83
7.01
12.24
9.83

0.25
0.52
0.12
0.71
0.27

0.89
0.91
0.67
0.97
0.51

0.80
0.59
0.25
0.82
0.51

0.64
0.68
0.80
0.88
0.57

0.28
0.71
0.30
0.81
0.27

0.09
0.14
0.04
0.33
0.17

0.58
0.61
0.56
0.73
0.63

0.60
0.37
0.50
0.82
0.30

0.58
0.51
0.40
0.50
0.42

0.15
0.43
0.40
0.45
0.20

0.14
0.04
0.08
0.21
0.18

0.73
0.44
0.72
0.65
0.79

0.60
0.21
0.50
0.50
0.38

0.36
0.09
0.25
0.63
0.23

0.33
0.14
0.10
0.23
0.25

Median Capital per Worker
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand

27.64
117.75
45.23
10.02
36.66

5.98
112.14
18.30
8.09
26.14

Share of Firms with Outside Auditors
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand

0.69
0.73
0.80
0.97
0.48

0.33
0.62
0.73
0.50
0.50

0.56
0.62
0.77
0.90
0.61

Share of Firms with Formal Training Programs
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand

0.58
0.50
0.30
0.47
0.46

0.67
0.27
0.36
0.50
0.50

0.32
0.18
0.31
0.43
0.26

Share of Firms Using Foreign Technology
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand

0.80
0.55
0.67
0.39
0.61

0.33
0.06
0.18
0.50
0.67

0.61
0.08
0.54
0.50
0.46

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

53

Table 8a
Regressions of Total Factor Productivity on Firm Characteristics and Practices:
TFP Measures Obtained from Series Estimator
(1)
tfp_lps

(2)
tfp_lps

(3)
tfp_lps

(4)
tfp_lps

(5)
tfp_lps

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.203

-0.007

0.224

0.253

0.156

(3.12)**

(0.17)

(2.26)*

(3.44)**

(2.58)*

0.041

0.004

0.157

0.139

0.003

(0.85)

(0.13)

(2.06)*

(2.77)**

(0.07)

0.057

0.023

0.127

0.017

(1.15)

(0.23)

(2.38)*

(0.41)

0.337

0.141

0.047

0.382

0.264

(4.90)**

(3.18)**

(0.47)

(7.22)**

(3.84)**

0.150

0.010

0.034

-0.003

0.051

(3.68)**

(0.39)

(0.49)

(0.08)

(1.43)

0.057

0.074

0.135

0.100

-0.007

(1.38)

(3.07)**

(1.92)

(2.97)**

(0.17)

0.171

0.076

0.085

-0.055

-0.054

(3.94)**

(2.80)**

(1.49)

(0.91)

(1.84)

0.044

0.003

0.131

0.116

-0.031

(1.07)

(0.14)

(1.90)

(3.48)**

(0.91)

Observations

846

1631

980

758

732

R-squared

0.27

0.40

0.32

0.55

0.28

1

Domestic, Established as Exporter

2

Domestic, Became Exporter

3

Minority Foreign Ownership

4

Majority Foreign Ownership

Size Dummy

5

Capital city

Audited by outside firm

Training program

Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
Note:
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned.
5
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 150 or more employees; 0=otherwise.
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999.

54

Table 8b
Regressions of Total Factor Productivity on Firm Characteristics and Practices:
TFP Measures Obtained from Value Added
(1)
TFP

(2)
TFP

(3)
TFP

(4)
TFP

(5)
TFP

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.469

0.040

0.460

0.514

0.418

(3.71)**

(0.81)

(3.55)**

(3.56)**

(3.08)**

0.208

0.062

0.224

0.208

0.214

(2.13)*

(1.73)

(2.08)*

(1.92)

(2.32)*

0.129

0.222

0.329

0.196

(2.50)*

(1.54)

(2.32)*

(2.20)*

0.602

0.260

0.115

0.916

0.575

(5.03)**

(5.46)**

(0.84)

(7.24)**

(4.23)**

0.164

-0.022

-0.092

0.162

0.126

(1.96)

(0.77)

(0.87)

(1.80)

(1.63)

0.111

0.112

0.287

0.295

-0.022

(1.25)

(3.96)**

(2.77)**

(3.74)**

(0.26)

0.415

0.105

0.306

-0.004

0.092

(5.03)**

(3.26)**

(3.71)**

(0.03)

(1.27)

0.162

0.007

0.229

0.165

-0.007

(2.07)*

(0.27)

(2.16)*

(2.11)*

(0.09)

Observations

846

1631

1118

769

736

R-squared

0.17

0.05

0.07

0.15

0.13

1

Domestic, Established as Exporter

2

Domestic, Became Exporter

3

Minority Foreign Ownership

4

Majority Foreign Ownership

Size Dummy

5

Capital city

Audited by outside firm

Training program

Sector dummies and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Note:
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned.
5
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 150 or more employees; 0=otherwise.
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

55

Table 9a
Regressions of Total Factor Productivity on Firm Characteristics with Ownership: With
TFP Measures Obtained from Series Estimator

1

Domestic, Established as Exporter

2

Domestic, Became Exporter

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

tfp_lps

Tfp_lps

tfp_lps

tfp_lps

tfp_lps

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.221

0.003

0.119

0.271

0.143

(3.45)**

(0.07)

(1.20)

(3.66)**

(2.21)*

0.060

0.030

0.088

0.140

-0.023

(1.21)

(0.98)

(1.10)

(2.82)**

(0.60)

0.079

-0.048

0.116

0.008

(1.59)

(0.45)

(2.21)*

(0.20)

0.404

0.182

-0.065

0.393

0.205

(6.26)**

(4.19)**

(0.65)

(7.52)**

(3.28)**

0.048

0.070

0.140

0.096

0.021

(1.13)

(2.87)**

(2.04)*

(2.87)**

(0.59)

-0.205

0.133

-0.073

0.081

0.213

(1.44)

(1.67)

(0.64)

(0.43)

(3.77)**

3

Minority Foreign Ownership

4

Majority Foreign Ownership

Capital city

Partnerships

Cooperatives

Limited Liability

0.034

0.160

(0.51)

(0.87)

0.121

-0.033

0.139

0.035

0.210

(2.19)*

(0.68)

(1.46)

(0.46)

(2.86)**

0.114

-0.033

0.513

-0.006

0.206

(1.61)

(1.12)

(0.95)

(0.07)

(1.39)

Observations

846

1596

980

787

741

R-squared

0.26

0.39

0.33

0.55

0.30

Publicly Listed

Sector, size and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Note:
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned.
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

56

Table 9b
Regressions of Total Factor Productivity on Firm Characteristics with Ownership: With
TFP Measures Derived from OLS Value Added Specification

1

Domestic, Established as Exporter

2

Domestic, Became Exporter

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

TFP

TFP

TFP

TFP

TFP

Indonesia

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Thailand

0.537

0.058

0.312

0.584

0.372

(4.22)**

(1.16)

(2.20)*

(4.03)**

(2.52)*

0.278

0.094

0.168

0.245

0.152

(2.80)**

(2.59)**

(1.40)

(2.25)*

(1.66)

0.177

0.169

0.343

0.157

(3.40)**

(1.08)

(2.38)*

(1.75)

0.798

0.306

0.019

0.948

0.451

(6.54)**

(6.45)**

(0.13)

(7.70)**

(3.62)**

0.101

0.111

0.278

0.279

-0.000

(1.10)

(3.83)**

(2.73)**

(3.60)**

(0.00)

3

Minority Foreign Ownership

4

Majority Foreign Ownership

Capital city

Partnerships

-0.331

0.047

0.132

-0.108

0.357

(1.07)

(0.47)

(0.81)

(0.34)

(2.61)**

Cooperatives

Limited Liability

-0.033

-0.007

(0.41)

(0.01)

0.212

-0.086

0.293

-0.003

0.180

(1.86)

(1.41)

(2.04)*

(0.02)

(1.00)

0.041

-0.029

0.718

-0.197

0.143

(0.29)

(0.85)

(0.78)

(1.10)

(0.51)

Observations

846

1596

1118

798

745

R-squared

0.15

0.05

0.08

0.16

0.15

Publicly Listed

Sector, size and year dummies were included, but not reported.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
1
Note:
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that started exporting
within the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
2
Dummy variable: 1=firm with less than 10% of equity foreign owned and that which started
exporting sometime after the first year of establishment; currently is exporter. 0=otherwise.
3
Dummy variable:1=firm with 10% to 49% of equity foreign owned; 0=otherwise.
4
Dummy variable: 1=firm with 50% or more of equity foreign owned.
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

57

Table 10
The Significance of the Experience of the Founder:
Regressions using TFP Measures from Series Estimator Production Functions
Indonesia
log(tfp)

Korea
log(tfp)

Malaysia
log(tfp)

Philippines
log(tfp)

Thailand
log(tfp)

Prior Experience
Local Firm

0.191
(3.39)**

-0.013
(0.50)

0.160
(2.24)*

0.142
(2.78)**

0.089
(2.59)**

Prior Experience
Foreign Firm

0.245
(2.67)**

0.073
(0.92)

-0.335
(3.86)**

0.091
(1.43)

0.093
(1.42)

Prior Experience
Joint Venture

0.394
(4.65)**

-0.066
(0.91)

0.258
(2.06)*

0.300
(3.52)**

0.134
(2.47)*

Domestic, Estab.
as Exporter

0.204
(3.13)**

0.001
(0.02)

0.139
(1.47)

0.182
(2.42)*

0.140
(2.35)*

0.081
(1.90)

-0.038
(0.39)

0.006
(0.11)

-0.009
(0.21)

0.289
(3.66)**

0.144
(3.90)**

0.272
(2.59)**

0.301
(4.76)**

0.200
(2.92)**

0.085
(1.87)

0.014
(0.54)

0.344
(5.58)**

0.037
(0.84)

0.104
(2.81)**

0.313
(6.66)**

0.008
(0.26)

0.249
(2.63)**

0.067
(1.47)

0.082
(2.12)*

0.001
(0.03)

0.082
(3.11)**

0.176
(2.64)**

0.075
(2.11)*

0.65
(1.57)

Observations

778

1526

965

699

676

R-squared

0.27

0.39

0.37

0.57

0.30

Minority Foreign
Ownership
Majority Foreign
Ownership

Medium Size (50149)
Large Size (150
plus)

Capital City

Notes: Dummy variables for the sectors, years, and age of firm were included, but are not reported.
Robust t-statistics are reported within parentheses: *significant at 5%; and **significant at 1%. See the
notes to Table 4. The dummy variables pertaining to the experience of the founder of the firm pertain
To the question n the survey as to whether he or she had previously worked at a firm in the same
industry, and who had owned that firm. The excluded category are small, locally-owned firms that
Are located outside of the capital city district and were established as non-exporters by a founder with no
experience.

58

Figure 1: Coefficient of Variation of Total Factor Productivity

All Industries

Electronics

3.5

2.5
2

2.5
Coefficient

Coefficient

3

2
1.5
1

1.5
1
0.5

0.5
0

0

Indo

Phil

Thai

Mal

Korea

Indo

Thai

Mal

Korea

Mal

Korea

Garments

Textiles
12

7

10

6
5

8

Coefficient

Coefficient

Phil

6
4

4
3
2

2

1
0

0
Indo

Phil

Thai

Mal

Indo

Korea

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

59

Phil

Thai

Figure 2
Time between Establishment and First Export

Indo

Korea

Phil

Thai

Mal

.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0

20

40 60

Fraction

.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0

20

40 60

0

20

40 60

Number of Years Since Establishment

time_to_export

me Between Establishment and First Expo
Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

60

Figure 3
Share of Export Over Total Sales
Established Exporter

Became Exporter

FDI

.7

.7

.6

.6

.6

.4

.4

.4

Fraction

.7

Fraction

Fraction

Korea

.2

.2

.2

0

0

0
0

sh_xsal

0

1

sh_xsal

0

1

sh_xsal

1

Malaysia

Fraction

Fraction

.6

.4

.7

.7

.6

.6

.4

.4

Fraction

.7

.2

.2

.2

0

0
0

sh_xsal

0

0

1

sh_xsal

1

0

sh_xsal

1

.7

.7

.6

.6

.6

.4

.4

.4

Fraction

.7

Fraction

Fraction

Philippines

.2

.2

.2

0

0

0
0

sh_xsal

0

1

sh_xsal

0

1

sh_xsal

1

.7

.6

.6

.6

.4

.4

.4

Fraction

.7

Fraction

Fraction

Thailand
.7

.2

.2

.2

0

0
0

sh_xsal

1

0

0

sh_xsal

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

61

1

0

sh_xsal

1

FIGURE 4

Capital per Worker
'000 US$

80
60
40
20
0
Indonesia
FDI

Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Estab Exp Becm Exp Local

Thailand

Equipment Less than 4 Years Old
40

Percent

30
20
10
0
Indonesia

Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
FDI Estab Exp Becm Exp Local

Thailand

Share of Firms with Outside Auditor
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
Indonesia

Korea
FDI

Malaysia

Estab Exp

Philippines

Becm Exp

Local

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

62

Thailand

FIGURE 5
Share of Firms Using Foreign Technology
0.75

0.5

0.25

0
Indonesia

Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
FDI Estab Exp Becm Exp Local

Thailand

Share of Workers with Primary Education
Relative to Local Firms' Share
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0

Korea

Malaysia
FDI

Philippines

Estab Exp

Thailand

Becm Exp

Share of Firms with Formal Training
0.75

0.5

0.25

0

Indonesia

Korea
FDI

Malaysia

Estab Exp

Philippines

Becm Exp

Local

Source: World Bank, Asian Corporate Crisis & Recovery Firm-Level Survey 1999

63

Thailand

