NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIMITED ASSET MARKET PARTICIPATION AND THE ELASTICITY OF
INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen

Working Paper 8896
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8896

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2002

This paper is a revised version of the first chapter of my MIT thesis. I thank my advisors Daron Acemoglu,
Olivier Blanchard, and especially Ricardo Caballero for their insights and advice. Seminar and conference
participants and discussants at MIT, Princeton, Rochester, Chicago, Northwestern, Kellogg, Stanford, NYU,
Columbia, Wisconsin, UCL, Tilburg, Toulouse, Tel Aviv, Milan, the NBER Summer Institute, and the AEA
Meetings provided very useful comments and suggestions. All errors are mine. Financial support from the
Danish Research Academy, the Sloan Foundation, and the University of Chicago is greatfully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 8896
April 2002
JEL No. E2, G1

ABSTRACT
The paper presents empirical evidence based on the US Consumer Expenditure Survey that
accounting for limited asset market participation is important for estimating the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (EIS). Differences in estimates of the EIS between assetholders and non-assetholders are large
and statistically significant. This is the case whether estimating the EIS based on the Euler equation for
stock index returns or the Euler equation for T-bills, in each case distinguishing between assetholders and
non-assetholders as best possible. Estimates of the EIS are around 0.3-0.4 for stockholders and around
0.8-1 for bondholders, and are larger for households with larger asset holdings within these two groups.

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Tel: 773-702-9127
Fax: 773-702-8490
Email: vissing@uchicago.edu
Web: www.src.uchicago.edu/users/viss

1

Introduction

The elasticity of intertemporal substitution is one of the central determinants of households' intertemporal consumption choices. In the certainty case it can be computed as minus the elasticity of the
ratio of consumption in period t to consumption in period t + 1 with respect to the relative price of
consumption in the two periods
d (Ct =Ct+1 ) (1 + Rf;t ) d (ln(Ct+1 =Ct ))
EIS =
= d (ln(1 + R ))
(1)
d (1 + Rf;t ) Ct =Ct+1
f;t
where Rf;t is the net return on the riskless asset in period t: Under uncertainty, one can de ne
utility over consumption in this period and the certainty equivalent of future consumption following
Epstein and Zin (1989). The elasticity of intertemporal substitution can then be de ned based on
the ratio of current period consumption to the certainty equivalent of future consumption. Assuming,
rstly, that asset returns and next period consumption are joint log normally distributed conditional
on information known in this period and, secondly, that utility is of the Epstein-Zin form or (as a
special case) the constant relative risk aversion form, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution can
be calculated as
dE (ln(Ct+1 =Ct ))
(2)
EIS = t
dEt (ln(1 + Ri;t ))
where Ri;t is the net return in period t on any asset i in which the consumer has an interior position.1
In other words, the EIS determines how much consumers change their expected consumption growth
rate in response to changes in the expected return to any such asset.
Determining the sensitivity of consumption to interest rates is important for a host of economic
issues and policies. For example, (a) the response of household savings to changes in after-tax interest
rates depends crucially on the EIS, (b) the e ect of expansionary scal policy is weaker if the EIS is
large, and (c) the ability of real business cycle models to t the data depends on the EIS (see e.g.
Jones, Manuelli and Siu (2000) regarding (c)).
A quite large empirical literature has been devoted to estimating the EIS. Most work has focused
on estimating it assuming constant relative risk aversion preferences and using the log-linearized Euler
equation derived by Hansen and Singleton (1983). Hall (1988) summarized the evidence up to the
late eighties by concluding that the EIS is unlikely to be much above 0.1 and may well be zero. While
some subsequent studies, e.g. Attanasio and Weber (1993), have found positive and signi cant values
of the EIS, it seems fair to say that there is no consensus on whether it is signi cantly above zero and
1 See Attanasio and Weber (1989) for the derivation of the log-linearized Euler equation in the Epstein-Zin case.

1

if so what its value is.
In this paper I use microdata from the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey (the CEX) to argue
that accounting for limited asset market participation is crucial for obtaining consistent estimates of
the EIS. The Euler equation should hold for a given household only if the household holds a non-zero
position (positive or negative) in the asset. There is no theoretical reason for expecting households who
do not hold a given asset to adjust its consumption growth rate in response to predictable changes
in the return on that asset. In that case including the consumption of non-assetholders in Euler
equation estimations will lead to inconsistent estimates of the EIS. In particular, if the consumption
growth of non-assetholders does not comove with predictable asset return changes at all, then EIS
estimates based on the consumption of all households will be substantially downward biased.2 To
test this prediction I estimate log-linearized Euler equations involving T-bill returns as well as loglinearized Euler equations involving the return on the NYSE stock market index. In each case I
distinguish, as best possible given the CEX data, between households who hold the asset in question
and households who do not. I nd estimates of the EIS around 0.3-0.4 for stockholders and around
0.8-1 for bondholders, with larger values for the third of households within these two groups who have
the largest holdings of the asset. For non-stockholders and non-bondholders EIS estimates are small
and insigni cantly di erent from zero. Interestingly, in their paper in this volume Attanasio, Banks,
and Tanner also nd support for the limited asset market participation theory using data for the
United Kingdom. These ndings are consistent with earlier work by Attanasio and Browning (1995)
showing that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is increasing in consumption, given the large
correlation of consumption and wealth and the fact that wealth is known to be a strong predictor of
stock and bond market participation.
It is important to emphasize that the di erences in EIS estimates between assetholders and nonassetholders should not be interpreted as evidence of heterogeneity in the EIS across households. Since
the Euler equation for a given asset return cannot be expected to hold for households who do not hold
a position in that asset, EIS estimates for non-assetholders are not consistent estimates of the EIS for
these households. They are shown only to reconcile my ndings of fairly large values of the EIS for
assetholders with the nding of earlier studies. In fact it may be that the EIS is similar for assetholders
and non-assetholders. In a recent paper, Gross and Souleles (2001) nd a signi cant negative relation
between the interest rate on credit cards and the amount of credit card borrowing, suggesting that
2 For example, suppose households have constant relative risk aversion preferences and consumption growth rates and

asset returns are conditionally joint log normal. If the consumption growth of non-assetholders does not covary with
the instruments used to predict the asset return, it can be shown that EIS estimates based on estimation of conditional
Euler equations using the consumption growth rates of all households is only factor  of the true value, where  is the
fraction of assetholders in the population. The derivation of this is based on cross-sectional aggregation of individual
Euler equations as in the empirical section below.

2

the EIS is signi cantly positive for credit card borrowers as well. See also Attanasio, Goldberg and
Kyriazidou (2000) for evidence that the demand for automobile loans is sensitive to the interest rate
for most of the groups of households considered.
The idea that limited participation in asset markets matters for consumption and asset returns was
originally proposed by Mankiw and Zeldes (1991). They estimated unconditional Euler equations for
stockholders and non-stockholders using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Based on
unconditional Euler equations, they found large di erences in relative risk aversion estimates between
the two groups although the estimate remained as high as 35 for the richest group of stockholders.
Brav and Geczy (1996), and the extended version by Brav, Constantinides and Geczy (1999), con rm
Mankiw and Zeldes' ndings for unconditional Euler equations using CEX data. They show that risk
aversion estimates are much larger for households who are likely to hold stocks and bonds than for
others, and that risk aversion estimates decline as they look at still wealthier layers of assetholders.
They estimate risk aversion to be 12 for the richest assetholders. I the present paper, I focus on the
e ects of limited participation for estimates of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution rather than
estimates of risk aversion. Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) and Brav, Constantinides and Geczy (1999) do
not provide standard errors for their estimates. However, bootstrap methods show that the standard
errors of risk aversion estimates based on unconditional Euler equations are very large, especially
when using a relatively short time period as is available from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (see
Vissing-Jrgensen (1999)). This suggests that adding information about predictable movements in
expected consumption growth rates and expected asset returns is valuable for improving the precision
of the estimates. If, however, preferences are not of the CRRA form, the coeÆcient of relative risk
aversion does not equal the inverse of the EIS. More speci cally, in the case of Epstein-Zin preferences,
estimation of conditional log-linearized Euler equations, with log consumption growth regressed on
log asset returns, provides estimates of the EIS but is not informative about risk aversion, see e.g.
Attanasio and Weber (1989). Therefore, while the ndings of the present paper suggest that accounting
for limited asset market participation is crucial for obtaining reasonable values of the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution, it is too early to precisely determine the extent to which it helps resolve
the equity premium puzzle.
2
2.1

Empirical results based on the Consumer Expenditure Survey
Data

The available data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey cover the period 1980, rst quarter to
1996, rst quarter. In each quarter approximately 4500 households are interviewed. Each household
is interviewed ve times. The rst time is practice and the results are not in the data les. The
3

interviews are three months apart and when interviewed households are asked to report consumption
for the previous three months. Financial information is gathered in the fth quarter only. Aside from
attrition, the sample is representative of the US population. Attrition is quite substantial with only
about 60 percent of the households making it through all ve interviews.
2.1.1

Asset holder status

The CEX contains information about four categories of nancial assets. Households are asked for their
holdings of "stocks, bonds, mutual funds and other such securities", "U.S. savings bonds", "savings
accounts", and "checking accounts, brokerage accounts and other similar accounts".
I perform estimations rstly based on the return on the NYSE stock market index and then based
on the return on Treasury bills. Thus, I would like to separate households into those who own stocks
versus those who do not, as well as into those who hold bonds, T-bills or similar assets versus those
who do not. As is clear from the above categories a perfect separation of households is not possible.
In general, inability to perfectly identify assetholders from non-assetholders biases against nding
di erences in EIS estimates for the two groups. I will refer to households with positive responses to
the category "stock, bonds, mutual funds and other such securities" as stockholders and focus on this
distinction when estimating Euler equations for the stock index return. As for bondholdings, I will
refer to households with positive responses to the stock, bonds and mutual funds category or to the
U.S. savings bond category as bondholders (thus my sets of stockholders and bondholders di er by
the group of households who own U.S. savings bonds). Again, not all of those with positive holdings
of stocks, bonds or mutual funds necessarily hold bonds or bond mutual funds but many likely do. I
do not include households with positive holdings in savings accounts in the bondholder category but
return to these households after the main estimation results.
The Euler equation involving consumption in period t and t+1 should hold for those who hold
the asset as of date t. Therefore asset holding status must be de ned based on stockholdings at the
beginning of period t (when considering the consumption growth between period t and t+1). Two
additional CEX variables are used for this purpose. The rst one reports whether the household holds
the same amount, more, or less of the asset category compared to a year ago. The second one reports
the dollar di erence in the estimated market value of the asset category held by the household last
month compared with the value of the asset category held a year ago last month. I de ne a household
as holding an asset category at the beginning of period t if it 1) reports holding the same amount of
the asset as a year ago and holds a positive amount at the time of the interview (the fth interview)
or 2) reports having lower holdings of the asset than a year ago, or 3) reports having had an increase
in its holdings of the asset but by a dollar amount less than the reported holdings at the time of the
4

question.3 Based on this I classify 21.75 percent of households as stockholders and 31.40 percent as
bondholders.
It is known from e.g. the Survey of Consumer Finances that many households hold stocks or
bonds only in their pension plan. Whether these should be considered stockholders/bondholders or
not depends on the type of pension plan. In a de ned contribution pension plan households can (within
some limits) adjust their contributions and allocations and thus ensure that the Euler equation for
the asset return is satis ed. Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine whether households with
de ned contribution plans report their stockholdings and bondholdings in these plans when answering
the CEX questions. The percent of stockholders in the CEX is smaller than in other sources.4 This
may indicate that some households with stockholdings in de ned contribution plans do not report
these. This will lead them to be miscategorized as non-stockholders, a problem which may also occur
for bondholdings. Again, this should bias against nding di erences between assetholders and nonassetholders.
In addition to the split between stockholders and non-stockholders, and the split between bondholders and non-bondholders, the set of stockholders and the set of bondholders is split into three
layers of approximately equal size based on dollar amounts reported. Consistent with the de nition of
asset holding status this was done based on initial holdings. These were calculated as current holdings
minus the change in holdings during the current period. Transactions costs may be less important
for wealthier households, making it more likely that their Euler equations for stocks and bonds hold.
Furthermore, wealthier households typically hold better diversi ed equity portfolios. The return on
their equity portfolio is thus closer to the stock market index return used here. The bottom layer
of stockholders consists of those reporting initial stockholdings of $2-$3487 in real 1982-1984 dollars,
using the CPI to for total consumption of urban households to de ate the nominal values. The middle
and top layers are those with real initial stockholdings of $3487-$20264 and above $20264, respectively.
For interviews conducted from 1991 onwards, about 5 percent of households report holdings of stocks,
bonds and mutual funds of $1. I contacted the BLS to determine if this was a coding error, but they
were not sure how to interpret the $1 answers. Since all of the households reporting $1 assetholdings
answer the question comparing current holdings to holdings a year ago it is likely that they are holding
3 Around 600 households in my

nal sample of 34310 households report an increase in their holdings of stocks, bonds
and mutual funds but do not report their current holdings. Most of these households are likely to have held these assets
a year ago and I therefore put them in the stockholder category. Similarly around 400 households report an increase in
their holdings of U.S. savings bonds but do not report their current holdings. I classify these as bondholders.
A small number of households report an increase in their holdings of stocks, bonds or mutual funds or of U.S. savings
bonds larger than the value of the reported end of period holdings. I classify these as non-assetholders.
4 This is the case whether using the CEX weights or not. Consistent with data from other sources, the proportion of
stockholders is upward trending during the sample.

5

such assets. I therefore include them as stockholders when doing the stockholder-nonstockholder classi cation (assuming they satisfy the criteria outlined above). However, since the $1 households cannot
be classi ed by layer of stockholding, I exclude them in estimations based on layers of stockholders.
Thus the total number of stockholders used when de ning layers is smaller than the total amount of
stockholders when not doing this split. As for the three layers of bondholders, these were calculated
based on the sum of the holdings of stock, bonds, and mutual funds, and U.S. savings bonds, again
excluding households reporting $1 holdings of the rst category. The least wealthy third had holdings
below $967, while the middle third had holding between $967 and $9881, and the top third held more
than $9881 combined in these the asset categories.
2.1.2

Consumption measure and sample choice

The consumption measure used is nondurables and some services aggregated as carefully as possible
from the disaggregate CEX consumption categories to match the de nitions of nondurables and services in the NIPA. The service categories excluded are housing expenses (but not costs of household
operations), medical care costs, and education costs. This is done since these three types of costs
have a substantial durable component. Attanasio and Weber (1995) use a similar de nition of consumption. In leaving out durables, it is implicitly assumed that utility is separable in durables and
nondurables/services. Nominal consumption values are de ated by the BLS de ator for nondurables
for urban households.
As discussed in more detail below I use semiannual consumption growth rates, de ned as
C +6 +C +7 +C +8 +C +9 +C +10 +C +11
where m refers to month m. Following Zeldes (1989) extreme
C +C +1 +C +2 +C +3 +C +4 +C +5
outliers are dropped under the assumption that these re ect reporting or coding errors. Speci cally, I
drop observations for which the consumption growth ratio stated is less than 0.2 or above 5 (35 observations). Results are similar if I keep these observations. In addition, non-urban households (missing
for part of the sample) and households residing in student housing are dropped as are households
with incomplete income responses. Furthermore, I drop households who report a change in age of
household head between any two interviews di erent from 0 or 1 year. These exclusions are standard.
More drastically, I drop all consumption observations for households interviewed in 1980 and 1981,
since the quality of the CEX consumption data is lower for this period. For example, Figure A.1 in
Parker (1999) shows that the ratio of food consumption to income in the CEX is substantially higher
before 1982 and that a similar pattern is not present in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics or the
National Income and Product Accounts. Attanasio and Weber (1995) show that the share of food in
nondurable consumption was much higher in 1980 and 1981 than subsequently.
Finally, because the nancial information is reported in interview ve, and because I wish to calculate consumption growth values by household, households must be matched across quarters. Therefore,
m

m

m
m

m
m

m
m

m
m

m
m

6

I drop households for which any of interviews two to ve are missing. Matching households across
interviews creates problems around the beginning of 1986 since sample design and household identi cation numbers were changed, with no records being kept of which new household identi cation
numbers correspond to which old ones. I therefore exclude households who did not nish their interviews before the ID change. This implies that no observations are available for 7 months around the
ID change. This is taken into account when programming corrections for autocorrelation. The nal
sample consists of 34310 semiannual consumption growth observations.
Table 1 gives the average number of observations per month for the various household groups,
along with the mean and standard deviation of their semiannual average log consumption growth (not
annualized). The average number of observations for stockholders per month is 47, while the average
number of observations for non-stockholders is 170. There are on average 68 bondholders and 148 nonbondholders per month. Data are also shown for a restricted sample consisting of single individual
households only. This sample has substantially fewer observations. Therefore it is not possible to
consider layers of stockholders and bondholders in this case. The summary statistics on consumption
in Table 1 show that log consumption growth is higher for stockholders and bondholders than for
non-stockholders and non-bondholders.
2.1.3

Asset returns and other data used

Monthly NYSE value weighted returns are used as the stock return measure and monthly T-bill returns
as the measure of nominally riskless returns. The CPI for total consumption of urban households is
used to calculate real returns. Semiannual returns are aggregated up from the real monthly returns.
As instruments for the log stock return and the log T-bill return I use the log dividend price ratio,
the lagged log real value weighted NYSE return, the lagged log real T-bill return, the government
bond horizon premium, and the corporate bond default premium (in addition to seasonal dummies
and family size controls). The choice of instruments is discussed further below. The dividend price
ratio, the bond horizon premium and the bond default premium are based on data from Ibbotson
(1997). The dividend price ratio used is the ratio of dividends over the previous
12govt.months
to the
long
term
bonds
1+R
current price (the S&P500 Index). The bond horizon premium is de ned as 1+
; where
Rshort term govt. bonds
'long term' means 20 years to maturity and long
'short
term' means approximately 1 month to maturity.
term corp. bonds
1+
R
The bond default premium is de ned as 1+Rlong term govt. bonds where long term again means 20 years to
maturity. The monthly values for the bond horizon and default premia are aggregated multiplicatively
to semiannual values.
t

t

t

t

7

2.2
2.2.1

Econometric issues
Timing

The fact that households are interviewed every three months for a year, and in each interview report
consumption for the previous quarter leaves open a choice of data frequency for de ning consumption
growth rates. I use semiannual consumption growth rates as de ned above, and thus have one consumption growth observation per household interviewed. The rst motivation for using semiannual
rather than quarterly consumption growth rates, is that households may not reoptimize and optimally
adjust their consumption every quarter (or even if so, may not do it close to the interview dates). In the
context of risk aversion estimation, Lynch (1996), Daniel and Marshall (1997) and Gabaix and Laibson (2001) discuss how this leads to a downward biased prediction for the equity premium, and thus
by implication an upward biased risk aversion estimate, when individual consumption is aggregated
across households. Using consumption observations further apart, on average 6 months for semiannual
consumption growth rates, alleviates the problem. A second argument in favor of longer time horizons
is measurement error. If measurement errors have an additive component, this will tend to cancel
over longer periods. Furthermore, measurement errors may be negatively correlated with the true
consumption value. Daniel and Marshall (1997) suggest that measurement errors that are negatively
correlated with the true value can occur if consumption innovations are only gradually incorporated
into reported consumption over time. This will bias the covariance of consumption growth rates and
asset returns downward, but less so if the consumption observations are further apart. Consistent
with the concerns given, in my exercise results based on quarterly data were much weaker than those
based on semiannual data. Results based on the change from rst interview quarterly consumption
to last interview quarterly consumption were quite similar to those based on semiannual consumption
growth rates.
Using semiannual consumption growth rates raises the issue of precisely which asset return to use.
For semiannual data, is the relevant asset return (1 + Rm) (1 + Rm+1) ::: (1 + Rm+5 ) or (1 + Rm+6 )
(1 + Rm+7 ) ::: (1 + Rm+11 ) or something in between? Suppose consumers sell their assets (stocks or
bonds) at the beginning of the month in which they would like to consume. Then shifting consumption
from period m to m + 6 would imply a gross return of (1 + Rm ) (1 + Rm+1 ) ::::: (1 + Rm+5 ) ; whereas
shifting consumption from period m + 5 to m + 11 would yield a return of (1 + Rm+5 ) (1 + Rm+6) :::
(1 + Rm+10 ) : Thus the relevant asset return would be a weighted average of all of
(1 + Rm ) ; (1 + Rm+1 ) ; :::; (1 + Rm+10 ) : For simplicity I use the middle six months of relevant interest
rates (1 + Rm+2 )(1 + Rm+3 ) ::: (1 + Rm+7 ) : Results were similar when using (1 + Rm+3) (1 + Rm+4 ) :::
(1 + Rm+8 ).
While each household is interviewed three months apart, the interviews are spread out over the
8

quarter implying that there will be households interviewed in each month of the sample. Thus the
data frequency is monthly. This implies that consumption growth observations for adjacent months
will involve partially overlapping time periods and thus partially overlapping expectational errors. As
a consequence the error term in the log-linearized model will have an MA(5) component when using
semiannual consumption growth observations.
Autocorrelation raises the question of which lags of interest rates and other variables are valid
instruments. The error term has an expectational error component and a measurement error component. Since asset returns and other aggregate nancial variables are likely to be uncorrelated with
the measurement error component of the error term, autocorrelation due to measurement error does
not invalidate lags of asset returns or other aggregate nancial variables as instruments. The autocorrelation in the error term due to overlapping expectational errors imply that asset return lags six
and further back are valid instruments. Due to the fact that Rm and Rm+1 may be partly relevant as
right hand side variables as discussed above, the asset return instruments used are lagged further so
that there is no overlap. Thus (1 + Rm 6 )(1 + Rm 5 ) ::::: (1 + Rm 1) is used as instrument. As for
the speci c asset returns used, I will return to when stock returns and T-bills returns are used when
discussing the results. Similar considerations lead to using the dividend price ratio at the beginning
of period m as an instrument, as well as the bond horizon premium and bond default premium over
the period m 6 to m 1:
2.2.2

Measurement error

The conditions on measurement error under which consistent estimates of the EIS can be obtained
based on estimation of Euler equations are quite strict. The measurement error in individual consumption must be multiplicative and independent of the true consumption level and asset returns.
This is the case whether the Euler equations are log-linearized or not. For simplicity the argument
below therefore uses the nonlinear Euler equations.
To be speci c, suppose rst that we have a long time series of consumption observations for an
agent h and wish to test the CCAPM. Let Cth; be the true consumption of household h in period t
and assume observed consumption is given by Cth = Cth;"ht ; where "ht is the measurement error. Under
CRRA utility with risk aversion parameter (= 1=EIS ), the true Euler equation for household h and
asset i is
"

Et

Cth;+1
Cth;

!

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1:

9

(3)

^

However, our estimates and ^ will be based on sample equivalents of
"

Et

Cth+1
Cth

!

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1 , Et

"

Cth;+1 "ht+1
Cth;"ht

!

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1:

(4)

As an example, in the case of GMM estimation with two asset returns and two instruments, one of
^
which is a column of ones, the estimates and ^ satisfy the sample equivalents of the above equation
with equality. If "ht+1 and "ht are conditionally independent of Cth+1; Cth; and Ri;t (and the non-trivial
instrument used); (4) implies
"

Et
"

"ht+1
"ht

!

#

"

Et

Cth;+1
Cth;

!

#

(1 + Ri;t) = 1:

(5)

#



is constant over time as would be the case with i.i.d. measurement errors, it follows
If Et
that the estimator of will be inconsistent by this factor, whereas will be consistently estimated.
^

If measurement
errors
are
i.i.d.
lognormal,
ln
"ht  N "; "2 8t; will be inconsistent by the factor
#
"

" +1
= exp 2 "2  :5
Et
"
If we do not have a long time series of consumption for each agent and instead average marginal
rates of substitution over consumers within each period, it can be shown that as the number of
households in the cross-section at each date goes to in nity, is still consistently estimated and the
inconsistency in is as given above. To see this, suppose that at least two observations are available
for each household such that Cth+1 =Cth can be calculated. When aggregating the marginal rates of
substitution cross-sectionally, using a time series of cross-sections of Cth+1 =Cth observations, b and b
will be based on the sample equivalents of
"ht+1
"h
t

h
t
h
t

"

Et

"

1

H

h

Cth+1
Cth

!

#

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1 , Et

"

1

H

"
h

Cth;+1 "ht+1
Cth;"ht

!

#

#

(1 + Ri;t) = 1: (6)

or as H ! 1
"

Et

"

Eh

Cth+1
Cth

!

#

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1 , Et

"

"

Eh

Cth;+1 "ht+1
Cth; "ht

!

#

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1:

(7)

Under the independence assumptions stated above between measurement errors, true consumption
5 Similarly, ln
d in the log-linearized model will be inconsistent by the quantity 2 "2 . However, since the intercept in
the log-linearized model includes higher order moments it is not possible to accurately estimate from this intercept
even in the absense of measurement error.

10

and asset returns, and assuming i.i.d. log normal measurement errors across households, this implies
"

Et

"

Eh

exp

Cth;+1
Cth;
2

!

2  Et
"

#

"

Eh
"

"

Eh

"ht+1
"ht

Cth;+1
Cth;

!

#

!

#

#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1 ,
#

(1 + Ri;t ) = 1:

(8)

^

Thus as H ! 1 (and T ! 1), b will again be consistent and will be inconsistent by the same
factor as above. Since this argument for consistency of b even in the presence of measurement error
relies on H ! 1 and the number of observations in the cross-section is small in some of the cases
considered, I will also consider a 'median household approach' which is likely to be more robust to
small numbers of households in the cross-sections.6
2.2.3

Family size and seasonality controls

Following a series of papers in the consumption literature I assume that family size enters the utility
function multiplicatively, and thus include ln(familiy size) in the log-linearized Euler equations.
ln(familiy size) is de ned as the log average family size in the third and fourth interview minus the
log average family size in the rst and second interview. It is, however, not clear that such a simple
correction accurately captures family size e ects. The literature on equivalence scales considers this
issue in detail. Here, I choose to repeat the estimations using households consisting of only a single
individual in both periods to see if this a ects the results. Single individual households may also face
a much simpler optimization problem making it easier to detect the relation between consumption
growth and stock and/or T-bill returns in the microdata.
I assume that seasonality also enters as a multiplicative factor in the utility function, such that in
the CRRA case, U (Cm + Cm+1 + Cm+2 + Cm+3 + Cm+4 + Cm+5)
= 1 1 ((Cm + Cm+1 + Cm+2 + Cm+3 + Cm+4 + Cm+5 ) Sm )1 ; where Cm is consumption per adult
equivalent of the household in month m and Sm is the seasonal factor (thus Sm takes on one of 12
di erent values S1;...; S12 ). Under this assumption seasonal adjustment by dummies is valid in the
log-linearized model.
6 An argument similar to the one outlined in this section in the CRRA utility case can be given for Epstein-Zin utility.

In that case the EIS and the coeÆcient of relative risk aversion can be estimated consistently using standard GMM
methods, but the discount factor cannot.
An alternative way to see that measurement error does not prevent consistent estimation of the EIS in either the
CRRA or the Epstein-Zin case is to consider the log-linearized Euler equation stated below in which log consumption
growth is a left hand side variable and lagged consumption growth rates are not used as instruments.

11

2.2.4

Estimation method

As discussed in the introduction I estimate log-linearized Euler equations using standard estimation
techniques. To avoid the complicated semiannual notation, use t to denote six months long periods
and refer to the above sections for the precise de nitions of semiannual consumption growth rates and
family size changes as well as the timing of the asset returns. As earlier I use h to denote a given
household.
Since I only have one consumption growth observation per household I use the simple cohort
technique, discussed in the above section on measurement error, in which the consumption growth
observation for a given period is the cross-sectional average of the consumption growth observations
for households of a given type in the sample for that period. Notice that as long as one consumption
growth observation is available per household
it is still possible to avoid aggregation problems, since

C
+1
one can average ln Cth+1 = ln C across households as opposed to using the log of the ratio of
the household consumption averages.7
The log-linearized conditional Euler equations are then, with stockholders' Euler equation for the
stock return as an example
h
t
h
t

1

s

Ht
X

Hts h=1

ln C

h;s
t+1

H
X
1
s
s
s
s
=  ln(1 + Rs;t) + Æ1 D1 + Æ2 D2 + ::: + Æ12 D12 + H s ln(family size)h;s
t+1 + ut+1
s
t

t h=1

(9)

where  denotes the EIS; D1 ; :::; D12 are seasonal dummies, Rs denotes the net stock return, and Hts
denotes the number of stockholders in the cross-section at date t.
This equation is valid under CRRA preferences as well as under Epstein-Zin utility. In the CRRA
case, Æis is a function of and of the conditional variances and covariances of the log gross stock return
and log consumption growth in the CRRA case. In the Epstein-Zin case Æis includes additional terms
involving the variance of and conditional covariances with the return on the total portfolio of assets
held by the agents. See again Attanasio and Weber (1989) for the derivations of the log-linearized
Euler equation in the Epstein-Zin case. The error term ut includes the expectational errors for log
consumption growth and log stock returns and the measurement error in log consumption growth.
If the conditional variances and covariances in Æis are not constant, the stochastic components enter
the error term. This does not cause problems for the estimation as long as these components are
7 While theoretically important this distinction turns out not to matter much in the CEX data, most likely due to
substantial measurement error in the consumption data. Brav, Constantinides and Geczy (1999) conclude that tests of
the representative agent (complete insurance) model against the nonrepresentative agent (incomplete insurance) model
have very low power. Their results are based on a Monte Carlo simulation designed to capture the main features of the
CEX data set.

12

uncorrelated with the instruments used.
The estimation method used is linear GMM estimation, or in other words linear instrumental
variables estimation modi ed to account for autocorrelated error terms of the MA(5) form as well as
for heteroscedasticity of arbitrary form. Heteroscedasticity is likely to be present because of a varying
number of observations per quarter. Instrumental variables estimation is used rather than OLS because
of endogeneity of asset returns due to the expectational error being included in the error term. For
stockholders (also assumed to be bondholders according to my classi cation), the Euler equations for
the stock and T-bill returns are also estimated jointly, again using linear GMM estimation. Joint
estimation is used to gain eÆciency from exploiting cross-equation correlation in error terms caused
by correlated expectational errors. Furthermore, it makes it possible to impose identical values for 
to determine if this leads to rejection of the model according to overidenti cation tests as Hansen and
Singleton (1983) showed to be the case in aggregate US data. In the joint estimation, the coeÆcients on
the seasonal dummies are allowed to di er for the stock and the bond equation since this is implied by
the model when the two returns have di erent variances or di erent covariances with log consumption
growth.
2.3

Results and discussion

The results of the instrumental variables estimations of the log-linearized model in equation (10)
are shown in Tables 2-4. Each table shows estimates of  for three sets of estimations corresponding to three di erent sets of instruments. All instrument sets include 12 seasonal dummies and
ln(family size) : In addition instrument set 1 includes the log dividend price ratio. Instrument set
2 includes the log dividend price ratio, the lagged log real stock return and the lagged log real T-bill
return. Instrument set 3 includes the log dividend price ratio, the bond horizon premium and the bond
default premium. See section 2.2.1 for the precise timing of these variables. The dividend price ratio
is well known to be among the best predictors of real stock returns and is also a good predictor of the
T-bill return for the time period considered here. As for instrument set 2, many previous studies have
used lagged asset returns as instruments. For this time period, the contemporaneous dividend-price
ratio and the T-bill returns are highly correlated and results based instrument set 2 are fairly similar
if the log dividend-price ratio is excluded. The inclusion of the bond horizon premium and the bond
default premium is motivated by the ndings of Fama and French (1989) that these have predictive
power for stock returns. Leaving out the family size variable, the R2 from regressing the log real stock
return on the variables in the three instrument sets is 0.117, 0.143, and 0.148 for semiannual data.
The corresponding R2 values for the log real T-bill return are 0.673, 0.674, and 0.744.
While other variables in the information set should also be uncorrelated with the error terms in
the log-linearized Euler equations according to economic theory, the properties of the estimators may
13

deteriorate if weak instruments are included. It is known that the 2SLS estimator tends to be biased
towards the biased and inconsistent OLS estimator. If the explanatory power of the rst stage is xed
while more instruments are added, the bias becomes progressively worse (see Anderson and Sawa
(1979)). This motivates the use of small sets of instruments. Adding in more instruments tended to
push the estimates of the EIS closer to 0 for all groups.
The results of the estimations are favorable to the limited participation theory. The top half of
Table 2 shows the estimation results for the Euler equation for the stock return. For instrument set
1, the EIS is estimated to be 0.299 for stockholders. The estimate is signi cant at the 5 percent level.
The separate estimations for the three layers of stockholders, show that the relatively high value of
the EIS for stockholders is driven by a higher estimate for the richest layer of stockholders. One
interpretation is that wealthier stockholders have a higher elasticity of substitution. Alternatively, it
is possible that households with small equity stakes do not satisfy the Euler equation for the stock
market index return to a reasonable approximation (e.g. due to transactions costs or poorly diversi ed
equity portfolios). For non-stockholders, the estimate of the EIS is close to zero. A Wald test rejects
that the EIS is the same for stockholders and non-stockholders at the 10 percent level. When adding
more instruments, using instrument set 2 and 3, the results remain similar.
The estimation results for the Euler equation for the T-bill return are shown in the bottom half
of Table 2. They show the same patterns as the results based on the stock return with a positive
and signi cant estimate of the EIS around 0.8 for bondholders and a small, insigni cant estimate for
non-bondholders. Again, the EIS is estimated to be larger, around 1.6, for the top layer of bondholders.
The coeÆcients on ln(family size) (not shown) further supports the hypothesis that the Euler
equations for the stock return and the T-bill return hold for households who own the asset in question,
but not for others. For those who hold the asset, the coeÆcient on ln(family size) is typically
signi cantly di erent from zero with a point estimate around 0.6, while change in log family size has
a smaller and insigni cant e ect in the Euler equations for households who do not hold the asset.
An important negative nding based on the instrumental variables estimations in Table 2 is that
there is no tendency for 2 tests of overidentifying restrictions to reject for non-stockholders and nonbondholders but not for stockholder and bondholders as would be expected. For instrument set 2
the overidentifying restrictions are not rejected for stockholders and are rejected for non-stockholders
at the 10 percent level for both asset returns, but the opposite is the case for instrument set 3. To
determine the e ects of restricting the EIS to be the same across the Euler equations for stocks and
T-bills for a given group of households, Table 3 shows the joint estimation of the two Euler equations
for the stockholder non-stockholder distinction. Under my categorizations all stockholders are also
categorized as bondholders and the tests of overidenti cation should reject for non-stockholders but
not for stockholders. As the table shows, the tests of overidentifying restrictions are now rejected
14

for both stockholders and non-stockholders. The fact that the overidentifying restrictions are now
consistently rejected even for stockholders is consistent with the previous results that EIS estimates
for stockholders (around 0.3) are lower than EIS estimates for bondholders (around 0.8), despite the
fact that most households in these two categories are the same according to my classi cations. It may
be the case that the much lower power of the instruments for predicting the real stock return lead to
substantial small sample bias of the instrumental variables estimator.
In addition to considering di erent instrument sets, several other robustness check were done.
Firstly, the estimations were performed for households consisting of one individual only. The results,
included in the tables, show even larger di erences between stockholders and non-stockholders and
between bondholders and non-bondholders. In my view, this most likely re ect the fact that these
households face much simpler optimization problems, making it easier to detect the relation between
consumption growth and asset returns. Secondly, I repeated the estimations assuming a representative agent within the set of stockholders and within the set of non-stockholders. The results (not
shown) were similar. As mentioned that was to be expected given the simulation results of Brav,
Constantinides and Geczy (1999) regarding the possibility to di erentiate between the representative
agent (complete insurance) model against the nonrepresentative agent (incomplete insurance) using
CEX data. Thirdly, I considered estimators that are invariant to whether consumption growth is
regressed on asset returns or the other way around. For instrument set 1 this is not an issue since
the model is just identi ed (when estimating one Euler equation at a time) and thus leads to the
same estimate of the EIS regardless of whether consumption growth or the interest rate is used as
right hand side variable. For instrument set 2 and 3, the continuously updated GMM estimator of
Hansen, Heaton, and Yaron (1996) was diÆcult to make converge and lead to results very sensitive
to the exact speci cation of the model. Instead, a simple LIML estimation (without corrections for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation) was performed, with results similar to those reported in Table
2 for each of the two Euler equations. Finally, I considered an alternative to taking cross-sectional
averages over stockholders and non-stockholders which should be more robust to measurement error
in consumption in the case of a relatively small number of households in the cross-section. If the
Euler equation for a given asset return holds for each assetholder, one can use the stochastic discount
factor based on the consumption of any of the assetholders to estimate it. As an alternative to the
time series of cross-sectional averages of log consumption growth rates, I therefore constructed a times
series in which the consumption growth rate for a given period for a given group of households was
the median consumption growth rate for that period for that group of households. The corresponding
time series of observations of ln(family size) for this particular set of households was constructed as
well. Results corresponding to those in Table 2 are shown in Table 4. The results again con rm the
importance of distinguishing between assetholders and non-assetholders. The estimates of the EIS for
15

stockholders and for bondholders are larger than before, further supporting the limited participation
hypothesis. The Euler equation for the stock return lead to EIS estimates around 0.4 for stockholders
(larger for single stockholders), while the Euler equation for the T-bill return result in EIS estimates
around 1 for bondholders.
Overall, the limited participation hypothesis is supported by the di erences in coeÆcient estimates
across stockholders and non-stockholders and across bondholders and non-bondholders, but not by
the tests of overidentifying restrictions. The baseline results are robust to a variety of changes to the
speci cation and estimation method. As discussed earlier, the more important speci cation choice is
the use of semiannual data rather than higher frequency consumption growth rates.
It should be pointed out that my estimations of the EIS are based on pre-tax returns since it
is not possible to calculate accurate household-speci c tax rates for capital income in the CEX.8
It is however possible to get an idea of the bias taxes may introduce in EIS estimates. Suppose
the tax rate on the total net return (income return plus capital gains) to asset i is i. Then the
correct log return to holding asset i from t to t + 1 is ln(1 + (1 i) Rit ) ; which uctuates less than
ln(1 + Rit ). Thus ignoring taxes leads to a downward biased estimate of the EIS since a smaller value
is needed to 'translate' the too large uctuations in ln(1 + Rit) into consumption growth changes.
Using the approximation ln(1 + x) ' x the right hand side variable should be ln(1 + (1 i) Rit) '
(1 i) Rit but is ln(1 + Rit ) ' Rit : Thus I am approximately estimating (1 i) , not . This
further strengthens the case that the EIS is not zero for stockholders and bondholders.
In comparison to the literature it is relevant to discuss EIS estimates for households who hold
savings accounts but no stocks, bonds or mutual funds or U.S. savings bonds. The majority of
households (around two thirds in the CEX whether weighting households using the CEX weights
or not) have positive holdings in savings accounts. Since the return on such assets is fairly highly
correlated with the T-bill return one may have expected results based on aggregate consumption to
lead to signi cantly positive estimates of the EIS. In the CEX, estimates of the EIS based on the Tbill return are still small, around 0.15, for households with savings account holdings who do not hold
stocks, bonds, mutual funds or U.S. savings bonds. They are around 0.4 but with a standard error
around 0.7 when using the real return on savings accounts, calculated based on a series of passbook
savings account returns obtained from the Federal Reserve Board. For both return series, the estimates
for this group of households are somewhat sensitive to instrument choice. This is true even for the
wealthiest third of households with positive savings but no stocks, bonds or mutual funds or U.S.
8 As discussed earlier, it cannot be determined whether households reporting positive holdings of the category stock,
bonds or mutual funds hold both stocks or bonds or only one of these types of assets. When classifying households I
assumed they hold both, but without speci c information about whether this is correct, as well as dates of purchase,
accurate household level tax adjustments are infeasible.

16

savings bonds. One possibility is that most households with only savings (and typically also checking)
account holdings have too little nancial wealth for it to be optimal to do sophisticated intertemporal
optimization. An other possibility is that households with small savings account holdings (and no
stocks etc.) may in reality be net borrowers, or be borrowing constrained, holding just a small amount
of assets in a savings account for precautionary purposes. As mentioned in the introduction, the
ndings of Gross and Souleles (2001) suggest that once a more appropriate interest rate is used for
borrowers (in their case the credit card rate), borrowing and thus consumption growth is sensitive to
the interest rate suggesting a non-zero EIS.
3

Conclusion

The paper suggests that accounting for limited asset market participation is important for estimation of
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Di erences in the estimates of the EIS between assetholders
and non-assetholders are large and statistically signi cant. This is the case whether estimating the EIS
based on the Euler equation for the NYSE stock index return and distinguishing between stockholders
and non-stockholders as best possible or estimating the EIS based on the Euler equation for T-bills and
distinguishing between bondholders and non-bondholders. Estimates of the EIS are around 0.3-0.4
for stockholders and 0.8-1 for bondholders, and are larger for households with larger asset holdings
within these two groups.
I do not attempt here to explain why some households chose corner solutions for stocks and/or
bonds. I have argued elsewhere (Vissing-Jrgensen (2000)) that information costs work as entry costs
and per period market participation costs making it suboptimal for households with low or moderate
nancial wealth to enter these markets.

17

References

Anderson, T. W., and T. Sawa. "Evaluation of the Distribution Function of the Two-Stage Least
Squares Estimate." Econometrica 47 (January 1979): 163-182.
Attanasio, O. P., J. Banks, and S. Tanner. "Asset Holding and Consumption Volatility."
Journal of Political Economy, this issue.
Attanasio, O. P., and M. Browning. "Consumption over the Life Cycle and over the Business Cycle." American Economic Review 85 (December 1995): 1118-1137.
Attanasio, O. P., P. K. Goldberg, and E. Kyriazidou. "Credit Constraints in the Market
for Consumer Durables: Evidence from Micro Data on Car Loans." NBER Working paper, No.
7694, 2000.
Attanasio, O. P. and G. Weber. "Intertemporal Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Euler
Equation for Consumption.", Economic Journal 99 (No. 395, 1989): 59-73.
Attanasio, O. P. and G. Weber. "Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate and Aggregation." Review of Economic Studies 60 (July 1993): 631-649.
Attanasio, O. P. and G. Weber. "Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey." Journal of Political Economy
103 (December 1995): 1121-1157.
Brav, A. and C. Geczy. "An Empirical Resurrection of the Simple Consumption CAPM
with Power Utility." Working paper, University of Chicago, 1996.
Brav, A., G. M. Constantinides, and C. Gezcy. "Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers and Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence." Working paper, University of Chicago,
1999.
Daniel, K., and D. Marshall. "The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle at Long Horizons." Macroeconomic Dynamics 1 (No. 2, 1997): 452-484.
18

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French. "Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks
and Bonds." Journal of Financial Economics 25 (1989): 23-49.
Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson, 2001, "The 6D bias and the Equity Premium Puzzle." Forthcoming in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2001.
Gross, D. B., and N. S. Souleles. "Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data." Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2001.
Hall, R. E. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption."
96 (April 1998): 339-357.

Journal of Political Economy

Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, and A. Yaron. "Finite-Sample Properties of Some Alternative
GMM Estimators." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (July 1996): 262-280.
Hansen, L. P., and K. J. Singleton. "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns." Journal of Political Economy 91 (April 1983): 249-65.
Ibbotson Associates.
Associates, 1997.

Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and In ation 1997 Yearbook.

Chicago: Ibbotson

Jones, L. E., R. Manuelli, and H. Siu. "Growth and Business Cycles." NBER Working
Paper No. 7633, 2000.
Lynch, A. W. "Decision Frequency and Synchronization Across Agents: Implications for
Aggregate Consumption and Equity Return." Journal of Finance 51, (September 1996): 14791497.
Mankiw, N.G. and S. Zeldes, 1991, "The Consumption of Stockholders and Nonstockholders," Journal of Financial Economics 29 (March 1991): 97-112.
Parker, J. A. "Spendthrift in America? On two Decades of Decline in the U.S. Savings
Rate." NBER Macroeconomics Annual (1999): 317-370.
19

Vissing-Jrgensen, A. "Limited Stock Market Participation and the Equity Premium Puzzle." Working paper, University of Chicago, 1999.
Vissing-Jrgensen, A. "Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice heterogeneity: Non nancial income and participation cost structures." Working paper, University of
Chicago, 2000.
Zeldes, S. P. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation."
nal of Political Economy, 97 (April 1989): 305-346.

Jour-

Table 1: Summary statistics, CEX data, 1982-1996
Data

Mean number
Mean of
Standard deviation
of observations
Hh=1  ln Cth+1 of Hh=1  ln Cth+1
per month
over the sample over the sample
Semiannual,
All
217
0.002
0.024
all household sizes
Stockholders
47
0.014
0.041
Non-stockholders
170
-0.001
0.028
Bottom stockholder layer
11
0.022
0.088
Middle stockholder layer
11
0.002
0.101
Top stockholder layer
11
0.014
0.102
Bondholders
68
0.010
0.034
Non-bondholders
148
-0.001
0.030
Bottom bondholder layer
17
0.005
0.069
Middle bondholder layer
17
0.012
0.072
Top bondholder layer
17
0.008
0.073
Semiannual,
All
51
-0.001
0.045
single individual
households
Stockholders
10
0.009
0.098
Nonstockholders
41
-0.003
0.052
Bondholders
13
0.002
0.085
Non-bondholders
39
-0.002
0.054
Note: Hh=1  ln Ct+1 is seasonally adjusted using seasonal dummies. The seasonally adjusted value is the sample
mean of the series plus the residual from a regression on 12 dummies.
t

Group

t

t

Table 2: GMM estimation of log linearized Euler equations. Real T-bill return and real
value weighted NYSE return, separate estimations. CEX, 1982-1996. Semiannual
data.
Instrument set 1

b

Std.

Instrument set 2

OID test,
df=2, p-value

b

(0.186)
(0.274)
(0.325)
p-value
0.071
0.143

0.066 (0.062)
0.281 (0.114)
0.017 (0.070)
-0.054 (0.163)
0.350 (0.207)
0.417 (0.235)
W
4.340
2.378

0.086
0.260
0.048
0.570
0.547
0.203
p-value
0.037
0.123

0.068
0.200
0.049
0.052
0.173
0.292

(0.172)
(0.496)
(0.143)
p-value
0.188

-0.008 (0.106)
0.323 (0.264)
-0.115 (0.137)
W
1.958

(0.232)

0.362
0.839
0.087
0.798
0.336
1.672

b

Std.

Euler equation for stocks
All household sizes

All
0.098
Stockholders
0.299
Non-stockholders
0.057
Bottom layer
0.046
Middle layer
0.175
Top layer
0.486
Wald test for equal 
W
Non-stockholders vs. stockholders 3.255
Non-stockholders vs. top layer 2.146
Single individual households

All
Stockholders
Non-stockholders
Wald test for equal 
Non-stockholders vs. stockholders

0.202
0.698
0.077
W
1.733

(0.072)

(0.146)
(0.079)

Instrument set 3

Std.

OID test,
df=2, p-value

(0.059)
(0.091)
(0.070)
(0.158)
(0.261)
(0.188)
W
3.296
2.941

0.314
0.018
0.568
0.828
0.027
0.027
p-value
0.069
0.086

0.025
0.005
0.071
p-value
0.162

0.261 (0.139)
0.681 (0.326)
0.160 (0.123)
W
3.866

0.439
0.969
0.250
p-value
0.049

0.097
0.215
0.024
0.492
0.476
0.356
p-value
0.074
0.003

0.264
0.783
0.005
0.726
0.277
1.530

0.143
0.147
0.382
0.244
0.627
0.067
p-value
0.042
0.005

Euler equation for T-bill
All household sizes

All
Bondholders
Non-bondholders
Bottom layer
Middle layer
Top layer
Wald test for equal 
Non-bondholders vs. bondholders
Non-bondholders vs. top layer
Single individual households

0.372

0.932
0.105

0.986
0.287
1.648
W
4.029
8.055

(0.368)
(0.270)

(0.662)
(0.550)
(0.515)
p-value
0.045
0.005

(0.225)
(0.360)
(0.257)
(0.612)
(0.544)
(0.505)
W
3.192
8.905

(0.220)
(0.353)
(0.244)
(0.580)
(0.523)
(0.505)
W
4.127
7.871

All
0.681 (0.456) 0.524 (0.450) 0.032 0.282 (0.411)
0.053
Bondholders
2.624 (0.885) 2.759 (0.880) 0.163 1.617 (0.824)
0.007
Non-bondholders
0.048 (0.479) -0.028 (0.475) 0.039 -0.105 (0.460)
0.103
Wald test for equal 
W
p-value
W
p-value
W
p-value
Non-bondholders vs. bondholders 8.371
0.004
7.527
0.006
4.722
0.030
Note: 12 monthly dummies included as explanatory variables and instruments. The estimations for all household sizes
furthermore include  ln(family size) as explanatory variable and instrument. In addition the instrument sets include
the following variables. Instrument set 1: Log dividend price ratio. Instrument set 2: Log dividend price ratio, lagged
log real value weighted NYSE return, lagged log real T-bill return. Instrument set 3: Log dividend price ratio, default
premium, bond horizon premium.

Table 3: GMM estimation of log linearized Euler equations. Real T-bill return and real
value weighted NYSE return, joint estimations. CEX, 1982-1996. Semiannual
data.
Instrument set 1

b

All household sizes

All
Stockholders
Non-stockholders
Bottom layer
Middle layer
Top layer
Wald test for equal 
Non-stockholders vs.
stockholders
Non-stockholders vs.
top layer of stockholders
Single individual households

0.080

0.442
0.013

0.006
0.068
0.700
W
9.228
3.890

Instrument set 2

Instrument set 3

Std. OID test, b Std. OID test, b Std.
df=1,
df=5,
p-value
p-value
(0.077) 0.025 0.046 (0.058) 0.036 0.026 (0.045)
(0.144)
0.022 0.404 (0.114) 0.071 0.261 (0.079)
(0.057)
0.036 0.003 (0.022) 0.041 0.003 (0.033)
(0.054) 0.141 0.003 (0.021) 0.372 0.007 (0.026)
(0.173) 0.175 0.242 (0.203) 0.218 0.048 (0.040)
(0.354) 0.020 0.422 (0.260) 0.190 0.324 (0.179)
p-value
W p-value
W p-value
0.002
12.886 0.0003
13.677 0.0002
0.049
2.127 0.145
4.211 0.040

OID test,
df=5,
p-value
0.016
0.011
0.028
0.078
0.041
0.004

All
0.187 (0.192) 0.055 0.024 (0.041) 0.036 0.141 (0.120)
0.062
Stockholders
1.108 (0.527) 0.028 0.378 (0.306) 0.023 0.568 (0.278)
0.043
Non-stockholders
0.018 (0.089) 0.114 -0.028 (0.050) 0.068 0.050 (0.074)
0.079
Wald test for equal 
W p-value
W p-value
W p-value
Non-stockholders vs.
4.161* 0.041
1.716* 0.190
3.250* 0.071
stockholders
Note: 12 monthly dummies included as explanatory variables and instruments. The estimations for all household sizes
furthermore include  ln(family size) as explanatory variable and instrument. In addition the instrument sets include
the following variables. Instrument set 1: Log dividend price ratio. Instrument set 2: Log dividend price ratio, lagged
log real value weighted NYSE return, lagged log real T-bill return. Instrument set 3: Log dividend price ratio, default
premium, bond horizon premium. The Wald tests denoted by an asterics do not allow for correlation of the error terms
across the Euler equations for stock sand T-bills. Allowing for this lead to one of the matrices involved not being positive
de nite.

Table 4: GMM estimation of log linearized Euler equations. Real T-bill return and real
value weighted NYSE return, separate estimations. CEX, 1982-1996. Semiannual
data. Median household approach.
Instrument set 1

b

Std.

b

Instrument set 2

Std.

Euler equation for stocks
All household sizes

All
Stockholders
Non-stockholders
Bottom layer
Middle layer
Top layer
Wald test for equal 
Non-stockholders vs. stockholders
Non-stockholders vs. top layer
Single individual households

All
Stockholders
Non-stockholders
Wald test for equal 
Non-stockholders vs. stockholders

0.125

(0.081)

b

Instrument set 3

Std.

OID test,
df=2, p-value

(0.231)
(0.340)
(0.798)
p-value
0.092
0.194

0.069 (0.067)
0.451 (0.175)
-0.014 (0.073)
0.082 (0.191)
0.067 (0.233)
0.933 (0.538)
W
4.900
2.331

0.016
0.147
0.073
0.320
0.097
0.019
p-value
0.027
0.127

0.138 (0.064)
0.287 (0.105)
0.113 (0.074)
-0.016 (0.201)
0.228 (0.278)
0.706 (0.367)
W
4.203
4.116

0.691
0.014
0.352
0.408
0.006
0.886
p-value
0.040
0.042

(0.257)
(0.897)
(0.206)
p-value
0.245

0.168 (0.145)
1.030 (0.622)
0.044 (0.127)
W
3.853

0.028
0.090
0.058
p-value
0.050

0.347 (0.182)
0.874 (0.479)
0.268 (0.153)
W
3.438

0.877
0.661
0.624
p-value
0.064

(0.270)

0.413 (0.262)
1.140 (0.472)
-0.101 (0.283)
1.162 (0.677)
0.255 (0.689)
2.877 (0.565)
W
8.733
24.930

0.057
0.189
0.052
0.060
0.295
0.346
p-value
0.003
0.000

0.231 (0.263)
0.870 (0.425)
-0.168 (0.268)
1.214 (0.591)
0.182 (0.660)
2.390 (0.575)
W
7.077
20.094

0.010
0.047
0.153
0.700
0.075
0.017
p-value
0.008
0.000

0.437
0.055

(0.229)
(0.081)

0.348
1.152
0.238
W
1.350

0.054
-0.082
1.072
W
2.833
1.687

OID test,
df=2, p-value

Euler equation for T-bill
All household sizes

All
Bondholders
Non-bondholders
Bottom layer
Middle layer
Top layer
Wald test for equal 
Non-bondholders vs. bondholders
Non-bondholders vs. top layer
Single individual households

0.420

1.380
-0.011

1.345
0.267
2.838
W
7.476
22.514

(0.507)
(0.290)

(0.712)
(0.691)
(0.585)
p-value
0.006
0.000

All
1.174 (0.504) 1.018 (0.490) 0.155 0.661 (0.433)
0.073
Bondholders
2.625 (0.801) 2.727 (0.794) 0.253 2.256 (0.726)
0.032
Non-bondholders
0.740 (0.617) 0.589 (0.610) 0.085 0.379 (0.564)
0.047
Wald test for equal 
W
p-value
W
p-value
W
p-value
Non-bondholders vs. bondholders 3.788
0.052
4.326
0.038
4.187
0.041
Note: 12 monthly dummies included as explanatory variables and instruments. The estimations for all household sizes
furthermore include  ln(family size) as explanatory variable and instrument. In addition the instrument sets include
the following variables. Instrument set 1: Log dividend price ratio. Instrument set 2: Log dividend price ratio, lagged
log real value weighted NYSE return, lagged log real T-bill return. Instrument set 3: Log dividend price ratio, default
premium, bond horizon premium.

