                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FINANCIAL OPENING: EVIDENCE AND POLICY OPTIONS


                                            Joshua Aizenman


                                          Working Paper 8900
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8900


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




Prepared for “Challenges to Globalization,” NBER-CEPR conference, May 24-25, 2002, Stockholm.
Organized by Robert Baldwin and Alan Winters. I would like to thank Blake Lebaron, Simon Evenett and
the participants at the NBER pre-conference meeting for useful comments. Any errors are mine. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 8900
April 2002
JEL No. F21, F32, F34, F36



                                               ABSTRACT


        This paper evaluates the empirical evidence of increasing the chances of financial crises induced
by opening up developing countries to short-term capital inflows, and appraises the various proposals
made for mitigating the severity of financial crises. We point out that there is solid evidence that financial
opening increases the chance of financial crises. There is more tenuous evidence that financial opening
contributes positively to long-run growth. Hence, there may be a complex trade off between the adverse
intermediate run and the beneficial long run effects of financial opening. The literature is abounded with
proposals aimed at improving this intertemporal trade-off, reducing the costs of financial crises. A
version of the Lucas critic may limit the welfare gain of these proposals. Hence, a better understanding
of the structural characteristics leading to exposure and crises is the key for designing a successful
restructuring of the global capital market. Some of the reforms may fall short of success due to
coordination failure: they may be effective only if they were adopted comprehensively by all the relevant
financial centers. Finally, some of the proposals may be too optimistic, ignoring the time inconsistency
and political economy considerations, as well as presuming the ability to verify unambiguously the quality
of adjustment.




Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics
Social Sciences I
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@cats.ucsc.edu
                                              2


       This paper has two goals. First, it evaluates the empirical evidence of increasing
the chances of financial crises induced by opening up developing countries to short-term
capital inflows. Second, it appraises the various proposals made for mitigating the
severity of financial crises. We argue that there is solid evidence that financial opening
increases the chance of financial crises. There is more tenuous evidence that financial
opening contributes positively to long-run growth. Hence, there may be a complex trade-
off between the adverse intermediate run and the beneficial long run effects of financial
opening. These findings impose a challenge to policy makers – how to supplement
financial opening with policies that would improve this intertemporal trade-off. The
literature is abounded with proposals aimed at reducing the costs of financial crises. Yet,
there has been limited progress in designing credible reforms to deal with these
challenges.
       To put this issue in a broader context, the debate about financial opening is a
reincarnation of the earlier immiserizing growth literature, identifying conditions under
which growth may be welfare reducing in the presence of preexisting distortions.1 While
financial opening opts to increase welfare when the only distortion is restricting
intertemporal trade across countries, financial opening may be welfare reducing in the
presence of other distortions. An important example of such a distortion is moral hazard,
which frequently acts as an implicit subsidy to borrowing and investment.2 In financial
autarky, the pool of domestic savings confines the cost of the moral hazard distortion.
Financial opening implies that the scale of investment will be determined by the access to
global saving. If in autarky the domestic real interest rate exceeded the global one, the
resultant inflow of capital would magnify the existing distortion, thereby reducing
welfare. This situation is illustrated in Figure 1, where S depicts domestic saving, and I is
the domestic investment in the absence of moral hazard. Moral hazard would shift the
effective investment to I’. In these circumstances, the welfare cost of moral hazard is
given by the black triangle in panel a (where the benchmark for evaluating welfare in
panel a is financial autarky in the absence of moral hazard). If the global interest rate is


1
 See, Bhagwati (1956), Johnson (1967) and Brecher and Diaz-Alejandro (1977).
2
 See McKinnon and Pill (1996), Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999), Dooley (2000);
and Hellmann, Murdock, and Stiglitz (2000).
                                                 3


r*, financial opening in the presence of moral hazard reduces welfare by the shaded
triangle (where the benchmark for evaluating welfare in panel b is the welfare with open
financial markets, in the absence of moral hazard). If the supply of domestic saving is
relatively inelastic, whereas the demand for investment is relatively elastic, financial
opening will tend to reduce welfare. A similar argument applies to other distortions.
          The more recent literature dealing with welfare effects of financial opening added
to the earlier studies by modeling the process of financial intermediation. A key
difference between the earlier literature and the one dealing with financial intermediation
is the switch in focus, from the commercial to the financial aspects of opening up. This
matters, as the adjustment of financial markets to news and policies is much faster than
that of commercial flows of goods and services. A by-product of this switch is the focus
of the new literature on conditions leading to the instantaneous reversal in the flow of
financial assets, generating financial crises.
          This recent literature has lead to a spirited debate concerning the wisdom of
unrestricted capital mobility between the OECD and emerging markets. Various studies
have identified circumstances in which unlimited capital mobility may be sub-optimal
(see Table A for a summary of some of these studies). Not withstanding the above
debate, the strongest argument for financial opening is the pragmatic one. Like it or not,
greater trade integration erodes the effectiveness of restrictions on capital mobility.
Hence, for successful emerging markets that engage in trade integration, financial
opening is not a question of if, but of when and how. Consequently, the pragmatic
approach to the problem should recognize that there is no quick fix to the exposure to
financial crises induced by financial opening. Instead, the challenge is to reduce the depth
and the frequency of the crises. The core of the problem is that we deal with incomplete
financial markets, exposing the creditors to sovereign risk and moral hazard.3 As there
are fundamental reasons for the incompletion of these markets, one doubts whether there




3
    See for a review of the literature on sovereign risk see Eaton and Fernandez (1995).
                                              4




exists a smart fix that will prevent future crises. Instead, the hope is that new policies and
improved coordination will reduce the severity of financial crises, thereby improving the
odds of a positive long-run welfare effect of financial opening.


       Section 1 starts with the review of the empirical evidence. Section 2 reviews the
various proposals attempting to reform the global financial system. Section 3 provides an
appraisal of the various proposals made for preventing financial crises. Specifically, it
argues that a version of the Lucas critic may limit the welfare gain of these proposals. Of
course, this is not an argument against adopting reforms. It suggests, however, that a
better understanding of the structural characteristics leading to exposure and crises is the
key for designing a successful restructuring of the capital market. A reform that would
not deal with these structural factors runs the risk of leading to disappointing welfare
gains at best, and to crises in the worst case. Some of the reforms may fall short of
success due to coordination failure: they may be effective only if they would be adopted
comprehensively by all the relevant financial centers. Finally, some of the proposals may
be too optimistic, ignoring the time inconsistency and political economy considerations
that would challenge the practicality of the best-intended reforms, as well as in presuming
the ability to verify unambiguously the quality of macroeconomic adjustment.


1.     Financial opening and financial crises: the evidence
        The recent research has two common themes: it validated empirically the
assertion ‘Good-bye financial repression, hello financial crash.’ (Diaz-Alejandro
(1985)). Yet, it also found tenuous evidence that financial liberalization tends to increase
growth overtime. Both observations suggest an intertemporal trade-off. In the short-run,
the fragility induced by financial opening leads frequently to crises. Yet, if these crises
would force the country to deal with its structural deficiencies, financial opening may
induce a higher growth rate in the long-run. The empirical literature relies frequently on
cross-country methodology. Thus, it provides us with little guidance in evaluating the net
welfare effects of financial opening. For example, it remains hard to gauge if Korea
would have been better off by refraining from financial opening in the early nineties, or if
                                             5


Chile would have benefited by retaining financial repression in the eighties-nineties.4
The answers to these questions depend crucially on the time horizon of the analysis, as
well as on the evaluation of what is the relevant counterfactual, both issues to which there
are no satisfactory answers.5
       We illustrate the empirical literature by reviewing selectively several examples.
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) found that problems in the banking sector typically
precede a currency crisis, and that a currency crisis deepens the banking crisis, activating
a vicious spiral. Importantly, they also found that financial liberalization often precedes
banking crises. Similar results were replicated in several papers using different
methodologies. Glick and Hutchison (1999) investigated a sample of 90 countries during
1975-1997, covering 90 banking crises, 202 currency crises, and 37 twin crises. They
found that banking and twin crises have occurred mainly in developing countries, and
their number increased in the 1990s. Twin crises are mainly concentrated in financially
liberalized emerging-market economies. These findings support the conjecture that
openness of emerging markets to international capital flows, combined with a liberalized
financial structure, makes them particularly vulnerable to twin crises. The costs of these
crises are substantial. Currency crisis, on average, leads to a cost of 8% pre crisis GDP.

4
  Obviously, the financial crisis in 1997 impacted Korea’s welfare adversely. One may
argue, however, that it prevented a much deeper and longer calamity, akin to Japan’s
recession in the last ten years. Arguably, had Korea continued with financial repression,
a Japanese type of a correction would have hit Korea later. Korea’s development path
resembles that of Japan -- its domestic banks accumulated overtime large non-performing
loans. These loans were the heritage of the earlier development strategy, where large
corporations had selective access to preferential lines of credit. According to this
argument, the crisis of 1997 prevented a larger buildup of these loans, saving Korea from
a much deeper correction. Obviously, it is hard to provide a sound test of this argument.
See Haggard (2000) for further discussion on the interaction between the public and the
private sector in Korea and other countries in the Far East. Similar ambiguities apply to
Chile, which has been the best performing Latin American country in recent years, and is
credited with a sound banking system. Yet, Chile experienced a massive banking crisis
in the eighties, following earlier financial opening. Arguably, one may credit the superior
recent performance of Chile to the painful earlier reforms, reforms that were triggered by
the crises of the early eighties.
5
  A welfare evaluation of these issues may depend on the degree to which there are
political economy trade-offs between a large crisis versus a series of smaller crises – a
large crisis may be needed to overcome entranced opposing interest groups, yet it may
lead to larger welfare costs.
                                               6


Simultaneous currency and banking crises reduce the pre crisis GDP by 18% (World
Bank (1998), and Caprio G. and P. Honohan (1999)).
        Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (1998) studied the empirical relationship
between banking crises and financial liberalization in 53 countries during 1980-95. They
found that Banking crises are more likely to occur in liberalized financial systems. The
impact of financial liberalization on the fragility of banks is weaker, however, when the
institutional environment is strong (Relevant institutional characteristics - respect for the
rule of law, a low level of corruption, and good contract enforcement). They found that
banks’ franchise values decline after financial liberalization. Hence, the intensification of
the moral hazard associated with lower franchise values may be one of the sources of
increased banking sector fragility. Financial liberalization is followed by improved
financial development, while banking crises tend to slow it down. In countries that
liberalize from a position of financial repression, financial development improves even if
a banking crisis takes place. Their results support the view that financial liberalization
should be approached cautiously where the institutions necessary to ensure law and
contract enforcement, effective prudential regulation and supervision are not fully
developed, even if macroeconomic stabilization has been achieved.
        A useful survey of Financial Liberalization is Williamson and Mahar (1998), who
focused on 34 countries that undertook financial liberalization between 1973-1996.
Overall, they found a mixed record of financial liberalization -- The gains are there, but
the liberalization carries the risk of leading to financial crisis. Financial liberalization has
yielded greater financial depth, and increased efficiency in the allocation of investment.
Yet, it has not brought the boost in saving. The drawbacks in the liberalization process
are the danger that the liberalization will lead to a financial crisis. For the majority of
countries, capital account liberalization increases its probability. The challenge is to
design a liberalization program that does not bring a financial crisis in its wake. The
main recommendations emerging from their study are akin to Hellman, Murdock and
Stiglitz (2000) -- start with macroeconomic stabilization, improve bank supervision,
while delaying capital-account convertibility to the end of the process. In the transition,
"mild financial repression," in the form of a ceiling on deposit interest rate, may be
advantageous. This follows from the observation that exceedingly high interest rates
                                              7


encourage risk taking by borrowers – moral hazard induced by self-selection. Banks in
stress may wish to ‘gamble for resurrection’ by lending to such borrowers, at a cost to the
taxpayer. Williamson and Mahar conclude that maintaining high spreads may be needed
in a transition until banks are able to work off the legacy of bad debt inherited from the
period of financial repression. In such an environment, free entry of foreign banks may
be a mixed blessing. The efficiency gains should be balanced against the threat of
'gamble for resurrection' by older domestic banks losing their franchise value. Imposing
higher capital requirements increases the cost of a 'gamble for resurrection' strategy. In
these circumstances, deposit rate controls may complement capital requirements.
         The overall effect of financial opening on growth remains debatable. Levine
(1997) found a positive association, whereas Rodrik (1998) failed to depict any positive
effects of financial opening on investment, growth and inflation. While Levine’s
interpretation attaches the direction of causality from financial deepening to growth, the
old dictum that correlations do not indicate causality remains valid. More recently,
Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000) evaluated the empirical links between the level of
financial intermediary development and economic growth, TFP growth, physical capital
accumulation, and private savings rates. The main findings are that financial
intermediaries exert a large, positive impact on total factor productivity growth, which
feeds through to overall GDP growth. Yet, the long-run links between financial
intermediary development and both physical capital growth and private savings rates are
tenuous. Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001) found that equity market liberalizations,
on average, lead to a one percent increase in annual real economic growth over a five-
year period. The investment/GDP ratio increases post liberalization, with the investment
partially financed by foreign capital inducing worsened trade balances. The liberalization
effect is enhanced by a large secondary school enrollment, a small government sector and
an Anglo-Saxon legal system.6
         Rodrik’s earlier methodology has been revisited by Arteta, Eichengreen, and
Wyplosz (2001). While they found indications of a positive association between capital

6
    As is frequently the case with empirical studies relying on Macro date, endogeneity and
reverse causality remain a valid concern in interpreting some of these results.
                                              8


account liberalization and growth, the effects vary with time, with how capital account
liberalization is measured, and with how the relationship is estimated. The evidence that
the effects of capital account liberalization are stronger in high-income countries is
fragile. There is some evidence that the positive growth effects of liberalization are
stronger in countries with strong institutions. Capital account liberalization appears to
have positive effects on growth only in countries that have already opened more
generally, hence sequencing matters. But there are significant prerequisites for opening,
including a reduction of trade barriers and an ability to eliminate macroeconomic
imbalances. These conclusions are akin to Edwards (2001) who reported that, after
controlling for other variables (including aggregate investment), countries with a more
open capital account have outperformed countries that have restricted capital mobility.
There is also evidence that an open capital account affects growth positively only after a
country has achieved a certain degree of economic development. This provides support to
the view that there is an optimal sequencing for capital account liberalization.




2.     Proposals for preventing financial crises induced by financial opening
        This section provides a brief summary of the various proposals.7 These reforms
can be classified along several dimensions. First, proposals differ in the weight given to
reforming the incentives facing creditors, debtors, or the interaction between the two
groups. Second, proposals differ in the weight given to ex-ante risk reduction, versus ex-
post orderly management and resolution of actual crises. Third, proposals differ in the
depth of the reform. Some deal with upgrading regulations within the existing
institutional environment, whereas others suggest bolder steps, envisioning the creation
of new institutions. Table B summarizes the main proposals.
       One line of reform focuses on the possibility that, by subsidizing sovereign
borrowing, the involvement of institutions may exacerbate the problem, inducing moral
hazard. For example, the belief that the IMF, World Bank and banking deposit
insurances schemes will bailout creditors generates over borrowing, ending with more

7
 Several recent monographs overviewed comprehensively the various proposals. See
Eichengreen (1999), Rogoff (1999), Frankel and Roubini (2001), and Feldstein (2002).
                                              9


frequent and deeper crises, at the taxpayers’ expense. A profound reform of the IMF, as
suggested by the Meltzer committee (1998), would restrict IMF’s role to helping
countries meeting ex-ante conditionality [see also Jeanne (2001)]. Another radical
approach calls for the formation of a global lender of last resort [see Soros (1998)], an
approach that would institutionalized a global type of the FDIC arrangement. All these
proposals share the concern of minimizing ex-post bailouts that were not pre-approved at
the lending stage.
       A less aggressive approach to provide greater stability is the imposition of reserve
requirements on lenders and/or borrowers, as well as the possibility of capital adequacy
requirements that are linked to the bank’s portfolio risk. The Basle committee [as well as
Chairman Alan Greenspan (1998)] advocates this approach. The rationale for the reserve
requirements is provided by the presence of various externalities. On the lender’s side,
the anticipation of bailouts is introducing an externality, where marginal lending impacts
adversely the taxpayer. On the borrower’s side, as long as partial defaults are costly,
marginal borrowing affects all agents by increasing the probability of a costly default that
would impact all [see Aizenman and Turnovsky (2002)]. Alternatively, emerging
markets may enact similar policies aimed at curbing short-term financial flows, akin to
the Chilean system in the nineties [see Eichengreen (1999)].8
       A different tack of reforms has focused on the ex-post resolution of crises. One
approach advocates institutionalizing ex-ante the possibility of credit relief in bad times.
This may be accomplished by attaching to all foreign currency liabilities the option
entitling the borrowers to extend the debt for a specified period, at a mandatory penalty
rate [see Buiter and Sibert (1999)]. In order to facilitate the coordination among large
numbers of diffused lenders, various proposals advocate deeper institutional changes.


8
  See De Gregorio, Edwards and Valdes (2000) for a mixed review of Chile’s experience
with controls on inflows. Edwards (2001) conclude that these controls “were successful
in changing the maturity profile of capital inflows, and of the country’s foreign debt.
Also, the controls allowed the monetary authority to have greater control over monetary
policy. This effect, however, appears to have been confined to the short run, and was not
very important quantitatively.” In evaluating Chile’s experience, one should keep in
mind that Chile has been the best performing country in Latin America in recent years.
Hence, Chile’s experience may provide limited inference about the potential benefits of
controls on inflows to countries with more fragile financial systems.
                                            10


The adoption of a modified version of domestic bankruptcy procedure has been
frequently advocated [see Sachs (1995), Miller and Zhang (2000) and Kreuger (2001)].
Specifically, such an “international workout mechanism” would aim at minimizing the
cost of protracted negotiations. It would allow the debtor the continuation of export and
production with minimal disturbances. It would also serve to coordinate among the
diffused creditors, allowing smoother and faster resolution of the stand off between the
involved parties.
                                              11




3.     Reforming the financial system: the challenges
       The growing list of proposed reforms is indicative of the emerging consensus that
the present financial architecture needs a major overhaul. While it is easy to point out the
flaws of the existing system, any fundamental reform will confront a host of challenges.
We review briefly some of the general issues involved, and illustrate their relevance in
understanding the limitations of various proposals.


The Lucas critic; Political economy and coordination failure
       Any significant reform will change agents’ behavior in ways that are hard to
predict without understanding the fundamental forces explaining sovereign borrowing
and default. Some of the relevant fundamentals are determined by the political economy
characterization of emerging markets, and by the challenges confronting attempts to deal
with coordination failures. Short of a fuller understanding of the fundamental forces
leading to exposure and crises, suggested reforms may lead to disappointing results at
best, and welfare reduction at worst. We illustrate these considerations by analyzing the
potential pitfalls in several proposed reforms.




3.1    Debt maturity structure
       Jeanne (2001) illustrates the importance of understanding the forces leading to
vulnerability as a necessary condition for evaluating the welfare effects of changing the
international financial architecture. Specifically, he focused on understanding the
maturity structure of countries' external liabilities as the solution to an incentives
problem. He considered a country attempting to borrow when there is uncertainty about
its solvency due to exogenous shocks. The country can enhance its solvency by
implementing a costly fiscal adjustment, and it can borrow on a short term or a long-term
basis. This situation imposes a trade off -- when government's solvency deteriorates;
short-term debt becomes less expensive or more accessible than long-term debt. This
comes with a cost: the government is under more pressure to restore the fiscal situation if
its debt has a shorter maturity, because it is more vulnerable to a crisis in which creditors
                                               12


do not roll over their claims. This is due to the observation that short-term debt opens the
door to self-fulfilling crises, in which creditors stop rolling over their loans for an
extraneous reason unrelated to the fundamentals. There is a tension, thus, between the
disciplinary benefits of short-term debt and the risk of unwarranted rollover crises.
        In this context, Jeanne investigates the welfare effect of institutions that facilitate
an orderly workout of debt crises, (e.g., an international bankruptcy court and officially
sanctioned standstills); and of international lender of last resort. These measures are
shown to improve welfare, but to fall short of the first-best. The first best in Jeanne’s
model is achieved by a “crisis insurance fund" which ex-post bails out countries
conditional on the ex-ante fiscal adjustment, and payment a risk premium.


3.2     Transparency and the feasibility of “Crisis insurance fund” conditional on ex-ante
adjustment effort.
        It is non-controversial that a minimum level of transparency of financial positions
and policies is a necessary condition for financial markets to exist and to operate.9 Yet,
it’s not clear that greater transparency would eliminate the exposure to crises. Setting
standards for transparency may encourage creative accounting, where each crisis exposes
new loopholes, inducing a change in the required rules of the game. While “transparency
creep” is unavoidable, putting too much faith in the importance of transparency may lead
some investors to a false sense of security. Indeed, full information does not negate the
possibility of crises induced by multiple equilibria.
        One of the innovative proposals dealing with reforming the IMF is to insure
countries against financial crises only if they met ex-ante criteria [see Jeanne (2001) and
Meltzer (1998)]. A necessary condition for such a scheme is transparency. In practice,
however, verification is costly and fuzzy. Frequently, it takes a major crisis to force the
“real books” to open [see the case of Korean’s reserves in the 1997 crisis, and the recent
Enron fiasco]. These practical considerations suggest that only in the aftermath of a
crisis we learn the degree to which the ex-ante criteria were met, as a crisis may reveal


9
  For example, greater uncertainty about the net indebtness of a country would lead to
thinner markets, and may eventually lead to the collapse of voluntary lending [see Kletzer
(1984), Calvo (1999) and Aizenman and Marion (1999)].
                                             13


that some of these criteria were met only superficially. It may be hard to verify ex-ante if
the institutional environment changed enough to warrant the insurance. Hence, costly
monitoring and the impossibility to verify fully the depth of the adjustment limit the
applicability of this proposal. In these circumstances, we are left with no clean solutions,
and there may be no escape from the need to “muddle through” protracted negotiations in
the aftermath of crises.


3.3    The use (and abuse) of International Reserves, and vulnerability indicators
       A high short-term debt/International reserves ratio was found to be a vulnerability
indicator, signifying of exposure to crises [see Rodrik and Velasco (1999)]. Does it
imply that emerging markets would benefit by increasing the cushion of international
reserves, signaling thereby they’re being a safer borrower? Countries like Chile, Korea,
and Taiwan have managed large stocks of international reserves. Does it follow that
other countries will benefit from hording more international reserves in order to reduce
the above vulnerability index? As the Lucas Critic would suggest, a deeper understanding
of the economy is needed in order to answer this question.
       This point can be illustrated in a model of emerging markets, where there is a
conflict between efficiency and political economy considerations. Specifically, countries
characterized by sovereign risk, tax collection costs, inelastic demand for fiscal outlays,
and a volatile GDP opt to engage in large external borrowing. Suppose that international
reserves are beyond creditors’ control [this would be the case if the location and the
magnitude of the reserves is not public information, implying also that the partial default
repayment is independent of the stock of reserves]. In the absence of political economy
considerations, higher borrowing can be shown to be accompanied with a greater
accumulation of international reserves [see Aizenman and Marion (2002)]. While this
adjustment is welfare enhancing, it may do little to prevent a sovereign debt crisis.
Suppose now that there is political uncertainty regarding the identity of the future
administration -- there is a positive probability that an opportunistic administration will
“loot” the treasury, channeling resources towards narrow interest groups. Greater
political instability can be shown to reduce the demand for international reserves, and to
                                               14


increase borrowing.10 Hence, the association between external borrowing and
international reserves depends critically on political economy factors. High short-term
debt/reserve ratio may be the symptom of political instability. In these circumstances, a
policy that will target a drop in the short-term debt/international reserves ratio without
dealing with the political economy considerations that determine the prospect of future
looting, is welfare reducing. Such a policy does not necessarily reduce vulnerability to
crisis, and in fact it may increase the probability of a crisis.
        Similar concerns may apply to the usefulness of vulnerability indicators. These
indicators provide information on variables correlated with past crises. Attempts to
encourage the dissemination and the use of these indicators in allocating global funds
may have mixed results. One doubts the degree to which these indicators will perform in
the future, out of the sample used to construct them. One may also envision situations in
which the introduction of quasi-official indicators provide a false sense of security; where
market participants may attach too much value to these indicators, ignoring other relevant
information. It may induce emerging markets to ‘distort’ the indicators in order to signal
their relative soundness. As the previous discussion illustrated, short of deeper reforms,
these signals may be misleading, and may not indicate a genuine reduction in
vulnerability.




10
        If the present administration is opportunistic, it will “loot” all liquid resources,
hence it will minimize its reserves holdings, and maximize borrowing. If the present
administration is benevolent, a higher probability of a future opportunistic administration
will reduce the present demand for international reserves, and will increase borrowing, as
a way of reducing the resources available for future looting.
                                             15


3.4    Time inconsistency and political economy considerations – how important is the
choice of exchange rate regimes?


       Crises are frequently the delayed manifestations of political economy factors.
Reforms that ignore these factors run the risk of inducing too optimistic an assessment of
countries, leading overtime to a large exposure, and ultimately to greater vulnerability.
The literature on the optimal exchange rate regimes frequently attaches too much
importance to the choice of monetary policy. Beyond the short-run, monetary and fiscal
policies are intertwined via the intertemporal budget constraints. Indeed, one may argue
that a deficient fiscal system may lead to crises independently of the exchange rate
regimes. In these circumstances, the choice of the exchange rate regime will impact only
on the timing of the ultimate crisis. After all, sovereign risk and exchange rate risks have
different causes. Casting the problem in terms of the “smart” choice of an exchange rate
regime is potentially hazardous, as it obscures the need to challenge the deeper fiscal
deficiencies.
       These considerations are illustrated in the contrast of the policies undertaken by
Brazil and Argentina in the last 15 years. In the eighties, both countries were
characterized by similar fiscal deficiencies, stemming from their organization as a loose
federal system, where the provincial states and municipalities had a significant bargaining
power relative to the federal center. In the early nineties, both countries went through
successful exchange rate based stabilizations. The nominal anchor provided by pegging
the exchange rate, supported rapid disinflation in both countries. Argentina, however, put
a much greater emphasis on the importance of a peg – it adopted a rigid currency board.
In contrast, Brazil put greater emphasis on dealing with its fiscal imbalances, reducing
thereby the relative power of the provincial states. 11 In addition, Brazil moved overtime
from a fixed exchange rate regime towards discretionary exchange rate management,
accommodating external adverse shocks with occasional depreciations. As the recent
events have painfully illustrated, Brazil’s choice allowed it to steer away from a deep

11
  While it’s premature to conclude that Brazil has accomplished all the adjustments
called for under the Fiscal Responsibility act of 2001, it started the painful process of
curbing the biases towards provincial overspending. See Dillinger and Webb (1999) for
further details about the reforms.
                                                16


crisis, whereas Argentina’s choice has lead overtime to increased vulnerability, and to the
ultimate recent crisis.


3.5       Mulitiple equilibria and the international lender of last resort
          One possible justification for “bailing out” countries is the presence of multiple
equilibria. Exposure to multiple equilibria is a by-product of the maturity transformation
accomplish by financial intermediation, where short term deposits are used to finance
longer term real project [see Diamond and Dybvig (1983) for a banking model, and
Chang and Velasco (1999) for an open economy model of bank and currency runs]. In
these circumstances, the presence of the lender of last resort is supposed to prevent the
bad equilibrium. As Rogoff (1999) discussed, lenders of last resorts comes with a hefty
cost to the taxpayer. Some may view the fate of Argentina as an example of a country
suffering from the adverse consequences of a switch to a bad equilibrium. Supporters of
this view point out that conventional measures (current account, fiscal deficits, etc.)
failed to flag out Argentina as a highly vulnerable country in the 1990’s. Indeed,
Argentina’s fiscal measures were comparable to those of ‘respected’ OECD countries.
Can we infer from this that a lender of last resort would have prevented the Argentinean
crisis?
          While it’s hard to test this assertion, there are fundamental challenges facing the
multiple equilibria argument. Vulnerability to a crisis may depend on the flexibility of an
economy to adjust to changing circumstances. This includes the ability of the fiscal
system and the labor market to adjust to unforeseen events. More generally, country risk
may be determined by the interaction between shocks, and the quality of the institutions
of conflict management [see Rodrik (1999)]. In the context of Argentina, the multiple
equilibria interpretation is challenged by the view that Argentina is a quasi European
Style welfare state, standing on the shoulders of a very thin tax base. This situation is
further exacerbated by a provincial states’ bias towards overspending. Hence, one may
conclude that there are fundamental reasons to view Argentina as a risky destination for
global capital; even if its fiscal deficits and current account deficits are comparable to
OECD countries.
                                              17


          The insistence of the Argentinean authorities on preserving the currency board
despite the growing strength of the dollar and the occasional real depreciations of Brazil
may be viewed as a manifestation of these risks --viewing the currency board as the main
safeguard against inflation runs the hazard of providing a signal that the deeper fiscal
problems are still there. Placing too much faith on the currency board as the mechanism
for fiscal discipline overlooks the fact that the cost of changing the exchange rate regime
(and more generally of monetary policy) is much lower than the cost of a fundamental
fiscal reform. Hence, a country like Argentina runs the risk of being viewed as fiscally
unstable, independently of the realized path of current account and fiscal deficits. In the
long run, according to this view, the fiscal side will determine the strength of the system.
Short of resolving fiscal deficiencies, a country like Argentina will find it hard to
convince the market that it’s a prudent destination for capital.
          One may rephrase the above discussion in terms of the rules versus discretion
literature, where there are gains from delegating monetary policy to a conservative agent.
As was illustrated in Rogoff’s (1985) seminal work, the optimal commitment to the
conservative course depends on the stochastic structure. If the balance of shocks tilts
overtime towards adverse real shocks, a less conservative course is preferable. The
success of Brazil and the failure of Argentina may be viewed as a vivid example of this
principle. The success of the structural reform would require also challenging the fiscal
deficiencies that determine, in the long run, the course on monetary policy. Hence, the
relative success of Brazil is attributed to its success in curbing the bias towards provincial
overspending, and in a more appropriate use of discretionary exchange rate and monetary
policy.


3.6       Policies designed to impose discipline on the market - reserve and capital
adequacy requirements

          The introduction of reserve requirements by either borrowers or lenders may
impose better discipline on the global financial market. Borrowing will decline, and so
will default risk, reducing the necessity for continuing bailouts. The introduction of
reserve requirements will improve welfare in both the lending and borrowing economies.
In these circumstances, the lender's optimal reserve requirement increases with the
                                             18


expected bailout [see Aizenman and Turnovsky (2002)]. Indirectly, this policy may
reduce the bias in favor of debt and against equity in international lending, identified by
Rogoff (1999). But the design of the optimal reserve requirement in a decentralized
world is a delicate matter, and both the optimal lender's reserve requirement and the
optimal borrower's requirement have both attractive and unattractive features. Indeed,
without a proper coordination among all lenders, the reserve requirements will reallocate
lending from high to low reserve countries, with few beneficial effects. Hence, the gains
of such policies will be determined by the ability of international institutions [the BIS,
IMF, etc.] to induce all lenders to apply similar policies, driven by the underlying risk
factors.
                                             19


4.     Concluding remarks

       The global financial market has been shaken throughout the nineties by a series of
major financial crises. Attempts to stabilize the global system have led to large bailouts.
This experience suggests that the present system cannot survive indefinitely, as the
willingness of taxpayers in the OECD countries to engage in continuing bailouts is
approaching its limits. The presumption is that we deal with a second-best situation, in
which there is no quick fix but welfare can be enhanced by the proper regulatory changes.
While prudent borrowing of emerging market economics is beneficial, excessive
borrowing may be disadvantageous due to existing distortions. In such an environment,
one should either reduce the existing distortions, or induce borrowers and lenders to
internalize them.
       Recent proposals for the “New International Financial Architecture” have focused
on reform along two margins; reducing the ex-ante probability of a crisis, and inducing
more orderly resolution of a crisis. In evaluating the various of proposals, it is important
to stress that there are good reasons to support both more effective crisis management and
more prudent ex-ante allocation of credit. As each deals with a different margin, they
should complement each other. Specifically, the crisis management proposals do not
address directly the excessive risk undertaken due to moral hazard, as the ex-post
“solvency” of some of the resultant projects hinge on bailouts. Similarly, improving the
prudential regulations would not eliminate liquidity crises. Hence the need for more
efficient crisis management and resolution remains a high priority issue. This is
especially due to the growing diversity of lenders, implying that the task of coordinating
the resolution of crises is more involved.
       Greater global integration increased the responsiveness of financial flows to news.
This development is potentially beneficial in good times, but it has adverse consequences
when things go wrong. Hence, the darker side of globalization is that financial crises
increase the scope for conflicts -- the direct stakes are higher. Once the bad news hits the
market, the key issue is not only the ultimate distribution of the burden of adjustment
between the debtors and creditors, but also the length of time it would take to settle down
the dispute. The killer of future cooperation may be the uncertainty regarding the dispute
resolution mechanism, as it exposes creditors to the hazards of long haggling over a
                                              20


shrinking pie. Protracted negotiations will prolong the period where both domestic and
international agents refrain from new investments. This in turn will deepen the recession
in the affected countries, increasing the social tension, further increasing losses. The net
outcome may be greater temptation for the domestic authorities to embark on populist
policies, leading towards autarky, a trend that will hurt further prospects of trade
integration. Hence, the recent crises may be viewed as a test case for the efficiency of the
global dispute resolution mechanism. While one hopes that the direct financial contagion
from Argentina to other countries will be limited, one expects that a slow and protracted
resolution of the crisis will highlight the inability of the present system to deal efficiently
with adverse shocks, thereby reducing future financial flows, and putting in jeopardy
other vulnerable countries.
       The urgency of these issues is illustrated by the willingness of top IMF executives
to engage constructively in a debate concerning the future form of the global dispute
resolution mechanism [see Krueger (2001)]. One expects that only reforms that offer
practical solutions will pass the market test and will endure the political process needed
to implement them. One doubts the degree to which “clean” ideas, like insurance based
only on meeting ex-ante conditionality, will survive the time inconsistency and the
transparency challenges. Considering the greater weight of non-bank lending, and the
great increase in the number of institutional investors, one expects reforms dealing with
better coordination among creditors, and with the formation of international bankruptcy
procedures, to be vigorously tested by looming crises.
                                                    21


                                              References

Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti (1998): “Was Promotheus Unbound by Chance? Risk, Diversification and
    Growth”, Journal of Political Economy, 105, 709-751.
Aghion, P., Bachetta, P. and A. Banerjee (2000): “Capital Markets and the Instability of Open Economies”
    CEPR DP 2083.
Aizenman, J. (1989): “Country Risk, Incomplete Information and Taxes on International borrowing,” The
        Economic Journal, 99, March, pp. 147-161.
____ and S. Turnovsky. (2002): “Reserve Requirements on Sovereign Debt in the Presence of Moral
    Hazard -- on Debtors or Creditors?” The Economic Journal, pp. 107-132.
____ and Nancy Marion. (1999): “Reserve Uncertainty and the supply of International Credit”
    forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
_______ and N. P. Marion. (2002) “International reserves, sovereign risk and the cost of public funds,”
    manuscript.
Arteta C., B. Eichengreen and C. Wyplosz. (2001): “When Does Capital Account Liberalization Help More
    than It Hurts?” NBER Working Paper No. 8414.
Beck, T., R. Levine R. and Y. N. Loayza (2000): “Finance and the Sources of Growth.” Journal of
    Financial Economics 58(1-2): pp. 261-300.
Bekaert, G, C. Harvey and R. Lundblad. (2001): “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?”, NBER
    working paper 6724, 1-63.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. (1965): “Immiserizing Growth: a Geometrical Note,” Review of Economic Studies,
    June.
Brecher, Richard and Carlos Diaz-Alejandro. (1977): “Tariffs, Foreign Capital and Immiserizing Growth,”
    Journal of International Economics 7, pp.317-322.
Buiter, W.H. and A. C. Sibert, (1999): “A Contribution to the New International Financial Architecture,”
    International Finance, Vol. 2, pp. 227-247.
Caballero R. and A. Krishnamurthy. (2001): “International and domestic collateral constraints in a model of
    emrging market crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, December, 48 (3), pp. 513-548.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1998): “CONTAGION IN EMERGING MARKETS: when Wall Street is a carrier,”
        manuscript, University of Maryland.
Caprio G. and P. Honohan. (1999): “Restoring Banking Stability: Beyond Supervised Capital
        Requirements,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 4, Fall.
Chang R. and A. Velasco. (1999): “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets,” FRBA, Vol. 84, no. 2 (Second
    Quarter): 4-17.
Cole H. and M. Obstfeld. (1991): “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing: how much do
    financial markets matter?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 28 (August), 2-34.
Corsetti, G., P. Pesenti and N. Roubini. (1999): “Paper Tigers?”, European Economic Review (43)7.
                                                    22


De Gregorio, Jose, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo Valdes. (2000): “Controls on Capital inflows: Do they
    Work?” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 63, pp. 59-83.
Demigüc-Kunt A. and E. Detragiache. (1998): ”Financial Liberalization and Financial Fragility”, IMF
    Working Paper.
Devereux, M. and M. Saito. (1997): ”Growth and Risk-sharing with Incomplete International Asset
    Markets”, Journal of International Economics, 52, pp. 453-481.
Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig. (1983): “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 91, 401-419.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. (1985): “Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Repression.” Journal of
    Development Economics, 19, pp. 1-24.
Dillinger William and Steven B. Webb. (1999): “Fiscal Management in Federal Democracies: Argentina
    and Brazil,” World Bank report, May.
Dooley, M. (2000): “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 110, no. 460,
    January, pp. 256-272.
Eaton, J. and R. Fernandez. (1995): “Sovereign Debt,” Handbook of International Economics, G.
    Grossman and K. Rogoff, Volume 3, North Holland.
Edwards, S. (2001): ”Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies Different?”
    NBER WP 8076 Jan 2001.
______ “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows and Crisis Prevention,” NBER WP 8529, Oct 2001
Eichengreen, B. (1999): A new international financial architecture: A practical post-Asia agenda,
        Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose and C. Wyplosz. (1995): ”Exchange Rate Mayhem: The Antecedents and
    Aftermaths of Speculative Attacks”, Economic Policy, 21 pp 249-296.
Feldstein, M. (2002): “Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies: Overview of
    Prevention and Management,” NBER Working paper # 8837.
Frankel, J. A. N. Roubini. (2001): “The Role of Industrial Country Policies in Emerging Market Crises,”
    NBER Working Paper No.w8634, December.
Glick R. and M. Hutchison. (1999): “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common Are Twins?" In
    Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, eds. Reuven Glick, Ramon Moreno, and Mark Spiegel. NY:
    Cambridge University Press.
Greenspan, Alan. (1998): Speech at the 34th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition of the
    Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May.
Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic. (1990): “Financial Development, Growth, and the Distribution of
    Income,” Journal of Political Economy; 98(5), Part 1, October, pp. 1076-1107.
Haggard, Stephan. (2000): The Political Economy of the Asian Financial Crisis, Institute for international
    Economics.
                                                     23


Hellmann, T., Murdock, K., and Stiglitz, J.E. (2000): "Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking and
    Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?" American Economic Review, 90 (1), 147-
    165.
Jeanne, O. (2001): “Sovereign Debt Crises and the International Financial Architecture,” manuscript, IMF.
Johnson, G. H. (1967): “The possibility of income losses from increased efficiency or factor accumulation
    in the presence of tariffs,” Economic Journal, March, pp. 151-154.
Kaminsky, G. L.and C. M. Reinhart. (1999): “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-of-
    Payments Problems,” American Economic Review; 89(3), June, pp. 473-500.
Kaminsky, G. L., S. Lizondo and C. M. Reinhart. (1998): “Leading Indicators of Currency Crises,” IMF
    Staff Papers, Vol. 5 No.1, March, pp. 1-48.
Kohn, M. and N. Marion. (1992): “The Implications of Knowledge-Based Growth for the Optimality of
    Open Capital Markets,” Canadian Journal of Economics; 25(4), November, pp. 865-83.
Kletzer, Kenneth. (1984): "Asymmetries of Information and LDC Borrowing with Sovereign Risk," The
    Economic Journal, Vol. 94, June.
Krueger, Ann. (2001): International Monetary Fund;
    http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2001/122001.htm
Levine R. (1997): “Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda,” Journal of Economic
    Literature, 45, June: 688-726.
Martin P. and H. Rey. (2001): “Financial Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or Without Crash,”
    manuscript, New York Fed.
Miller, M. H. and L. Zhang. (2000): “Sovereign Liquidity Crisis: the Strategic Case for a Payment
    Standstill,” Economic Journal, Vol. 110, (January) pp. 335-362.
McKinnon, Ronald. (1991): The Order of Economic Liberalization: Financial Control in the Transition to
    a Market Economy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
McKinnon R. I.; and H. Pill. (1996): “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital Flows: The
    Overborrowing Syndrome.” In Ito T. and A. O, Krueger, eds. Financial deregulation and integration
    in East Asia. NBER-East Asia Seminar on Economics, vol. 5. Chicago and London: University of
    Chicago Press, pp. 7-42.
Meltzer, Allan. (1998): “Asian Problems and the IMF,” Testimony prepared for the Joint Economic
    Committee, US Congress, February 24, Washington.
Obstfeld, M., (1994): “Risk-taking, global diversification and growth,” American Economic Review 85,
    December, 1310-29.
Portes, R. (2000): “Sovereign Debt Restructuring: The Role of Institutions for Collective Action,”
    manuscript, CEPR, March.
Rodrik, D. (1999): “Where Did All The Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and Growth
    Collapses” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 4, December, pp. 358-412.
                                                    24


_______ (1998): “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Peter Kenen (ed), Should the IMF
    Pursue Capital Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance no. 207, Princeton: Princeton
    University Press (May).
____ and Andres Velasco. (1999): “Short-Term Capital Flows,” NBER Working Paper No.w7364.
Rogoff, K. (1985): “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 100 (November), pp. 1169-1189.
________ (1999): “International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial Instability,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives, Vol. 13, no. 4 (Fall): 21- 42.
Sachs, Jeffrey, (1995): "Do We Need an International Lender of Last Resort?" Princeton University, Frank
    Graham Memorial Lecture.
Soros, George. (1998): The Crisis of Global Capitalism, New York: Public Affairs Press.
Williamson, John and Molly Mahar. (1998): A Survey of Financial Liberalization, Princeton Essays in
    International Finance, No. 211, November.
World Bank. (1998): Global economic perspective.
                                                   25




The Welfare effect                                                 Explanation
of financial opening
Potentially large      Financial opening may lead to large benefits, stemming from better risk pooling,
benefits.              information collection and maturity transformation, providing thereby deeper liquidity
                       [Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990), Obstfeld (1994), Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1998)].

Positive but small     Second order magnitude gains from international diversification of output risk [Cole and
benefits from          Obstfeld (1991)].
financial opening.
Ambiguous welfare      - If production does involve learning by doing, opening capital
effects.               markets does not necessarily improve welfare for the nation or for the world
                       as a whole [Kohn and Marion (1991)].
                       - Overborrowing due to moral hazard and euphoric expectations, leading to crises
                       [McKinnon and Pill (1996); Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999)].
                       - Overborrowing due to congestion externalities, where atomistic agents do not internalize
                       the full effects of marginal borrowing on future welfare [Aizenman (1989)];
                       Overborrowing due to free rider problems in economies short of international collateral,
                       generated by imperfections of the domestic capital market [Caballero and Krishnamurthy
                       (2001)].
                       - Emerging markets are more prone to financial crashes. This will be the case when financial
                       market capitalization depends on the expectations of agents regarding aggregate investment
                       in their economy. This gives rise to potential coordination failures, which may be
                       exacerbated for low income countries by financial globalization [Martin and Rey (2001)].




                                            Table 1
                       The welfare effects of financial opening – Theory
                                                     26




Proposed by     Emphasis on                                           Key features

Meltzer         Ex ante steps      The IMF would provide unconditional short-term credit only to countries that are
Committee       to reduce the      pre-approved [ex-ante conditionality]. The credit is at penalty rate. Recommend
Report          moral hazard       to restrain the IMF’s ability to allocate credit using ex-post conditionality, and to
                induced by         prevent the IMF from supporting countries following loose fiscal and monetary
                institutional      discipline.
                bailouts
Basle           Ex-ante risk       The adjustment of the minimum capital standards to the risk exposure of banks,
Committee       management         including an adjustment for sovereign risk. This is done in order to mitigate
[supported by   by creditors       moral hazard induced by deposit insurance, due to the ‘Too big to fail’ systemic
Chairman                           risk doctrine.
Greenspan]
Eichengreen     Ex-ante risk       Argues for Chilean-style capital-inflow taxes as the only effective solution to the
(1999)          management         dangers of an open capital account when risk management is inadequate,
                by debtors         supervision and regulation are not effective, and there is a culture of explicit
                                   guarantees.
Sachs (1995)    Ex-post crisis     Adopting international bankruptcy-style procedures akin to those applied to
                resolution         corporate debt. The proposed procedure provides better coordination among
Miller and                         competing creditors, as well as a short-run relief to the debtor from the induced
Zhang (2000)                       credit crunch, enabling the continuation of export and production. This would be
                                   done as part of a controlled restructuring, and may include issuing new senior
                                   debt.
Portes (2000)                      The addition of collective action clauses to loan agreements and the
                                   establishment of standing bondholders committees are needed for a market-based
                                   solution to be feasible.
Kreuger                            International workout mechanism: a framework offering a debtor country legal
(2001)                             protection from creditors that stand in the way of a necessary restructuring, in
                                   exchange for an obligation of the debtor to negotiate with its creditors in good
                                   faith and to put in place policies that would prevent a similar problem from
                                   arising in the future.
Buiter and      Crisis             Attaching to all foreign currency liabilities the option entitling the borrowers to
Sibert (1999)   mitigation and     extend the debt for a specified period, at a mandatory penalty rate.
                resolution
Soros (1998)    Ex-ante            Insurance by a global authority, akin to a global FDIC. Borrowers would pay the
                insurance          premium. International monitors (like the IMF or the BIS) would set borrowing
                against default.   ceilings, and no bailouts would be enforced on non-insured loans.

Jeanne (2001)                      “Crisis insurance fund” which bails out countries conditional on the payment of
                                   risk premium and on making the needed fiscal adjustments.
Rogoff (1999)   Ex-ante steps      Shifting financing from debt to equity. This would be facilitated by mitigating
                to reduce          the factors contributing to the bias towards debt [like a deposit insurance which
                crises             subsidizes bank intermediation; underdeveloped equity markets in emerging
                incidence          markets, etc.].
Kaminsky,
Lizondo and
Reinhar                            A warning system for crises, taking into account a broad variety of indicators.
(1998)



                                               Table 2
                                        Overview of proposals
                                  27




          S                             S
r                                 r




r*                                r*
                              I                                I
                         I'                         I'
                 I                              I


          a                                   b
     Financial autarky                 Financial integration
