                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CAP AND TRADE POLICIES IN THE PRESENCE OF MONOPOLY AND
                         DISTORTIONARY TAXATION


                                            Don Fullerton
                                           Gilbert E. Metcalf


                                          Working Paper 8901
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8901


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




This research was supported by a grant to both authors from the National Science Foundation (NSF SBR-
9811324). The second author also acknowledges the support of the Joint Program on the Science and Policy
of Global Change at MIT. Helpful comments were provided by Richard Arnott, Larry Goulder, Ian Parry,
and Kerry Smith. David Fu provided excellent research assistance. This paper is part of the NBER’s
research program in Public Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Don Fullerton and Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Cap and Trade Policies in the Presence of Monopoly and Distortionary Taxation
Don Fullerton and Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 8901
April 2002
JEL No. H2, Q2



                                             ABSTRACT


        We extend an analytical general equilibrium model of environmental policy with pre-existing
labor tax distortions to include pre-existing monopoly power as well. We show that the existence of
monopoly power has two offsetting effects on welfare. First, the environmental policy reduces monopoly
profits, and the negative effect on income increases labor supply in a way that partially offsets the
pre-existing labor supply distortion. Second, environmental policy raises prices, so interaction with the
pre-existing monopoly distortion further exacerbates the labor supply distortion. This second effect is
larger, for reasonable parameter values, so the existence of monopoly reduces the welfare gain (or
increases the loss) from environmental restrictions.




Don Fullerton                                                   Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
University of Texas                                             Tufts University
Austin, TX 78712                                                Medford, MA 22105
and NBER                                                        and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu                                         gmetcalf@tufts.edu
         The Clear Air Act of 1990 introduced cap and trade policies on a large scale for the
electric utility industry in the United States. The goal of the tradable allowance program for
sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions is to reduce emissions by 10 million tons below 1980 levels by
2008.1 That goal is to be met through a two-step phased reduction in emissions. Phase I ran from
1995 through 1999, and phase II began in 2000. Allowances are given to electric utilities on the
basis of historic emissions. Giving away allowances, rather than selling them, was a political
expedient that helped generate sufficient support for the allowances program that it could get off
the ground. Economists have long noted the distributional implications of giving away
allowances; more recently, economists have noted the efficiency implications of giving them
away in the presence of pre-existing tax distortions.2 For example, Bovenberg and Goulder
(1996) calculate that if marginal environmental damages (MED) from carbon emissions are only
$25 per ton, then the optimal carbon tax with revenues returned lump-sum is zero or negative
(their Table 2, p. 992). In other words, no carbon tax is better than a positive carbon tax. Giving
allowances to firms is conceptually equivalent to a carbon tax with revenues returned lump-sum,
so their results suggest that sufficiently low environmental damages mean that the allowance
program is welfare reducing. Parry (1997) also finds that pollution quotas can reduce welfare in
the presence of pre-existing labor taxes. These papers assume perfectly competitive markets.
         An important theoretical and empirical question is how the existence of market power
affects the optimal design of environmental policy in the presence of distortionary taxation. In
this paper, we extend a simple analytic general equilibrium model with environmental policy and
pre-existing labor tax distortions to allow also for monopoly production of a polluting good. The
electric generating industry has many characteristics of monopoly power. A recent report by the
U.S. Department of Energy (Office of Policy (2000)) notes that many electricity markets are
highly concentrated and that the restructuring of electricity markets raises the possibility of
increased market power. The Wall Street Journal states: “Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson
said he has ‘strong evidence’ that some utilities are using near-monopoly power to raise electric
rates far beyond competitive levels” (Fialka (2000), p. A4). Yet much of the previous work in
this area has assumed that firms are perfectly competitive.
         In addition to extending the model, we provide numerical calculations of the impact of

1
  See Schmalensee et al. (1998) for a discussion of the characteristics of the emissions trading market. The program
also put limits on nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions.
                                                   -2-

pollution restrictions, both for a competitively-produced good and for a monopoly-produced good
associated with pollution. An example of such a restriction on emissions is the introduction of
permits under the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, but the model is general enough to
represent different kinds of policies toward any pollutant in any country. Because all producers
are identical in our model, a command and control (CAC) restriction on emissions is equivalent to
a cap-and-trade permit policy. And because of perfect certainty, government capture of scarcity
rents from either such quantity restriction is equivalent to a tax on pollution. Intermediate cases
are also possible: handout of half the permits is equivalent to a pollution tax with half of the
revenue returned lump sum.
        Whereas Pigou (1932) proposes a tax on pollution equal to MED, Buchanan (1969) first
notes that this prescription must be modified when the producer is a monopolist. Buchanan
shows that the desired policy response in the case of a monopoly is to increase output, while the
desired policy in the case of pollution is to decrease output. Thus, with a pollution-generating
monopolist, one cannot tell a priori if a tax is desirable at all. Asch and Seneca (1976) identify
conditions under which the imposition of a pollution tax equal to MED would increase or
decrease welfare, again in the special case of linear demand and cost. In addition, they provide
some data from the 1970s to show that a substantial number of industries have marked monopoly
power and are significant sources of pollution. Misiolek (1980) extended Asch and Seneca's
analysis by deriving the formula for the optimal tax rate on pollution for the special case of linear
demand and cost. When the socially-efficient output is below the monopoly output, the optimal
tax equals MED less a term equal to the ratio of MED to the price elasticity of demand. Barnett
(1980) derives an optimal tax rule that does not impose linearity and also allows for pollution
abatement activities.3
        All of these models are partial equilibrium and ignore the impact of pollution taxes on
factor markets. They also ignore the possibility of pre-existing distortionary taxes in other
markets. Browning (1994) shows that because monopoly power raises prices, it reduces the real
net wage and exacerbates labor tax distortions. Then Browning (1997) shows that because taxes
raise prices relative to the wage, they enlarge the welfare cost of monopoly. While Browning
considers the interaction of monopoly power and taxes, other papers consider the interaction of

2
 See e.g., Bovenberg and Goulder (1996), Parry (1997), Goulder et al. (1997), and Fullerton and Metcalf (2001).
3
 Oates and Strassmann (1984) also calculate the welfare interactions of monopoly output restrictions and pollution.
Their model is partial equilibrium in nature, however, and ignores other tax distortions.
                                                   -3-

environmental policy and taxes (see Bovenberg and de Mooij (1994), Parry (1995), and other
papers mentioned in footnote 2 above). Thus, a contribution of our paper is that we consider all
three distortions simultaneously in a general equilibrium model that can be solved analytically.4
         In prior competitive models where environmental policy generates scarcity rents (Fullerton
and Metcalf (2001)), the extent of government capture of those rents affects whether
environmental policy can improve welfare at all.5 However, that prior paper does not consider
monopoly power, and it does not include any calculations, parameter values, or numerical
magnitudes. Here, we find that the rate of profits tax (capture of rents) is equally important with
monopoly power. However, the existence of monopoly has two offsetting effects on welfare.
First, the environmental policy reduces monopoly profits. The resulting negative effect on
income increases labor supply, which partially offsets the pre-existing labor supply distortion.
Second, both monopoly and environmental policy raise prices and thus reduce the real net wage,
so interaction between them exacerbates the labor supply distortion. Thus, adding monopoly
power means adding an income effect that increases labor supply and a price effect (of higher
output prices on the real net wage) that reduces labor supply. The relative magnitudes of these
two offsetting effects can only be determined numerically. When we add parameter values and
calculate the size of each effect, we find that this second effect is larger. For reasonable
parameter values, the existence of monopoly reduces the welfare gain (or increases the loss) from
environmental restrictions.
         Next, we sketch out the general equilibrium model used in our analysis. Section I
describes our initial model with perfectly competitive firms, while Section II provides some
numerical results. Section III extends the model to allow for monopoly production of the dirty
good, and Section IV concludes.


I. The Model
         We develop a simple general equilibrium model with N identical individuals who own a


4
 Interest in environmental policy analysis under conditions of imperfect competition is growing as evidenced by
Katsoulacos and Xepapadeas (1995) and the papers contained in Carraro et al. (1996). Nearly all these papers focus
on oligopolistic markets in a partial equilibrium setting and ignore tax distortions in other markets.
5
  The rents impact is related to the tax-interaction and revenue-recycling effects, as discussed by Goulder et al.
(1997). We have avoided this terminology because the casual reader might confuse revenue recycling and revenue
raising. See Fullerton and Metcalf (2001) for further discussion of this point.
                                                      -4-

single resource and sell it in the market to earn income that can be used to buy two different
goods. One of the goods is a "clean" good and the other is a "dirty" good (that is, one for which
pollution is a by-product of the production process).
         This static model considers only one time period, with no saving decision. For simplicity
we refer to the resource as time available for labor supply, but under some conditions it can be
interpreted more generally as a fixed total amount of labor, capital, land, and any other resource
that can be sold in the market (in amount L) or used at home (in amount LH). The resource kept
at home could be interpreted either as leisure or as a resource used in home production. We
assume perfect certainty, no transactions costs, and constant returns to scale production.
         Each individual receives utility from per-capita amounts of a nonpolluting good (X), a
polluting good (Y), and leisure (LH), and from the total amounts of a government-provided
nonrival public good (G), and another nonrival public good called environmental quality (E). The
per-capita amount Y is produced using per-capita amounts of labor (LY) and of emissions (Z).
Total emissions (NZ) negatively affect the environment through:

(1)                                       E = e(NZ) ,         where e' < 0.

Goods are produced according to:

(2a)                                                    X = LX
(2b)                                                 Y = F(LY, Z)
(2c)                                                   G = NLG

We define a unit of X as the amount that can be produced using one unit of labor. The
numeraire good is L, or equivalently X. The commodity Y is produced in a constant returns to
scale function (F), using clean labor (LY) and emissions (Z). Emissions may include gaseous,
liquid, or solid wastes and we assume that they require some private costs for removal and
disposal. These private costs must come in the form of resources, so we define one unit of
emissions as the amount that requires one unit of private resources (Z = LZ).6 Thus, the private


6
 Note that emissions are positively related to the use of these resources: LZ is not to clean up or reduce emissions,
but just to cart it away. Abatement is undertaken by substituting away from Z and into LY. Marginal abatement cost
in units of labor is given by the marginal rate of transformation between LY and Z. This overall production function is
still constant returns to scale, since Z is a linear function of LZ. The private cost for emissions helps justify our
assumption of an internal solution with a finite choice for Z, even without corrective government policy.
                                             -5-

cost of Z is always 1. We define a unit of Y such that the marginal cost of production equals 1
(before the introduction of environmental policy). Finally, some labor (LG) is also used to
produce the public good. The combination of these production relationships provides the overall
resource constraint:

(3)                                 NL = NX + N(LY + LZ) + G .

Individuals maximize the Lagrangian:

(4)                     U(X, Y, LH, G, E) + λ{(1-tL)L + (1-tΠ)Π - X - pYY}

by their choice of X, Y, and LH, where tL is the tax rate on resource (labor) supply, tΠ is the tax
rate on profits, and Π are profits. Economic profits can arise from two sources in this model.
First, the cap and trade program provides scarcity rents for firms that receive permits (equal to the
market value of the permits received). Second, profits will arise if Y is produced by a
monopolist. In this section, we focus on profits arising from the cap and trade program. Later we
introduce monopoly production and profits.
        Our approach is to start at an initial competitive equilibrium with an existing tax on labor,
but without any policy correction for the external effect of Z on E, and then to analyze small
changes. Following the log-linearization approach used by Bovenberg and de Mooij (1994),
Fullerton and Metcalf (2001), and others, we differentiate all equations above and re-express them
in terms of proportional changes ( L̂ ≡ dL/L). We then solve for the change in utility, dU, divide
by λ to express the change in dollars, and divide by L to get the dollar gain or loss as a fraction
of income:


                                     dU             Z
(5)                                     = t L L̂ - µ  Ẑ
                                     λL             L


where µ = -NUEe′/λ is the "marginal environmental damage" (MED). A new environmental

regulation can be represented by a small exogenous reduction in pollution ( Ẑ <0). We then need
to solve for the endogenous change in labor supply. Once we have L̂ , equation (5) says that
welfare is lowered to the extent that this policy reduces labor supply (because of the pre-existing
tax on labor, tL). Also, welfare is raised to the extent that the policy reduces pollution.
                                                  -6-

         Next, in order to derive an expression for the change in labor supply, L̂ , we need to trace
the effect of the policy ( Ẑ <0) on the price of emissions, the price of output, and thus on the real
net wage. We also trace the effect of the policy on income flows that might affect labor supply.
These income effects include the possibility that the policy generates private profits.
         Any policy to reduce Z will raise the marginal product of Z above its private cost. In
the case of the Clean Air Act, the limited number of permits are handed out for free (on the basis
of historic energy use). Thus the scarcity rent goes to the permit recipient. These permits can be
used to yield a marginal product greater than the private cost of emissions, or they can be sold.
Either way, the policy has generated a private profit. We define these profits as:

(6)                                               Π = (pZ -1)Z

The rules for the initial allocation of these permits do not matter in our model, because our N
identical agents must own whatever firm or other entity is given the permits. The price pZ in
equation (6) is the marginal value of emissions, and the private cost of emissions is 1, so (pZ – 1)
is the market price of the tradable allowance.7 Note that while the profits are initially given to the
firms, they can be recovered by the government through taxation (tΠ). As seen below, the tax rate
on profits will be an important policy instrument.
         We start at a competitive equilibrium with no environmental policy and zero profits.
Thus, pZ = 1, and Π in equation (6) is zero. When we introduce a new policy to restrict
emissions, any generated profits might affect consumer behavior and government revenue.
         The government budget constraint is:

(7)                                            G = NtLL + NtΠΠ

The environmental policy affects labor supply and profits, so it also affects government revenue.
In order to hold spending on G constant, we assume that government adjusts the labor tax to
balance the budget. We differentiate the government budget (7) and set dG=0 to calculate the
necessary change in tL. For notational convenience, it is expressed below as a proportion of the
net wage ( t̂ L ≡ dt L /(1 − t L ) ).

7
  Current prices for SO2 allowances at the end of 1999 were roughly $150 per ton of emissions. See U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (2000). If instead of creating restrictions through a cap and trade program, the
government simply restricted emissions, then pZ would be a shadow price rather than a market price.
                                                     -7-

         We set tΠ to 1 for any case where government receives the scarcity rent, such as for sale
of permits, and we set it to zero for the other extreme where private parties keep the rents. This
specification also allows us to consider the case where a pre-existing corporate profits tax rate
would take part of the firm's private profits. We do not adjust this tax rate endogenously to help
maintain the necessary revenue to pay for G, but its existence greatly affects the amount by which
the labor tax might have to be adjusted. Suppose, for example, that a permit or CAC policy
generates profits but also reduces labor supply and thus labor tax revenue. If the tax on profits is
zero, then the government has to raise the labor tax rate and exacerbate labor supply distortions. If
tΠ equals 1, then the government may be able to reduce the labor tax rate.
         To obtain specific effects on labor supply, we assume that utility is separable in the form
U = U(V{Q(X,Y),LH}, G, E), where Q is a homothetic function of X and Y. If pQ is a price
index on Q(X,Y), then the real net wage is w = (1-tL)/pQ. Differentiation yields ŵ = − t̂ L − p̂ Q .

Also, p̂ Q = φp̂ Y , where φ is the expenditure share of the dirty good in the consumer's budget, so:


(8)                                                ŵ = − t̂ L − φp̂ Y


         The consumer’s maximization of (4) yields a labor supply function that can be written as
L = L(w, (1-tΠ)Π/pQ). If profits were always zero, then L depends only on the real net wage, w,
and differentiation yields L̂ = εŵ , where ε is the uncompensated labor supply elasticity.
However, labor supply also depends on income effects from the change in real net profits. We
differentiate all equations to show how the emission restriction raises the value of emissions pZ,
which affects profits and raises the price of output. This raises pQ, which lowers the real net
wage w, which affects labor supply L.
         For the analysis that follows, we make a simplification of the model to avoid notational
clutter and undue complexity. We assume that the output Y itself generates externalities either
in production or in consumption. In other words, we assume Y = Z (and LY = 0).8 Thus
Ŷ = Ẑ , and p̂ Y = p̂ Z .9 As we discuss below, this simplification affects the quantitative but not the

8
  Examples include gasoline, and cigarettes, where the environmental problem is not from one of the inputs to
production, but from the use of the final product. For these two examples, it is easy to see how a mandated reduction
of every firm's output (pollution) could generate private profits.
9
  The marginal cost of production of Y is then simply the marginal cost of Z, which we assume equal to 1. In
this case, the change in the price to consumers directly reflects the increased cost of pollution.
                                                             -8-

qualitative results. With this simplification, we find that:10


                                                   (1 - t L )φ (η - ε)                  
(9)                L̂ = (1 - t Π )                                                       Ŷ ≡ (1 - t Π )∆Ŷ
                                    (1 - t Π )φ (η - ε) - σQ (1 - φ )(1 - t L - ε t L ) 

where η is the income elasticity of labor supply, and σQ is the elasticity of substitution between
X and Y in consumption. This equation provides L̂ as a function only of exogenous parameters
and the policy shock ( Ŷ ).
           A couple of comments are in order. First, the ratio in brackets (denoted ∆) will be positive
if the following three assumptions hold: leisure is a normal good (η<0); labor supply is not
backward-bending (ε≥0); and ε < (1-tL)/tL. We assume these three conditions hold throughout.11
Thus, with ∆ > 0, labor supply in (9) moves in the same direction as production of the dirty good
( Ŷ ) when the cap and trade program is implemented.
           Second, equation (9) shows the importance of tΠ. If government acquires all the rents for
use in reducing labor tax rates (that is, if tΠ = 1), then the policy will not affect labor supply and
will not exacerbate labor tax distortions. Otherwise, labor supply will fall. Finally, we can
combine equations to measure explicitly the welfare loss from the cap and trade policy. We
substitute equation (9) into (5) to obtain the welfare impact:


                                    dU                       Y 
(10)                                  =  t L (1 - t Π )∆ - µ  Ŷ ≡ - ψŶ
                                    λL                       L 


           Utility increases only if the cost of the larger labor supply distortion (tL(1-tΠ)∆) is less
than the benefits from reducing pollution (µY/L). Since Ŷ is negative, the sign of ψ indicates
the net effect on welfare.


II. Benchmark Results with Perfect Competition
           In this section we provide numerical magnitudes for the welfare loss from an incremental


10
     See Fullerton and Metcalf (1997) for details.
11
 The third condition will be satisfied if the initial point is on the normal side of the Laffer curve. Define revenue as
R = tLL , totally differentiate, and rearrange to get R̂/ t̂ L = (1 - t L ) / t L - ε .
                                                       -9-

cap and trade restriction for our model under perfect competition. In order to provide results, we
need to select plausible parameter values for (10). These will also be useful for subsequent
calculations in the monopoly case. For tL, we want a tax rate that applies to income from all
household resources (that is, national income). Total government spending in the U.S. is roughly
35% of national income, but incentives depend on a marginal tax rate that exceeds this average
tax rate. We feel that tL = 0.5 would be a reasonable choice to account for the progressive
Federal income tax, plus payroll tax, plus state and local income taxes, plus sales and excise
taxes. All of these taxes apply to market goods and not to leisure. However, we actually use tL
= 0.4, because the rate in our model is both an average rate and a marginal rate.12
         For the uncompensated labor supply elasticity ε, we need a single value to represent an
aggregate of all potential workers and all labor supply effects from changes in wages. As
discussed in Rosen (1980), these effects include not only hours worked, but also participation
decisions and effort on the job. Thus, the typical hours elasticity likely understates the overall
impact of changes in the real net wage. The literature includes many estimates of the hours
elasticity that are small or negative for men, and other estimates that are large and positive for
women.13 These estimates do not include participation decisions. Few have attempted to
aggregate and summarize all such effects into one number. One such attempt is in Russek (1996).
Taking into account both hours and participation, using many existing estimates for both men and
women, he concludes that "the total wage elasticity for the labor supply of the economy seems to
range somewhere between zero and 0.3" (p.10).14 In this study, we employ both 0.1 and 0.3 as
reasonable alternatives for the overall uncompensated wage elasticity (ε).
         Russek (1996) also finds that the aggregate income elasticity is about -0.30 for women
and about -0.10 for men. We use -0.2 for the aggregate income elasticity (η), so the
compensated labor supply elasticity (ε-η) is either 0.3 or 0.5. Note, by the way, that CAC or
permit polices will still affect non-environmental welfare even if ε were 0, because the creation
of profits generates an income effect that reduce labor supply and thus still exacerbate pre-


12
  An overall labor tax rate of 0.4 has become a standard assumption in the literature on marginal excess burden,
including Stuart (1984) and Browning (1987).
13
 In a questionnaire sent to labor economists, Fuchs et al. (1998) find that the mean belief is that the hours elasticity is
zero for men and 0.45 for women.
14
  Feldstein (1995) points out other behavioral alternatives to taxable labor supply, and he finds that the relevant
elasticity is at least 1.0 and could be higher.
                                                        - 10 -

existing distortions.
            Estimates for the elasticity of substitution in consumption, σQ, are not available for the
specific aggregation in our model between a "clean" good X and a "dirty" good Y. We choose a
base value of 1.0, which is broadly consistent with the empirical literature on substitution in
consumption, and we test the sensitivity of results to alternative values.
            For φ, we want an aggregate expenditure share for all goods with externalities in
production or consumption. Based on 1993 data in the Statistical Abstract of the United States
(U.S. Bureau of the Census 1999)), the industries most responsible for pollution include chemical
and paper producers, mining and primary metals, electric utilities, petroleum and coal production
and processing, and motor vehicles and equipment. Total production by those industries
constitutes almost 15% of GDP, so we use 0.15 for Y/L. Since φ is defined as pYY/{L(1-tL)},
and since tL = 0.4, we must have φ = 1/4. In other words, these polluting goods are primarily
private goods, so 15% of total output represents a quarter of private consumption.15
            Finally, we need a measure of marginal environmental damage (µ). Pearce and Turner
(1990) review studies finding that damages from pollution are 0.5% to 0.9% of GNP in the
Netherlands. Wicke (1990) reports estimates that are 6% of GNP in Germany. Freeman (1982,
2002) estimates that pollution damages would be about 1.25% of GNP or higher in the U.S. in the
absence of environmental polices.16 Unfortunately, none of these sources provides a measure of
marginal damages. Based on the figures just mentioned, we assume that total damages are 1.5%
of total output. Then, since Y is 15% of total output, we have damages that are about 10% of
Y. Again we use multiple alternatives. First, if this relationship were linear, then damages would
be about 10% of marginal output (µ=0.1). Second, however, these surveys do not include
damages from greenhouse gas emissions. Focusing on carbon emissions by the electric power
industry, Nordhaus (1991) reports estimates of MED ranging from a low of $7 per ton to a high of
$66 per ton. Parry et al. (1999) argue that typical estimates are below $20 per ton (p. 67). We
need to convert this number to damages per dollar of output. Carbon emissions associated with
electric power totaled 607.2 million metric tons in 1998 according to Energy Information
Administration (2001), and Gross Domestic Product for electric utility services is roughly $122.7


15
     In any case, as shown in Goulder et al. (1997), results are not sensitive to this parameter.
16
  Recent estimates by the EPA are much higher (on the order of one-fifth of GDP for 1990) as reported in U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (1997). Freeman (2002) notes that these estimates are controversial.
                                                    - 11 -

billion in that year.17 By division, we get 0.0050 tons of carbon per dollar of GDP in this industry.
Thus, $20/ton is 10 percent of the value of output (µ=0.1).
         Given the tremendous uncertainty associated with this number, we also provide results for
a case with "treble damages" (µ=0.3). Finally, as an alternative to reporting any specific value of
µ, we also report the threshold value of µ above which the welfare impact of the pollution
reduction becomes positive.
         Table 1 shows the effects of a permit or CAC policy that mandates a small reduction in the
quantity of the polluting good (Ŷ < 0) . The left-hand section shows assumed values for some of
the input parameters. The first four rows show results for tL =0.4, while we vary ε and µ. When
marginal damage µ is 0.1, then column 1 shows that a 1% reduction in Y yields benefits from
reduced pollution that are 0.015% of national income. In the first row where ε is also 0.1, and
scarcity rents are not taxed (tΠ=0), we find that ∆ = 0.09 (so a 1% reduction in output of Y
induces a 0.09% reduction in labor supply). Multiplication by the tax rate (0.4) yields a welfare
cost from the labor supply reduction that is 0.036% of national income. Taking into account both
the environmental gain (0.015) and the labor market loss (-0.036), we find that the net effect is a
reduction in welfare equal to 0.021% of national income. As noted in column (4), the output
restriction will reduce welfare so long as µ is less than 0.240. Using a similar model with
perfect competition, Parry (1997) also finds that pollution quotas can reduce welfare in the
presence of pre-existing labor tax distortions.
         With a 40 percent tax on rents (tΠ=tL), where those revenues are used to reduce the labor
tax rate, the added labor market distortion is only 0.023 (rather than 0.036). This figure still
exceeds the 0.015 environmental gain, by 0.008 of national income. If we continued to increase
the tax on rents, the loss from the labor distortion would continue to fall. Note that the threshold
value of marginal damages has fallen from 0.240 to 0.153. Recapturing some of the rents raises
the likelihood that the policy will be welfare improving in the case with uncertainty about µ .
         The breakeven tax rate, the rate at which the environmental benefits of the permit policy
are just offset by the increased labor market distortions, is 62 percent (see column (8)).18 In the

17
  GDP is reported for electric, gas, and sanitary services. Electric utility services are 59.9 percent of gross
output for this cluster of industries. We apply that fraction to the whole industry's GDP to obtain our estimate.
18
  Giving away permits corresponds to tΠ = 0, while selling them corresponds to tΠ = 1. A hybrid policy where some
are sold and others given away is possible, and so tΠ between 0 and 1 is possible. Bovenberg and Goulder (2001)
consider such a hybrid policy.
                                                   - 12 -

limit, with 100 percent capture of scarcity rents (tΠ=1), then labor supply is unaffected (equation
(9)). An environmental policy that collects all of the scarcity rents can eliminate the negative
effects on the pre-existing labor distortion. This policy can have unambiguously positive effects
on welfare.19 Notice, however, that 100 percent capture is necessary just to get all of the benefits
from the environment.
         The second row of Table 1 changes the wage elasticity from 0.1 to 0.3, so the negative
effect on labor is enlarged. Welfare falls even more. The point is that when environmental
controls raise production costs, the lower real net wage can reduce effort on the job, induce
secondary workers to quit, or even shift the same effort from taxable to nontaxable forms like
home production or the underground economy. As taxable labor supply becomes more
responsive, the environmental policy is less likely to raise welfare. In this scenario, the breakeven
tax rate on profits is over 80 percent.
         The next two rows triple the marginal environmental damage (from 0.1 to 0.3). If the
labor supply elasticity is back down to 0.1, then the environmental gain (0.045) exceeds the loss
from the labor distortion (0.036). Even with "treble damages," this policy just barely raises
welfare (by 0.009) with a zero profits tax. Still, however, the taxation of scarcity rents can reduce
the labor market loss and leave more of the environmental gain.
         When both parameters are 0.3, the large environmental gain (0.045) is more than offset by
the larger loss from labor distortions (0.062) when scarcity rents are untaxed. As indicated in
column (4), the MED would have to be over 40% of the firm's production cost for this
environmental regulation to break even in terms of welfare. In particular examples, the
externality might well be high, perhaps over 100% of the firm's production cost. The point
remains, however, that even a large gain from correcting a large externality can be offset by losses
from labor market distortions – unless the government captures the scarcity rents. In the fourth
row (where both parameters are 0.3), the 40% tax on rents converts the net loss (-0.017) into a
small net gain (0.004).
         The last two rows of Table 1 illustrate the effect of altering the initial labor tax rate
(keeping ε and µ at 0.3). Consider column 3 (where tΠ=0). If tL is 0.3, instead of 0.4, the net


19
  This case with tΠ=1 corresponds exactly to the case of Bovenberg and de Mooij (1994) where a tax on the dirty
good generates revenues used to reduce the tax on labor income. See equation (13) in their paper, when their initial
tD = 0.
                                                    - 13 -

welfare effect is a small net gain (0.007) instead of a loss (-0.017).20 Note, however, that this
0.007 net gain is still only a small fraction of the 0.053 gain possible with government capture of
the rents. If the initial tax rate is raised to 0.50, then the welfare loss is increased from -0.017 to
-0.043. If scarcity rents are not taxed and the tax on labor income is 50%, then the marginal
environmental damage (µ) would have to be over 60% of production cost before the regulatory
policy could begin to improve welfare.
         In calculations not reported here, we have also considered a model in which pollution and
labor are inputs in the production of a dirty good and firms can substitute between these two
inputs (reduce pollution by the use of more resources). Not surprisingly, the welfare impact of a
cap and trade program depends importantly on the elasticity of substitution between the dirty and
clean input. For an elasticity below one, we find that the welfare losses of the pollution restriction
increase. For example, in the scenario corresponding to the fourth row of Table 1, the net welfare
loss rises from -0.017 to -.077 as the elasticity falls from one to zero. Increasing the elasticity
from one to two shifts the welfare loss to a small welfare gain (0.004). See Fullerton and Metcalf
(1997) for more details on these calculations.
         A permit policy like the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 creates a scarcity rent that is
left in private hands. It does not necessarily improve welfare, in this second-best world, even
when starting with a substantial uncorrected externality.


III. Model and Results with Monopoly Production
         To this point, we have assumed that all markets are perfectly competitive, but we now
explore how environmental policies affect welfare in the presence of imperfect competition. To
be specific, we consider the case where the polluting good (Y) is provided by a monopolist.21 We
motivated this research by noting the possibility of market power in the electric utility industry, an
industry subjected to cap and trade restrictions in 1990. The phenomenon of monopoly power in
polluting industries is more general. Hall (1986) reports mark-up ratios by industry using post-

20
  When tL changes from 0.4 to 0.3, we assume that φ remains at 1/4, so Y/L = φ(1-tL) must change (from 0.15 to
0.18).
21
  If instead the clean sector has monopoly power, then the regulatory reduction in Y will offset the monopolist's
reduction in X, but it will reinforce the wage tax effect by reducing both goods relative to leisure. Also, the model
could incorporate other forms of imperfect competition. Browning (1997) uses a simple mark-up to represent an
arbitrary degree of market power, but we wish to specify monopoly behavior in order to see how that mark-up
changes. We believe that our results would not be substantially different with some other specific model of oligopoly
                                                      - 14 -

World War II data and separates industries into groups exhibiting "substantial," "some," and
"little" market power (his Table 1, p. 298). Of the seven industries included in his category
exhibiting substantial market power, four are significant polluting industries (chemicals, paper,
motor vehicles, and primary metals). Three of the polluting industries (metal mining, utilities,
and oil and gas extraction) have high but unreliably estimated mark-up ratios. Only one polluting
industry (other transportation equipment) is included in the group exhibiting little mark-up.22
           Aside from allowing for a polluting monopolist, we maintain the model developed in the
previous sections. Our economy now has three pre-existing distortions: a wage tax, a monopolist,
and an uncorrected externality. As a consequence, the welfare effect of any particular change
cannot be known a priori. The initial production of Y may be too low because of monopoly, or
too high because of the externality. Similarly, even the initial labor supply may be above or below
the welfare-maximizing level. Any environmental policy that requires a reduction in Y will
alleviate some problems and exacerbate others. We solve for the general equilibrium effect of a
small policy on all three distortions.
           The production relationships are linear as in our first model above. The household budget
constraint in (4) is unaffected, but after-tax monopoly profits (1-tΠ)Π exist prior to the
implementation of any environmental policy. These profits are defined by:


(11)                                             Π = (pY - 1)Y

           If Y is produced in a competitive market, then the initial equilibrium price of Y (pY)
equals 1. If Y is produced by a monopolist, then the firm maximizes profits by choosing Y (or
equivalently pY, given the demand curve). We define εY as the absolute value of the price
elasticity of demand for Y, so the firm’s first-order condition for profit maximization is:23

                                                            pY
(12)                                             pY - 1 =
                                                            εY

The degree to which the price of Y exceeds marginal cost depends on the elasticity of demand

or monopolistic competition, but we leave these questions for future research.
22
   Evidence supporting market power in polluting industries can also be found in Domowitz et al. (1988),
Beccarello (1996), and Considine (2001).
23
     Totally differentiate (11), set dΠ to zero, and re-arrange.
                                                    - 15 -

for Y. The higher is         εY, the less distortion (mark-up) is created by monopolization of Y.
Equation (12) can only be satisfied if the monopolist produces in the portion of the demand curve
where the elasticity is greater than one.24
         Totally differentiating the definition of profits in (11), and using the first order condition
for the monopolist in (12) yields:


(13)                                         ˆ = Ŷ + ε Y p̂ .
                                             Π              Y



Also, along a demand curve where income and other prices are constant, the consumer's behavior
is defined by:


(14)                                           Ŷ = - ε Y p̂ Y .


The firm uses the demand curve in (14) to arrive at its maximizing behavior, so substitution into
(13) yields Π̂ = 0 . That is, the firm cannot increase profits by movement in either direction
along the demand curve. We use (13) to calculate a change in profits that is not zero, however,
for an environmental regulation that shifts the demand curve by changing income and other
prices. Also, occasionally, it will be useful to write profits as:

                                                                   pY Y
(15)                                     Π = ( p Y - 1) Y =
                                                                   εY

where the first equality reflects the definition of profits in (11) and the second equality reflects the
firm's behavior in (12). The far-right expression for profits is written in terms of εY, the demand
elasticity for Y. Next, we express εY in terms of σQ.
         Differentiating the household budget constraint (holding income constant) yields:

                                                     φ
(16)                                       X̂ = -       (Ŷ + p̂ Y).
                                                    1-φ




24
   We set parameters below such that the initial pY is 1.2, so profits are 20% of the cost of producing Y. This is
consistent with the estimates of market power reported in Office of Policy (2000). Equation (12) then implies that εY
 is six. We also derive the corresponding value of σQ, which also must exceed one.
                                                      - 16 -

Then, combining equations (14), (16), and the definition of the elasticity of substitution in
consumption, we have:

(17)                                          ε Y = φ + (1 - φ ) σQ .


Since εY must exceed 1, the monopoly solution also requires that σQ exceed 1.
         To obtain an expression for the welfare impact of regulation in the presence of monopoly,
we follow steps similar to those in the derivation of dU/λL above. We totally differentiate utility
and use first-order conditions from the consumer’s maximization problem, but we also use the
definition of profits. These steps yield:


                                       dU             Y     Π
(18)                                      = t L L̂ - µ Ŷ +  Ŷ
                                       λL             L     L

As before, the environmental policy lowers welfare to the extent that it reduces labor supply, and
raises welfare to the extent that it reduces production of the polluting good. The third term
represents the monopoly distortion. Since a monopolist inefficiently restricts production of its
good, further restrictions from the environmental policy reduce welfare. The usual partial
equilibrium model might compare the last two terms to see if the monopolist raises price toward
(or above) the social marginal cost of output. For example, if the initial pY is 1.2, then profits
are 20% of the cost of production of Y. But if µ=0.2, then these two effects exactly offset: the
monopolist already raises price to 1.2, which exactly reflects the social marginal cost of
production (1+µ). However, that partial equilibrium model neglects the effect of Ŷ on L̂ in
the first term of (18). We show below that labor supply, and thus welfare, must fall. The
implication is that the reverse policy with a forced increase in output would raise welfare (despite
the negative externality).25
         These results depend entirely on whether the monopolist has left the price of output below
the social marginal cost of production or has already raised it above the social marginal cost of


25
  An important issue is how to specify the counterfactual. Under one scenario, we could take Y/L from the previous
competitive model, and suppose that Y were to become monopolized. We would then calculate a new lower Y/L
for the monopoly case, and a new lower benefit from reduction of pollution (µY/L). Under a different scenario, Y/L
 is an observed value like 0.15, and we ask what would happen if that outcome represents a monopolized sector
instead of a competitive sector. We take this latter course, since it maintains the size of the polluting sector (and thus
 µY/L) across the two models.
                                                        - 17 -

production. Therefore, in numerical results below, we use pY = 1.2, and set µ to 0.1 or 0.3.
       To find the general equilibrium effect on labor supply, we again start with the
government's balanced-budget adjustment to the tax rate on labor. Any pre-existing tax rate on
profits is not adjusted. The government budget constraint in equation (7) is unchanged, but now
profits exist prior to the imposition of any new policy. Moreover, the change in profits is driven
by equation (16). We differentiate equation (7), use the expression for profits in equation (15) as
well as the change in profits in equation (13) to obtain:


                                        tL   φ tΠ 
(19)                         t̂ L = -          L̂ -  (Ŷ + εY p̂Y ).
                                        1 - t L   εY SL 

where SL is the share of after-tax labor income in total after-tax household income.
       Next, labor supply is a function of the real net wage and real nonlabor income. Thus
environmental regulations affect labor supply both through the effect of t̂ L on ŵ and the effect

of Ŷ on Π̂ . We differentiate the labor supply function and use equation (13) to get:


(20)                                                [
                                L̂ = εŵ + η SΠ Ŷ + (1 - φ) σQ p̂Y      ]
where SΠ is the share of after-tax profits in after-tax income. The expression in brackets is the
proportional change in real profits. Labor supply is affected by changes in the real after-tax wage
through ε (including both substitution and income effects) as well as changes in real profits
through η (effect of nonlabor income).
       Finally, we need an expression for the change in the price of Y attributable to the
environmental policy. We can use the equilibrium relationship between Y and pY to obtain this
expression. Totally differentiate the household budget constraint:

                            pY Y               (1 - t L )L                          Π
(21)               X̂ = -        (Ŷ + p̂ Y) +             (L̂ - t̂ L ) + (1 - t Π ) Π̂.
                             X                     X                                X

Substitute this equation into the definition of the elasticity of substitution in consumption (σQ),
and use equations (13), (17), and (19) to get:
                                                       - 18 -

                                         Ŷ                   SL
(22)                           p̂Y = -        +                              L̂
                                         εY       (1 - t L )(εY SL - φ t Π )


At this point, if we take Ŷ as an exogenous policy parameter, we have four equations that are
linear in four unknowns. By successive substitution, or Cramer's Rule, the four equations (8),
(19), (20), and (22) can be solved for p̂Y , t̂ L , ŵ , and L̂ . The long expression for L̂ is not

worth repeating here, but we use it to measure the welfare impact of a required reduction in Y.
Thus welfare in (18) can be re-expressed as -ψ Ŷ .
        For parameter values, we cannot use all the same selections as before. In the competitive
model, where pY = 1, we set (Y/L)=0.15 and tL=0.40, so government provision must be 40% of
output and X must be the remaining 45% of output. These ratios generate φ=0.250 for the
expenditure on Y as a share of the consumer's budget. In the monopoly model, we first assume
that the monopolist has set pY =1.2, so that profits are 20% of the output of Y. Second, we
choose to match the share of Y in total output (Y/L) across models, to keep the pollution impacts
comparable. But then the higher price on Y in the monopoly model means that consumers must
be spending more of their income on Y. We derive φ as the spending pYY = (1.2)(.15) as a
fraction of total consumer spending {(1.2)(.15)+.45}, so φ must be 0.286 in the monopoly
model. Third, we can no longer assume a unit elasticity of substitution between X and Y. Since
pY=1.2, equation (12) says that εY must be 6, and equation (17) says that σQ must be 8. These
values may seem high, but our model only has two commodities. The reality that constrains the
price charged by a monopolist from being even higher is that some other good can serve as a
reasonably close substitute. Then, to be able to compare results, we use this value (σQ=8) in both
the competitive model and in the monopoly model.26
        Finally, in cases where the pre-existing tΠ is positive, then the initial monopoly profits
must be generating some tax revenue. In those cases, we keep government spending at 40% of
national output by reducing the initial tax on labor supply according to:27

                                                    G       Π
(23)                                     tL =          - tΠ
                                                    NL      L

26
  When σQ is fixed across the two models, but φ is not, equation (17) says that εY must be 6.25 in the
competitive model and 6 in the monopoly model.
                                                           - 19 -


            Table 2 presents results for these parameters when Y is provided by a monopolist and for
purposes of comparison, also in a perfectly competitive market. All rows assume that the labor
supply elasticity ε is 0.3, and the first two rows vary the externality (µ=0.1 and 0.3). We first
analyze results for the perfectly competitive model. Note that the results for this competitive
model differ from those in Table 1, primarily by assuming a greater degree of substitutability
between X and Y in consumption. And because consumers have this greater ability to
substitute in consumption, the forced reduction in Y has less impact on raising the price of Y.
The consequence is a smaller decrease in the real net wage and a smaller loss from increasing the
labor market distortion. To see the impact of increasing σQ from 1 to 8, compare the first row of
Table 2 to the second row of Table 1 (with the same ε=0.3 and µ=0.1). The labor market loss is
cut by more than 80%, from 0.062 to 0.010. Since this loss is so much smaller, and the
environmental gain is still 0.015, this change in σQ has converted the overall effect on welfare
from negative in Table 1 to positive in Table 2. The next row in Table 2 shows that increasing
the MED from 0.1 to 0.3 also increases this net gain.
            The remaining rows of Table 2 keep µ=0.3 and show the effect of alternative values for
the initial tax on profits. As in Table 1, a higher tax on profits reduces the handout of scarcity
rent, which blunts the fall in labor supply attributable to that income effect. With 100% profits
tax, in the last row, all incremental labor market distortions are eliminated. Then the net welfare
effect is simply the gain from correcting the externality.
            The right half of Table 2 presents results from the monopoly model. First, note that the
initial tax rate on wage income is no longer fixed at 40%. With pre-existing profits, a higher
initial profits tax implies that a lower initial labor tax is required to raise 40% of national income.
The first two rows present results for the case where profits are untaxed (and the labor tax is
40%). The reduction in labor supply in the monopoly model is 70% of the reduction in the perfect
competition model (as evidenced by the loss from the labor market distortion in columns 3 and 8).
Households do not reduce labor supply as much in the monopoly model because the
environmental policy reduces monopoly profits, and leisure is a normal good. When µ is only
0.1, however, the net welfare effect of the regulation turns from positive in the competitive model
to negative in the monopoly model. The reason is that this monopolist has already raised price


27
     We use the same tax rate for monopoly profits and scarcity rents, but it would simple to allow these rates to differ.
                                                         - 20 -

(pY = 1.2) above social marginal cost (1+µ). The loss from exacerbating the monopoly distortion
combined with the loss from exacerbating the labor distortion then exceeds the environmental
gain. The aggravating impact of monopoly power is also reflected in the higher breakeven value
for marginal environmental damages ( µ * ) under monopoly.
         When µ = 0.3, the monopolist with pY = 1.2 has not restricted output "enough." In this
case the loss from the monopoly distortion (0.03) is less than the environmental gain (0.045).
Now the net welfare effect depends on the labor distortion. In the monopoly model, however, the
loss from the labor distortion is only 0.007. Why? First, the impact on labor is reduced
substantially by the use of σQ = 8, as mentioned above, in both the competitive model and the
monopoly model. When consumers can substitute into other goods, the policy has smaller effect
on the price of Y. It therefore has smaller effect on the real net wage and on labor supply.
Second, in the monopoly model, the environmental policy reduces pre-existing profits. The loss
of income has a positive effect on labor, since leisure is normal, which provides a "partial offset"
to the negative effect from the lower real net wage. These factors shrink L̂ to only -0.016,
which is multiplied by tL=0.4 to get the loss in welfare (0.007).
         The last three rows of Table 2 show that changes in tΠ have virtually no effect on the
0.007 loss from the labor distortion (column 7).28 Why? First, a higher initial profits tax means
that the income effect (from the change in monopoly profits) is smaller. Thus the "partial offset"
just mentioned is smaller, and labor supply does fall a bit more. The real wage falls by about -
0.058 in all three rows, and profits fall by about -0.038 in all three rows, but the higher tax on
profits makes the income effect smaller. With 100% profits tax, and no income effect to offset
the wage effect, labor supply falls by the full ε ŵ , which is (0.3)(-0.058) = -0.017. Second,
even though the higher profits tax enlarges the effect on labor supply (slightly), it reduces the
initial required labor tax. The net effect on welfare is the product, t L L̂ , so these two effects
offset each other, and the loss from the labor distortion is essentially unchanged.
         The results from this section illustrate two points about environmental policies that restrict
output. First, the exacerbation of distortions arising from imperfect competition can be very


28
  When the profits tax rate is zero, the 40% labor tax raises enough to provide spending that is 40% of total output
(L). The penultimate row finds the single tax rate on both profits and labor (38.8%) that raises the same revenue for
the initial equilibrium. The last row considers a 100% profits tax, so the same spending is possible with a labor tax of
only 37%. (We assume the firm continues to maximize profits despite a 100% tax rate).
                                                - 21 -

important and could potentially more than offset any gains from improving the environment, even
ignoring effects on labor supply. This point may be particularly important for energy-producing
industries. Second, these monopoly results affect the previous result in the competitive model
where we emphasized that government could prevent the fall in the real net wage if it were to
capture all of the scarcity rents by 100% profits tax, or by sale of all permits. This result does not
hold in a model with pre-existing profits, because the environmental policy reduces those pre-
existing profits. In the case of complete profits taxation, for a 1% output restriction, profits fall
by -.038%. This change requires government to increase the tax on wages to make up lost tax on
profits. The result is that a 1% output restriction does reduce the real net wage (by 0.058%).


IV. Conclusion
        This paper develops and applies a simple analytic general equilibrium model to evaluate
the welfare impact of implementing a cap and trade program such as the tradable allowance
program in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Numerical results can be obtained with a
relatively small number of parameters. The model is sufficiently flexible to allow for competitive
markets in the production of the good associated with pollution as well as a market dominated by
a monopolist.
        In both the competitive model and the monopoly model, the government’s capture of rents
created by giving allowances to private firms is important if the policy is to have a positive
welfare impact. In all the calculations considered, whether the creation of an allowance program
that restricts pollution raises welfare or not depends importantly on the extent of tax on rents (or
capture of rents) generated by the allowance give-away.
        The capture of rents from the permit program is somewhat less important in the monopoly
model, however, because the environmental policy reduces monopoly profits in a way that offsets
the generation of scarcity rents from the emission restriction. These two income effects on labor
supply offset each other: while the new scarcity-rent income tends to reduce labor supply, the
diminished monopoly income tends to increase labor supply. In addition, a price effect reduces
the real net wage and thus tends to decrease labor supply.
        Thus we find offsetting effects on prior labor tax distortions, and only numerical analysis
can allow us to compare the relevant magnitudes. While the net income effect on labor supply is
reduced, in the monopoly model, we find that the price effect is enlarged. The introduction of a
                                               - 22 -

cap and trade program in a market characterized by imperfect competition is more likely to reduce
welfare, even after taking the environmental benefits into account.             The intuition is
straightforward: market power raises price and curtails production of a commodity (relative to
production in a competitive equilibrium). A cap and trade program further raises price and
curtails production; the labor market distortions arising from a decrease in the real net wage are
exacerbated, and the environmental benefits of reducing pollution are offset by greater distortions
elsewhere.
                                                                        - 23 -


                                                                        Table 1
                                                      Welfare Effects of a Small Cut in Pollution,
                                                              With Perfect Competition


                                                                       tΠ = 0                          tΠ = tL

                                            Gain from Loss from Net Effect           Loss from Net Effect           Breakeven
               Assumed parameter                                           Breakeven                      Breakeven
                                            Externality Labor      on                  Labor      on                 Profits
                    values                                                   MED                            MED
                                            Correction Distortion Welfare            Distortion Welfare             Tax Rate
                                              (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
               tL     ε        µ     Y/L     µ(Y/L)        tL(1-tΠ)∆     ψ         µ*      tL(1-tΠ)∆      ψ         µ*           t *Π
              0.4    0.1       0.1   0.15     0.015         0.036      -0.021     0.240     0.023      -0.008      0.153       0.62
              0.4    0.3       0.1   0.15     0.015         0.062      -0.047     0.413     0.041      -0.026      0.273       0.81
              0.4    0.1       0.3   0.15     0.045         0.036      0.009      0.240     0.023      0.022       0.153         -
              0.4    0.3       0.3   0.15     0.045         0.062      -0.017     0.413     0.041      0.004       0.273       0.33
              0.3    0.3       0.3   0.18     0.053         0.045      0.007      0.250     0.034      0.019       0.189         -
              0.5    0.3       0.3   0.13     0.038         0.081      -0.043     0.623     0.048      -0.011      0.369       0.63


The four parameters in the first part of the table are: tax rate on labor income (tL), uncompensated labor supply elasticity (ε), marginal
external damage (µ), and the production of the dirty good as a fraction of total output (Y/L). Other parameter values are as follows: the
elasticity of substitution in consumption (σQ) equals 1.0, the income elasticity of labor supply (η) equals -0.2, and the expenditure share
of the dirty good in consumption (φ) equals 0.25. Columns (4) and (7) report the threshold value of marginal external damage (MED)
above which the welfare impact of the reduction in pollution is positive. The last column indicates the critical tax rate on rents below
which the net welfare change is negative. A dash indicates that the net welfare gain is positive for all non-negative tax rates on rents. See
text for details.
                                                                     - 24 -



                                                                  Table 2
                                                Welfare Effects of a Small Cut in Pollution,
                                              With Monopoly Production of the Polluting Good


                                              Perfect Competition                                     Monopoly
          Assumed Gain from             Loss from                               Loss from Loss from
                                                  Net Effect Breakeven                                Net Effect Breakeven
          Parameter Externality Tax rate Labor                         Tax rate Monopoly Labor
                                                  on Welfare MED                                      on Welfare MED
           Values Correction on Labor Distortion                       on Labor Distortion Distortion

                          (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)       (9)         (10)
              tΠ   µ     µ(Y/L)        tL       t L L̂      ψ          µ*          tL        Π/L        t L L̂       ψ           µ*

              0    0.1   0.015       0.4       0.01       0.005       0.067       0.4        0.03       0.007     -0.022       0.247

              0    0.3   0.045       0.4       0.01       0.035       0.067       0.4        0.03       0.007      0.008       0.247

              tL   0.3   0.045       0.4       0.006      0.039       0.040      0.388       0.03       0.007      0.008       0.247

              1    0.3   0.045       0.4         0        0.045       0.000       0.37       0.03       0.006      0.009       0.240




Government spending is 40% of total output, the uncompensated labor supply elasticity ε is 0.3, the labor supply income elasticity η is -0.2,
and the elasticity of substitution in consumption σQ is 8. The pollution generating good comprises 15% of total output. Prior to the mandated
restriction, the price of Y is 1 in the competitive model, and 1.2 in the monopoly model. The share φ is 1/4 in the competitive model and
.286 in the monopoly model. εY equals 6.25 in the competitive model and 6 in the monopoly model. Columns (5) and (10) report the
threshold value of marginal external damages (MED) above which the welfare impact of the reduction in pollution is positive.
                                           - 25 -

                                         References

Asch, P., and J.J. Seneca, 1976, Monopoly and External Costs: An Application of Second-Best
Theory to the Automobile Industry, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 3: 69-
79.

Barnett, A.H., 1980, The Pigouvian Tax Rule under Monopoly, American Economic Review 70:
1037-1041.

Beccarello, M., 1996, Time Series Analysis of Market Power: Evidence from G-7 Manufacturing,
International Journal of Industrial Organization 15: 123-136.

Bovenberg, A.L., and R. de Mooij, 1994, Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation,
American Economic Review 94: 1085-1089.

Bovenberg, A.L., and L. Goulder, 2001, Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts of Co2
Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?, in: C. Carraro, and G.E. Metcalf, eds., Distributional
and Behavioral Effects of Environmental Policy (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 45-85.

Bovenberg, A.L., and L.H. Goulder, 1996, Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence of
Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses, American Economic Review 86: 985-1000.

Browning, E.K., 1987, On the Marginal Welfare Cost of Taxation, American Economic Review
77: 11-23.

Browning, E.K., 1994, The Non-Tax Wedge, Journal of Public Economics 53: 419-433.

Browning, E.K., 1997, A Neglected Welfare Cost of Monopoly--and Most Other Product Market
Distortions, Journal of Public Economics 66: 127-144.

Buchanan, J.M., 1969, External Diseconomies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structure,
American Economic Review 59: 174-177.

Carraro, C., Y. Katsoulacos, and A. Xepapadeas, eds., 1996 (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht).

Considine, T.J., 2001, Markup Pricing in Petroleum Refining: A Multiproduct Framework,
International Journal of Industrial Organization 19: 1499-1526.

Domowitz, I., R.G. Hubbard, and B.C. Peterson, 1988, Market Structure and Cyclical
Fluctuations in U.S. Manufacturing, Review of Economics and Statistics 70: 55-66.

Energy Information Administration, 2001, Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States
2000, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy.

Feldstein, M., 1995, The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the
1986 Tax Reform Act, Journal of Political Economy 103: 551-572.
                                            - 26 -


Fialka, J.J., 2000, Energy Secretary Says He Has Evidence Some Utilities Use Monopoly Power,
New York Times, A4.

Freeman, A.M., 1982, Air and Water Pollution Control: A Benefit-Cost Assessment (John Wiley
and Sons, New York).

Freeman, A.M., 2002, Environmental Policy since Earth Day I: What Have We Gained?, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 16: 125-146.

Fuchs, V.R., A.B. Krueger, and J.M. Poterba, 1998, Economists' Views About Parameters,
Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics, Journal of Economic
Literature 36: 1387-1425.

Fullerton, D., and G.E. Metcalf, 1997, Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and Pre-Existing
Distortions, Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Fullerton, D., and G.E. Metcalf, 2001, Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and Pre-Existing
Distortions, Journal of Public Economics 80: 249-267.

Goulder, L.H., I. Parry, and D. Burtraw, 1997, Revenue-Raising Vs. Other Approaches to
Environmental Protection: The Critical Significance of Pre-Existing Tax Distortions, RAND
Journal of Economics 28: 708-731.

Hall, R.E., 1986, Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: 285-322.

Katsoulacos, Y., and A. Xepapadeas, 1995, Environmental Policy under Oligopoly with
Endogenous Market Structure, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 97: 411-420.

Misiolek, W.S., 1980, Effluent Taxation in Monopoly Markets, Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 7: 103-107.

Nordhaus, W.D., 1991, To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect, The
Economic Journal 101: 920-937.

Oates, W.E., and D.L. Strassmann, 1984, Effluent Fees and Market Structure, Journal of Public
Economics 24: 29-46.

Office of Policy, 2000, Horizontal Market Power in Restructured Electricity Markets,
Washington, DC: Office of Economic, Electricity and Natural Gas Analysis, U.S. Department of
Energy.

Parry, I.W.H., 1995, Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling, Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 29: S64-S77.

Parry, I.W.H., 1997, Environmental Taxes and Quotas in the Presence of Distorting Taxes in
                                           - 27 -

Factor Markets, Resource and Energy Economics 19: 203-220.

Parry, I.W.H., R.C. Williams, III, and L.H. Goulder, 1999, When Can Carbon Abatement Policies
Increase Welfare? The Fundamental Role of Distorted Factor Markets, Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 37: 52-84.

Pearce, D., and R.K. Turner, 1990, Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment (Johns
Hopkins Press, Baltimore).

Pigou, A.C., 1932, The Economics of Welfare (MacMillan and Co., London).

Rosen, H., 1980, What Is Labor Supply and Do Taxes Affect It?, American Economic Review 70:
171-176.

Russek, F.S., 1996, Labor Supply and Taxes, Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.

Schmalensee, R., P.L. Joskow, A.D. Ellerman, J.P. Montero, and E.M. Bailey, 1998, An Interim
Evaluation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Trading, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12: 53-68.

Stuart, C., 1984, Welfare Costs Per Dollar of Additional Tax Revenues in the United States,
American Economic Review 74: 352-362.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1999, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1999 (U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC).

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1997, The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: 1970-
1990, Washington, DC.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2000, Allowance Prices,: U.S. EPA.

Wicke, L., 1990, Environmental Damage Balance Sheets, in: N. Akerman, ed., Maintaining a
Satisfactory Environment: An Agenda for International Environmental Policy (Westview Press,
Boulder CO).
