                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CAN THE NEW DEAL’S THREE R’S BE REHABILITATED?
             A PROGRAM-BY-PROGRAM, COUNTY-BY-COUNTY ANALYSIS


                                           Price V. Fishback
                                            Shawn Kantor
                                          John Joseph Wallis


                                          Working Paper 8903
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8903


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




The authors are deeply indebted to Larry Neal and Joseph Mason who facilitated the collection of the New
Deal data used in the paper. Financial support has been provided by National Science Foundation Grants
SBR-9708098 and SES-0080324,the Earhart Foundation, the University of Arizona Foundation, and the
University of Arizona Office of the Vice President for Research. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Price V. Fishback, Shawn Kantor and John Joseph Wallis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Can the New Deal’s Three R’s Be Rehabilitated?
A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis
Price V. Fishback, Shawn Kantor and John Joseph Wallis
NBER Working Paper No. 8903
April 2002
JEL No. D78, E62, H50, N42



                                            ABSTRACT


        We examine the importance of Roosevelt’s “relief, recovery, and reform” motives to the
distribution of New Deal funds across over 3,000 U.S. counties, program by program. The major relief
programs most closely followed Roosevelt’s three R’s. Other programs were tilted more in favor of areas
with higher incomes. For all programs spending for political advantage in upcoming elections was a
significant factor. Roosevelt’s successful reelections were based on developing specific programs for a
broad range of constituents, delivering on his stated goals, but also spending more at the margin for
political purposes.




Price V. Fishback                  Shawn Kantor                        John Joseph Wallis
Department of Economics            Department of Economics             Department of Economics
University of Arizona              University of Arizona               University of Maryland
Tucson, AZ 85721                   Tucson, AZ 85721                    College Park, MD 20742
and NBER                           and NBER                            and NBER
pfishback@bpa.arizona.edu          skantor@u.arizona.edu               wallis@econ.umd.edu
                                                                                                           3


                           Can the New Deal’s Three Rs Be Rehabilitated?
                         A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis




                In the consistent development of our previous efforts toward the saving

                and safeguarding of our national life, I have continued to recognize three

                related steps . . . Relief was and continues to be our first consideration. It

                calls for large expenditures and will continue in modified form to do so

                for a long time to come. . . The second step was recovery, and it is

                sufficient for me to ask each and every one of you to compare the

                situation in agriculture and in industry today with what it was fifteen

                months ago. At the same time we have recognized the necessity of

                reform and reconstruction. . . .

                                                    President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)



I.      Introduction

        During the New Deal the federal government distributed unprecedented amounts of grants and

loans to state and local governments, leading to the federal government’s share of GNP to rise from about

4 to 9 percent during the 1930s (Wallis and Oates, 1998, p. 157). Economic historians and public choice

scholars have long acknowledged the wide variation in the federal government’s per capita spending and

lending across the United States and have devoted significant research to understanding the determinants

of this relatively uneven distribution.1 Over the past three decades a number of scholars have used

econometric analysis to test whether New Deal administrators followed Roosevelt’s high-minded public

goals of “relief, recovery, and reform” or whether they used federal spending and patronage to achieve

their political goals of maintaining support for Roosevelt and building a lasting Democratic political

coalition.
                                                                                                             4


        To date, research on New Deal spending provides only partial support for the notion that the New

Deal was designed to promote relief, recovery, and reform. Regression coefficients on the relief and

recovery variables – drop in income from 1929 to 1933, unemployment, and the number of relief cases –

have the expected sign two-thirds of the time, but in half of those cases the null hypothesis of no effect

cannot be rejected. Most tests find very little evidence of any reform aspect of the New Deal. We revisit

the determinants of New Deal expenditures in this paper by examining the distribution of funds in a

comprehensive and disaggregated fashion, focusing program-by-program across over 3,000 U.S.

counties.2

        To better understand what motivated New Deal administrators, it is important to focus on the

individual programs because each was designed to address specific and varied problems. Politicians

typically do not publicize their largesse by discussing government spending in general terms; instead,

they boast of the programs that address specific problems and benefit specific constituencies. For

example, when President Roosevelt was asked what his administration was doing for the unemployed, he

pointed to the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), Civil Works Administration (CWA),

and the Works Progress Administration (WPA), agencies that put the unemployed back to work and

provided relief for the destitute. Roosevelt responded to the depression in farming with the Agricultural

Adjustment Administration (AAA), the Farm Credit Administration (FCA), and the Farm Security

Administration (FSA), and each had its own subsets of programs. Given this programmatic emphasis, it

would be inappropriate to expect the major relief programs, for instance, to have been responsive to

agricultural needs.3 Focusing our attention on individual programs allows more precision in

understanding how the New Deal dealt with distinctly different policy problems in relief, agriculture,

public works, and public loan programs. Table 1 shows the amount of spending or lending in each of the

New Deal programs we consider in this paper.

         Refocusing the analysis of New Deal spending from the state level to the county level is equally

important. First, the New Deal programs involved multiple layers of political administration. The

ultimate success of each program was determined as much by what happened within states as it was by
                                                                                                             5


what happened across states. Second, there is ample documentation in the New Deal qualitative literature

that state politicians sometimes viewed the New Deal much differently from the federal government.

Some actively sought New Deal funds in various programs, while governors in Oklahoma, Virginia,

North Carolina, and others seemed to disdain the New Deal.4 Only Wallis (1984, 1987, and 1998),

Couch and Shughart (1998), Fleck (1999b, 1999c, 2001a), and Strömberg (2001) have tried to control for

the impact of state and local government decision-making on federal spending explicitly.5 We are able to

control for the attitudes of state governments explicitly in our county-level analysis by including state

dummy variables that account for state attitudes that were common to all counties within each state.

        A third reason the county-level data can be superior to the state data lies in the adage “all politics

is local.” Whether the monetary benefits of the New Deal reached their local communities would have

ultimately determined voters’ assessments of the economic and political effectiveness of the New Deal.

Had the Roosevelt administration simply sought to use the New Deal for re-election purposes, voters

would have had to witness the spending locally, not simply at the federal or state levels.6 County-level

data, therefore, affords more precise testing of the determinants of New Deal spending.



II.     Measures of the Three Rs in Prior Research

        Historians hold a variety of opinions of the nature of the New Deal. Schlesinger (1958), Degler

(1959), and Freidel (1973) argue that the New Deal moved as far as possible toward social reforms given

the climate of the Great Depression. In the 1960s a revisionist view developed as Leuchtenburg (1963),

Zinn (1966), Conkin (1967), and Bernstein (1968) argued that the New Deal was basically conservative.7

There was certainly plenty of controversy during the 1930s: New Deal critics charged the Roosevelt

administration with using the distribution of funds to enhance its own political power. These charges

received substantial press in late 1938 as newspaper columnists ridiculed WPA administrator Harry

Hopkins for allegedly declaring to friends that “we shall tax and tax and spend and spend and elect and

elect” (McJimsey, 1987, p. 124). Yet the general impressions of the detailed, non-econometric studies of

Key (1937), Brown (1940), Howard (1943), E. A. Williams (1968), J. K. Williams (1968), and Patterson
                                                                                                             6


(1969) were that political opportunism was not a primary motivating factor in the distribution of New

Deal funds.

        Economic historians began examining the distribution of funds with a statistical approach when

Arrington (1969) noted the substantial disparities in New Deal funding across states. Reading (1973),

attempting to empirically test the importance of the relief, recovery, and reform motives, treated relief and

recovery as a combined category and his proxies for reform might better be described as measuring

income redistribution. His econometric results suggested that aggregate New Deal grant funds were

distributed to promote relief and recovery, but not reform (see Table 2). Wright (1974) developed a

political-economic model of the Electoral College and then tested the importance of presidential politics

in an econometric horse race by adding a series of factors to measure how the New Deal funds might have

been used to enhance Roosevelt’s re-election prospects. He found that politics dominated New Deal

spending decisions and the three Rs had a statistically negligible role

        Table 2 shows how relief, recovery, and reform (or income redistribution) measures perform in

the large number of econometric studies of the distribution of New Deal funds. The many blank cells in

the table suggest that scholars have used a variety of specifications. Had the New Deal been reform-

minded and redistributive, we would expect negative relationships between New Deal spending and

income per capita, manufacturing wages, median education, and farm values. We would expect positive

relationships between New Deal spending and the percentage of tenants among farmers and percent

black. Had the New Deal focused on relief and recovery, we would expect a negative relationship

between New Deal spending and the growth in income from 1929 to 1933 and positive relationships

between unemployment rates and relief cases per capita.

        Most of the studies summarized in the top part of the table have focused on a 48-state cross-

section of aggregate New Deal spending on non-repayable grants from 1933 to 1939, although Wallis

(1984, 1987, and 1998) and Couch and Shughart (1998) have used a panel of annual data. The bottom

section of the table shows the results of a series of studies on specific programs, most using state-level

data. Only Fleck (1999b, 2001a) and Stromberg (2001) have used a national county-level data set,
                                                                                                               7


although missing data for some of the control variables in each of those studies cause the loss of at least

400 (probably rural) counties. Fleck (1999c) also looked at the distribution of FERA spending in

southern counties and Couch and Williams (1998) and Couch, Atkinson, and Wells (1998) have looked at

the distribution of New Deal funds and agricultural funds across counties within Alabama.

        Of all the potential tests for reform listed in the table, only three are unequivocally consistent with

the hypothesis that the New Deal had a reform component. Fleck (2001b) found that aggregate New Deal

spending might have been negatively related to income per capita and Fleck (1999b, 2001a) found that

relatively more relief jobs in 1937 and 1940 were distributed in lower wage areas. Of 21 tests of the

hypothesis that the New Deal was designed to offset the severe income drop from 1929 to 1933, 19 found

coefficients consistent with this idea, but in only half of those cases was the hypothesis of no effect

rejected. Of 31 tests of the hypothesis that the New Deal was used to offset unemployment problems, 24

have the appropriate sign, but only 18 reject the hypothesis of no effect and in two cases the coefficient of

the lagged effect is the wrong sign. Our sense of these results, taken as a whole, is that the record of the

New Deal with respect to relief and recovery is mixed and that it had very little to do with reform. Table 2

shows how the econometric literature on the determinants of New Deal spending has evolved, as most

papers have contributed by adding new variables to the analysis. Yet a closer look at the table shows that

nearly all of the papers suffer from the omission of at least one key variable category. Wright (1974)

added presidential politics to Reading’s (1973) analysis. Once Anderson and Tollison (1991) mentioned

the importance of Congress, nearly all scholars writing later have included some measure of

congressional activity. Only Wallis (1984, 1987, and 1998), Couch and Shughart (1998; but only for the

WPA), Fleck (1999b, 1999c, and 2001a), and Stromberg (2001) have sought to control for the important

role that state governments played in determining the distribution of New Deal funds. Our primary goals

in this paper are to extend the econometric New Deal literature in two directions: to move the level of

analysis from the state level to the county level and to examine the major New Deal programs

individually.
                                                                                                          8


III.    An Intuitive Model of New Deal Spending

        Consider a simplified portrayal of the problem faced by the federal administrators of a generic

New Deal program, like a relief program. Congress, in consultation with the president, established a

budget to provide grants to state and local governments to help them provide relief. The law contained

very loose guidelines about how the monies were to be distributed. Roosevelt maintained in speeches that

the administration’s goal was to provide relief where it was needed. Spending money where people were

most needy enhanced the president’s re-election chances because constituents reward political

responsiveness. On the other hand, political power can be fleeting; at the margin, the administrator

confronted pressure to shift spending to swing states or to reward voters who defected from the

Republicans in 1932. The administrator also faced pressures from congressmen who wanted their own

constituents to benefit from federal largesse. Congressional influence had to be considered because

Congress provided the funding for the program, wrote the funding formulas, and had broad oversight

power over the New Deal administrator’s activities. Special attention had to be paid to the demands of

the members of key committees that directly determined the fate of the program. Further complicating

our hypothetical administrator’s job, many New Deal programs involved significant interaction with state

and local politicians who faced their own set of political objectives and constraints. State and local

governments were directly involved in the New Deal allocation process as they sometimes had to provide

matching funds for grants. Moreover, they proposed projects for federal funding and ultimately selected

those individuals who would receive the relief locally. Thus, an aggressive state and local government

would have been able to extract more New Deal funding, all else equal.

        The scenario above focuses on the administration of a single program. Developing a theoretical

model that incorporates all of these various pressures across multiple programs with contradictory goals is

daunting.8 We simplify the problem by considering the president, as head of the executive branch, as the

maximizing agent, making choices over the entire range of programs, subject to constraints imposed by

Congress, state and local governments, voters, and interest groups. The president’s multivariate

maximization problem was, in fact, a series of choices over each individual program. The exogenous
                                                                                                              9


variables in the president’s decision-making included all of the factors over which he and the executive

branch had no direct control, including the state of the economy, the pressures exerted by various interest

groups, the limits imposed by congressional rules and oversight, and the attitudes of state governments.

Since the president and his staff paid attention to all of the factors in administering the different programs,

all of the exogenous factors should be included in the analysis of each of the individual programs. At the

margin, each program was a substitute for another since a dollar more for unemployment relief, for

example, meant a dollar less for agriculture. As a result, every exogenous variable belongs in the reduced

form specification of each program.9



IV.     The Estimation Equations

        Previous scholars have typically estimated reduced-form equations with per capita New Deal

spending (aggregated across programs) regressed on variables designed to capture the relief, recovery,

and reform motives, presidential reelection strategies, congressional clout, and other variables that

describe the economic structure of the geographic areas. Following this literature we start with the

following basic equation:

                                    n         48            
         NDij = α 0 + Popij  β 0 +∑ βkXijk + ∑ βjbj + εij                                         (1),
                                   k =1       j=1           

where NDij is total New Deal spending in county i from 1933 through 1939 (to keep the notation simpler,

we suppress an index for programs). Popij is the population in 1930 in county i, state j, Xijk represents k

different exogenous explanatory variables Xk indexed by county i and state j, and bj represent state

dummy variables. The term εij is a stochastic error with mean zero and variance σ2.

        Wallis (1998) suggested that the federal government structured total New Deal spending such that

each geographic area received a base amount of spending, plus a base amount of spending per person,

plus additional spending per person based on economic, political, reform, recovery, or relief motives.10

He argued that political decision-makers would have found it politically unpalatable to spend nothing in a

state or county, so he structured his model so that each geographic unit was assumed to have received
                                                                                                              10


some base amount (α0 in equation (1) above). Our equation assumes that the remainder of New Deal

spending was distributed on a per capita basis. Each county is assumed to have received a base amount,

β0, per person, in addition to per capita amounts, βk, based on the exogenous characteristics of the county.

We also allow for differences in spending per person across each state.

        The equation we estimate is determined by dividing equation (1) by population, creating per

capita New Deal spending equation similar to the ones previously estimated in the literature:

                                   n         48
                      1
        PCNDij = α 0       + β 0 +∑ βkXijk + ∑ βjbj + εij                                              (2),
                     Popij        k =1       j=1


where PCNDij is per capita New Deal spending in county i, state j. The α0 coefficient shows the baseline

total spending on the program in all counties in the United States. The β0 coefficient is the baseline

spending associated with each person across all counties. Finally, the βj coefficients represent the

amounts of per capita spending unique to state j, relative to Connecticut (the excluded state). Since the

specification is in per capita terms, heteroskedasticity should not be an issue.

        Table 3 lists the explanatory variables and their summary statistics. The variables follow those

used in the existing literature, with some additional variables designed to capture issues that have not

been fully addressed. The variables are sorted according to the hypotheses being tested and we provide a

sketch of how to interpret the signs of the coefficients.

        One of the central features of many of the New Deal spending and loan programs was that state

and local governments had a significant impact on the extent of federal New Deal spending locally. Some

programs, such as the WPA, the non-federal portions of the PWA, FERA, and the Social Security

Administration, had distinct matching features, although it is not clear how tightly federal administrators

adhered to these requirements.11 Even if matching was not an explicit feature of a program, many of the

spending programs were determined by the types of projects proposed and the applications filed by state

and local governments. Thus, their willingness to expend the time and resources necessary to make the

application, as well as to make sure that the application was of high quality, was an important determinant

of whether or not the federal government expended funds. There is ample documentation that different
                                                                                                              11


states had vastly different attitudes toward the New Deal (Patterson 1967, Braemen, Bremner and Brody

1975, Abrams 1992, Collins 1992). To capture the different states’ attitudes toward the New Deal, which

were common to all counties within the state, we include a series of state dummy variables. These state

dummy variables also control for other factors, particularly the nature of Senate representation. Wallis

(1987 and 1998) points out that omission of such controls for the difference in state attitudes can lead to

omitted variables problems that can cause the coefficients to be biased.

        The variables measuring the support for Democratic presidential candidates and voter turnout in

presidential elections help to control for differences in attitudes toward the New Deal at the county level.

Roosevelt supporters might have been more willing to press for New Deal involvement locally. Finally,

general political savvy and political activity can be measured by the percentage of adults casting

presidential votes in 1932. This variable captures voting by both parties, so it might better be treated as a

measure of political activism and interest in the political process generally. This in turn could lead to

greater pressure for New Deal funds.

        There is one final econometric point worth noting. We have sought to avoid problems of

simultaneity bias by using economic variables from 1929 and 1930, before the New Deal was established.

The one variable where there could be a small problem with endogeneity is our measure of the growth

rate in real per capita retail sales between 1929 and 1933. The 1933 value might be affected to some

degree by some of the New Deal spending that occurred in the second half of 1933. However, since the

vast majority of the spending for nearly every program came after 1933, we do not see this as a serious

problem.12


V.      Regression Results

        Based on the coefficients from the regression equations, we have calculated elasticities for each

New Deal program with respect to each variable. Appendix Tables 1 through 5 report all of the

regression coefficients and t-statistics. The elasticities represent the percentage change in per capita funds

associated with a one-percent increase in the respective variable’s sample mean, holding all others
                                                                                                               12


constant. Asterisks denote the elasticities where the coefficient in the original regression was found to be

statistically significantly different from zero in a two-tailed t-test at the 10 percent level. The elasticities

for the relief, recovery, and reform variables are reported in Table 5, for the presidential variables in

Table 6, and for the structural economic variables in Table 7.

V.1     Relief and Recovery

        Economists analyzing the distribution of New Deal funds originally sought to test whether the

Roosevelt administration’s actions followed the relief, recovery, and reform mantra.13 In this sub-section

we focus on the relief and recovery hypothesis. Had the New Deal sought to promote relief and recovery

of the depressed economy, we would expect more spending where unemployment in 1930 was higher and

where the percentage of farm acreage with crop failures in 1929 was greater. We expect a negative

relationship between the change in economic activity from 1929 to 1933 (as measured here by retail sales

per capita) and New Deal spending.

        The centerpieces of the Roosevelt administration’s efforts to promote relief and recovery were the

Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) from 1933 through 1935, the Civil Works

Administration (CWA) in the winter of 1933-34, the Works Progress Administration (WPA) from 1935

through 1939, and the public assistance programs developed under the Social Security Act of 1935

(SSAPA).14 These programs distributed 62.7 percent of the non-repayable New Deal grants (see Table 1).

The regression results indicate that each of the relief programs responded to economic hardships. Each

program shows a positive and statistically significant relationship between the allocation of funds and the

unemployment rate in 1930. The elasticities are 0.252 for the WPA, 0.105 for the FERA, 0.078 for the

SSAPA programs, and 0.047 for the CWA. Similarly, for each program there is a negative relationship

with the difference in log retail sales per capita from 1929 to 1933. The FERA elasticity is largest in

magnitude at -0.238, followed by -0.068 for the CWA, while the negative effects are much smaller in size

and not statistically significant for the WPA and SSAPA programs. Our findings generally reconfirm

those of other studies summarized in Table 2 that suggest that the relief and recovery motives were

important determinants of the allocation of New Deal spending.
                                                                                                               13


        An alternative avenue for the federal government to provide work for the unemployed and to

stimulate a depressed economy were the public works programs, including the Public Works

Administration (PWA) established in 1933, the Public Roads Administration (PRA) which built on prior

federal highway programs, and the Public Buildings Administration (PBA). The PWA was originally

established as part of the program to provide relief for the unemployed, but its chief administrator Harold

Ickes focused on large-scale public works projects designed to have a lasting impact on the economy.

This emphasis led to relatively long delays in the start of construction and, thus, in the hiring of the

unemployed. In contrast, Harry Hopkins, the administrator of the FERA, CWA, and WPA, focused his

attention on putting the unemployed back to work as quickly as possible. In the famous “Battle for

Relief,” Hopkins won the lion’s share of the funding for his projects and the PWA’s focus shifted away

from unemployment relief toward the building of lasting infrastructure (Schlesinger, 1958, pp. 283-96). It

is not clear that Ickes sought to promote recovery in the regions where the economy declined most. He

saw the PWA as stimulating the overall economy and not specific regional economies. In congressional

hearings Ickes was asked whether the PWA focused on variations in unemployment when distributing

projects to various areas. Ickes replied: “In a general way, we have that in the back of our heads. But if

the purpose of this program is to give employment, to relieve unemployment, and to stimulate heavy

industries, it does not matter a great deal whether you are building in California or New York” (quoted in

J. K. Williams, 1968, p. 116 n.22).15

        Total PWA activity combined two programs. Federal PWA programs were sponsored by federal

agencies with strong central control over those programs. Non-federal PWA grants and loans were made

to state and local governments. The impetus for these programs came from state and local governments.

        Despite the professed limited attention paid to the unemployed, the PWA federal program appears

to have been highly responsive to the unemployment rate in 1930. The unemployment elasticity for the

federal PWA was the highest of any program studied at 0.693. The effect for PWA spending as a whole,

however, was muted because the non-federal PWA grants were negatively related to the unemployment

ratio in 1930 with an elasticity of -0.122. The regression results are also consistent with Ickes’s relative
                                                                                                            14


indifference to recovery efforts in the hardest hit areas. The elasticity for the federal PWA program with

respect to changes in log retail sales of 0.99 suggests that the federal program spent more funds in the

areas that experienced the least damaging declines from 1929 to 1933. In sum, the PWA agency was a

study in contrasts with respect to promoting relief and recovery.

        The agencies least interested in relief and recovery were the PRA and PBA. The PRA was

statutorily locked into a formula based on population and land size and Fleck (2001b) found that on a per

capita basis state-level PRA spending was very highly correlated with land area (0.994). Our county-

level analysis suggests that the PRA and the PBA largely ignored recovery and relief and may have even

exacerbated cross-county economic differences. Both programs had a negative and statistically

significant relationship with the unemployment ratio and a positive relationship with the growth in retail

sales. In other words, the better an economy fared during the Depression, the more money it received for

federal roads and buildings.

        Farm programs were designed to promote higher incomes for farmers. We have data on the

Agricultural Adjustment Administration’s (AAA) payments to farmers to take acreage out of production,

the Farm Credit Administration’s (FCA) loans to farmers through the Land Bank Commissioner for crop

loans and for debt relief, the Farm Security Administration’s (FSA) mixture of loans and grants to

financially troubled farmers, and the Rural Electrification Administration’s (REA) loans to bring

electricity to farms. Many of the farm programs display a negative and statistically significant

relationship to the unemployment rate, although measured unemployment may have been more of an

urban phenomenon during the period. All farm programs except the REA distributed funds to areas

where the downturns were steepest as measured by the growth rate of retail sales from 1929 to 1933. The

strongest negative elasticities of -0.392 and -0.223 were found for the FSA’s grant and loan programs,

respectively. This is not surprising; the FSA was specifically charged with aiding farmers in financial

distress. The basic FSA programs were started under the relief-oriented FERA and the focus on relief

apparently continued after the FSA was established. The FSA programs also distributed more funds

where there was a higher rate of farm failures in 1929, although the elasticities are relatively low. The
                                                                                                             15


AAA payments and the FCA payments were also negatively related to the downturn from 1929 to 1933,

but had small negative correlations with the rate of farm failures in 1929.

        The final group of programs provided loans or insured mortgage loans. The largest of these was

the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which started under the Hoover administration, and

loaned money to banks, industry, local governments, and provided funding for a variety of New Deal

programs. The Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC) provided direct lending to homeowners who

were already at risk of defaulting on their own mortgages. The HOLC loaned money at more favorable

terms for these at-risk borrowers. Finally, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) insured private

lenders against the default risk associated with making home improvement and mortgage loans.

        The only loan and insurance program that appears related to relief and recovery is the HOLC,

which had an elasticity of -0.059 for the growth rate of retail sales. The coefficients in the RFC analysis

might well be biased in a positive direction with respect to the retail sales variable because increased RFC

lending in 1932 might have softened the downturn in many areas. In general, the loan programs were

ones where the borrowers sought funding from the federal government and the rules of the lending

program required that the agencies pay attention to the ability of their borrowers to repay the loans.

Roosevelt and other administrators viewed repayment pragmatically. They worried about a series of loan

defaults in the early stages of the New Deal that would have led to a public outcry, thus inhibiting their

future ability to continue the programs or add new programs. The results from the analysis suggest that

the emphasis on likely repayment of the loans largely offset any desire to loan more in counties with

higher unemployment or where the economic downturn was deeper. The HOLC was focused on

providing assistance to troubled mortgagees, but even it was careful to lend in cases where the chances of

repayment were relatively higher. Had there been no focus on repayment, the elasticity with respect to

the growth rate in retail sales would have been even more negative.
                                                                                                             16


V.2     Reform and Redistribution

        The New Deal push for reform had a variety of meanings, including the introduction of federal

social insurance, changes in the organization of labor markets, and many legislative mandates that were

national in scope and likely unrelated to the geographic distribution of New Deal funds. Following

previous scholars we have included several variables in the analysis to assess the extent to which the New

Deal was redistributive. If reform and redistribution were important factors in the allocation of New Deal

funds, we would expect a negative relationship between New Deal spending and measures of a county’s

income level, which we proxy using retail sales per capita in 1929. County-level personal income data do

not exist, but retail sales per capita is a reasonable alternative because the state-level correlation between

the two variables (income and retail sales) was 0.86 in 1929. We expect a positive relationship between

New Deal spending and the black percentage of the population and the percent illiterate in 1930, as both

groups tend to be in the lower tier of the income distribution, holding constant the mean level of income.

Had the farm programs been redistributive, we expect a negative relationship between average farm size

and spending on the farm programs. Finally, we include a measure of the upper tail of the income

distribution – the ratio of tax returns in 1929 to population in 1930 – within each county. Income tax

rates were common to the entire U.S. and less than 7 percent of households earned enough income to pay

income taxes.16 If the New Deal were redistributive, the tax return ratio should be inversely related to

New Deal spending.

        The studies that focus on aggregate New Deal spending have found almost no evidence that the

New Deal was redistributive. This result may be a phenomenon of the aggregation across programs or

across counties within states. By contrast, our analysis of the individual relief programs shows strong

signs of a redistributive bent. Three of the four major relief programs have a negative and statistically

significant relationship with per capita retail sales, with elasticities ranging from -0.135 for the FERA to -

0.205 for the WPA. The CWA has a small negative elasticity that is statistically insignificant. All four

also display negative relationships with the tax return ratio, although the elasticities are statistically

significant for only the WPA and the Social Security programs. If we expand the discussion of relief to
                                                                                                             17


include the Farm Security Administration’s relief programs, we find the anticipated strong negative

elasticities for both retail sales in 1929 and tax returns. After combining the results of the relief and

recovery variables with the reform variables, it appears that the programs specifically designed to provide

relief actually promoted Roosevelt’s three-R objectives. Again, it is difficult to say whether these

objectives were fully realized, but the effects we find in the county-level data are much stronger than

those seen in analyses using aggregated state data.

        This positive record of income redistribution under the relief programs only partially extended to

the black population. Despite federal officials’ statements that the programs were nondiscriminatory,

many of the programmatic decisions were made by state and local officials and there are claims that many

of the decisions were discriminatory (Lieberman, 1998; Sterner, et. al., 1943). The CWA and the public

assistance programs were positively and statistically significantly related to the percent black variable, but

the elasticities were 0.021 and 0.060, respectively. Meanwhile, the WPA showed a negative and

statistically significant relationship with a small elasticity of -0.055. Finally, none of the relief programs

spent more in areas with higher illiteracy.

         In the aggregate New Deal statistics, the redistributive aspects of the relief programs are

overshadowed by other New Deal programs. For example, the AAA payments to restrict production and

Farm Credit Administration loans favored large farmers and high-income areas.17 Both sets of programs

had positive and statistically significant relationships with the tax return and per capita retail sales

variables, with elasticities in the range of .036 to .194. The strongest relationships, however, are with the

average farm size variable with high elasticities of 1.20 and 0.659 for the AAA and the FCA,

respectively.18 These findings are consistent with research that has found that the farm programs favored

larger farmers often at the expense of non-landowning tenants and wage workers.19

        Similarly, the New Deal loan programs favored high-income counties. If repayment were a

concern, then the Roosevelt administration would have tended to lend money where income or the

likelihood of economic progress was relatively greater. As a result, we see strong positive relationships

between each of the loan programs and the retail sales variable. The elasticities range from a low of
                                                                                                             18


0.238 for the HOLC mortgage lending to a high of 1.69 in the non-federal PWA loans. The FHA

insurance program also displayed a positive and statistically significant elasticity of 0.28. Not only did

these loan programs distribute more resources to counties with relatively higher average incomes, but also

to those counties where there was a larger group in the upper portion of the income distribution. The

FHA and nearly all of the loan programs had strong positive relationships with the tax return ratio, with

elasticities ranging from 0.172 for the RFC to 0.864 for the U.S. Housing Authority. Public housing

grants under the PWA (later taken over by the USHA) had very strong positive relationships with the high

income measures.

        The PWA and other public works programs had a mixed record with regard to income

redistribution. Both the federal and non-federal grants programs for the PWA have positive relationships

with 1929 retail sales, suggesting that they were not redistributive with respect to average income. On the

other hand, they have negative relationships with the tax returns ratio, which suggests that they were

distributing away from the highest end of the income distribution. There is also evidence that the federal

PWA program tried to help areas with larger black populations, possibly to counteract the lack of non-

federal PWA activity in black areas. The elasticity for percent black was 0.44 for the federal PWA grant

program and -0.503 for the non-federal PWA lending program.

        Disaggregating spending by program uncovers the relief, recovery, and reform efforts of the New

Deal hidden from many previous scholars because of the aggregate nature of their spending data. Relief

programs were aimed at lower income areas with higher unemployment and a relatively larger economic

downturn in the early 1930s. The farm programs promoted recovery, but were centered on high-income

counties with larger farms. Meanwhile, the loan programs, concerned about the likelihood of repayment,

distributed more funds to high-income counties and those not hit as hard by the Depression.



V.3     Political and Structural Economic Variables

        Although we have focused on the high-minded goals of the New Deal, there are several key

findings concerning the structural economic variables that deserve attention.20 The coefficients of the
                                                                                                         19


economic variables are largely consistent with the findings of other economists and the historical

literature on New Deal spending. The relief programs focused on non-farm areas, while the farm

programs unsurprisingly targeted agricultural areas. Fleck (2001b) notes that a state’s land mass was an

important determinant of its New Deal distribution. When we look program by program, the elasticities

show that the large effects Fleck found are primarily associated with two programs: the Public Roads

Administration grants, which by statute were to be distributed via a formula based on population and land

mass, and the PWA grants for projects proposed by federal agencies.

        Scholars have suggested a variety of ways to test whether New Deal expenditures were used for

naked political purposes. Wright (1974) developed a “political productivity index” at the state level that

took into account the long-term support for Democratic presidential candidates between 1896 and 1932,

as well as the volatility of that support. Anderson and Tollison (1991) and Couch and Shughart (1998)

used Roosevelt’s share of the 1932 vote, which is a reasonable specification on the grounds that

Roosevelt was likely to reward his supporters and that Roosevelt was seeking more than just a 51 percent

victory so that he could establish a mandate. Fleck (2001a) developed a model of swing voting in several

layers of government and found swing voters to be important determinants of the distribution of relief

jobs. Rhode, Snyder and Strumpf (2001), in their study of military spending during World War II, argue

that the focus should be on the swing vote in a median voter model, so they use the gap between the

Democratic and Republican votes.

        We take a neutral stance on whether the appropriate standard is the median-voter model or the

“mandate model,” so include a variety of political variables spanning both views. If Roosevelt sought to

reward long-time Democratic supporters, we expect more spending in areas where the mean Democratic

presidential vote share from 1896 through 1928 was relatively higher.21 Had Roosevelt sought to

influence swing voters, we expect more per capita spending in counties where the standard deviation of

the Democratic vote share from 1896 to 1932 was higher. Roosevelt might have targeted spending in

counties based on the difference between his vote share in 1932 and the long-term Democratic vote share

from 1896 to 1928. This measure would have targeted areas where voters actually did switch to support
                                                                                                             20


Roosevelt in the 1932 election, a group likely to switch again.22 Fleck (1999c) shows that a key

determinant of FERA spending was voter turnout, which we measure as the number of presidential votes

cast in 1932 divided by the population in 1930. This variable measures the extent to which the populace

was politically active, which, in turn, would suggest their greater likelihood of successfully lobbying for

New Deal support.

           From the expansive set of New Deal regressions, two general statements describe the impact of

presidential politics. First, in nearly every program at least one political variable affected the distribution

of funds in the expected direction. Second, no single presidential political variable exerts a strong

influence in every program or, for that matter, in a majority of programs. There is certainly potential for

multicollinearity in these measures, but closer examination shows that each variable is measuring a

different aspect of presidential politics. Since we are sensitive to the potential for omitted variables bias,

we chose to include them all, such that the regressions provide a simultaneous test of all the potential

effects.

           The programs most responsive to long-term Democratic support (as measured by mean voting

from 1896 to 1928) were the AAA, the REA, and most of the public works programs. In the case of the

public works programs, the PWA programs, and the PBA all have elasticities ranging from 0.22 to 1.28,

but only the PBA coefficient is statistically significant.

           Long-term Democratic supporters were less likely to determine elections than swing voters,

however. The swing voters most likely to stay with Roosevelt in 1936 were the ones who swung to

Roosevelt in the 1932 election (as measured by the vote for Roosevelt in 1932 minus the mean

Democratic vote, 1896-1928). The programs that were most responsive to the Roosevelt swing were the

FERA, the WPA, the PRA, the FSA grants, and the REA. The PRA’s 0.188 elasticity with respect to the

Roosevelt swing vote, as well as the 0.654 elasticity with respect to voter turnout, suggest that there was

room within the road-allocation formula to accommodate presidential reelection goals.

           Holding constant the Roosevelt swing vote, the standard deviation of votes from 1896 to 1932

measures deeper-seated volatility among a county’s voters. The programs most responsive to this
                                                                                                                21


measure include the PWA federal and non-federal programs, the FCA loan programs, the FSA grant

programs, and the U.S. Housing Administration programs. All have elasticities higher than 0.14 and the

PWA federal program elasticity is extremely large at 2.53.

         The political measure that seems to have an impact on the most programs is the measure of voter

turnout. The variable not only reflects interest in presidential politics, but also interest in the political

process more generally. Such localized political interest and savvy might have been associated with

greater pressure by the state and local governments on the federal government to obtain more funding.

Given the way nearly all of the programs were structured – state and local governments applied for grants

and loans – we would expect state and local governments to have played an important role in the overall

allocation of New Deal funds. The programs with elasticities above 0.10 included the CWA, SSA public

assistance programs, the public works programs at both the federal and non-federal levels, the PRA, the

FCA loans, the RFC, the FSA loans, the REA loans, and the FHA. Most of the coefficients on which the

elasticities are based are also statistically significant.

         The public works programs deserve slightly more discussion on this political dimension. The

PWA developed a reputation for focusing on the long-term value of projects, avoiding scandal, and

making decisions without regard to politics. In Senate hearings before the Committee on Appropriations

concerning the 1935 allocations for the PWA, Senators Townsend and Chairman Glass, an avowed

opponent of federal subsidies, each declared that they thought Ickes was free of politics when distributing

PWA funds (J. K. Williams, 1968, p. 128). Yet, biographers note that Ickes served Roosevelt faithfully in

stump speeches leading up to the 1936 election (Clarke, 1996). The results of the analysis suggest that

the federal PWA program, a program over which the Roosevelt administration exercised direct control,

was highly sensitive to political interests. The elasticities on each of the political variables are among the

highest that we calculated, although not all are precisely estimated. Part of the PWA’s reputation for

being above politics might have come from looking at the combined spending on the federal and

state/local programs. Given that the state and local PWA project selections were driven more from the

bottom up, their impact would have muted the effects of the federal programs. In fact, the elasticity for
                                                                                                          22


the Roosevelt swing vote was negative for the non-federal PWA programs and the other elasticities were

much smaller.



VI.     Conclusions

        Did the New Deal indeed promote relief, recovery, and reform? The answer largely depends on

the program. The major relief programs appear to have been responsive to the ideals of the three Rs.

Measures of unemployment, the depth of the depression, and proxies for income consistently affected

allocations for relief. Relief programs were not used exclusively for high-minded objectives, political

factors were important, but politics seems to have mattered more in the agricultural and public works

programs than in the relief programs. Whether the magnitudes of the elasticities with respect to relief and

recovery are “enough” to say that the programs were adhering to the three-R mantra is a normative

question that will always depend on the eye of the beholder.

        Many other New Deal programs display only limited relationships to the relief, recovery, and

reform motives. Every loan and housing program distributed more funds in areas with higher levels of

per capita retail sales and a higher percentage of households rich enough to pay income taxes. The farm

programs typically distributed relatively more money in areas with larger farms and, aside from the FSA,

distributed more money to areas with higher average incomes and with a higher share of wealthier

citizens. The public works programs also tended to be more generous to areas with higher average retail

sales per person. Most of these programs were designed from the start to require state, local, or even

private investment before funding could be assured. Most of the loans were expected to be repaid,

farmers had to have enough land to take some out of production before the AAA stepped in, and the non-

federal public works programs required significant local sponsorship. To join these programs,

communities had to have sufficient resources to meet the financial requirements of the program, hence,

the strong relationships between program spending and income.

        The New Deal was designed to provide something for everyone. The Roosevelt administration

targeted specific programs to the needs of particular groups. The regression results show that relief
                                                                                                              23


programs clearly benefited the unemployed in urban areas and the AAA aided larger farmers. Geographic

areas with larger middle and upper income classes, many of whom also experienced substantial problems

during the Depression, received more loans from the RFC and the PWA. Many people with the

resources to own homes benefited from HOLC loans and FHA insurance of mortgages. The county-level

information highlights the targeted nature of the New Deal’s efforts.

        There is no doubt that politics was important. At least one of the presidential political variables

had an economically and statistically significant impact on nearly every program. Even the Public Works

Administration, which was famous for its alleged nonpartisanship, appears to have distributed funds for

federally sponsored projects with the presidential elections in mind. Part of the PWA’s reputation derived

from the funding of non-federal projects, which were often the result of choices made by state and local

jurisdictions.

        In the final analysis a large fraction of the New Deal money that was spent followed Roosevelt’s

three-R mandate, but politics was important too. The New Deal’s high-minded agenda was not only the

result of a focus on public service but also a response to the demands of the populace in the heart of a

Great Depression. Roosevelt, Hopkins, Ickes, and the other administrators of the New Deal were savvy

politicians who understood the problems their constituents faced. Winning reelection required more than

spending extra funds in certain key swing areas, rewarding Democratic supporters, or spending where

people turned out more for Roosevelt. To please their nationwide constituency, they had to promote relief

and recovery at the very least (redistribution is trickier because it often goes to people who are less likely

to vote). They established a plethora of programs, each with a specific problem to solve. Thus, for those

concerned with unemployment, Roosevelt and Hopkins could point to the FERA, CWA, and WPA. To

those concerned with farm problems, they pointed to the AAA and the FCA. It is important to look at the

range of programs that were offered for evidence of Roosevelt’s political motivation because within any

specific program his administrators had only limited political leeway. Had the largest relief grants gone

to the areas with the lowest unemployment, for example, there might have been a scandal sufficient to

stymie their reelection hopes. It was good politics to deliver on the high-minded goals, just as it was good
                                                                                                      24


politics to spend more money at the margin, everything else constant, in areas that were key to the

reelection effort.
                                                                                                     25


                                         DATA APPENDIX

         New Deal spending information is from the U.S. Office of Government Reports (1940). Table 1
shows the total amounts from March 1933 through June 1939 distributed by the various programs. Retail
sales information from 1933 is from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic
Commerce (1936). The 1929 retail sales information is from Historical, Demographic, Economic, and
Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970, ICPSR tape number 0003, as corrected by Michael Haines.
The population figures used to create our per capita estimates for 1929 and 1933 retail spending were
calculated using linear interpolations of the 1930 and 1940 populations. We calculated 1929 population
as 1930 minus the average annual change in population between 1930 and 1940; we did not use trends
from 1920 to 1930 due to changes in county boundaries between 1920 and 1930. The percent black,
percent urban, percent of a county’s land in farms, inverse of population, area in square miles,
unemployed as a percent of the gainfully employed, average farm size, and percent of acres with crop
failure are from the 1930 files in ICPSR tape 0003 as corrected by Michael Haines. For 1930 we used the
illiteracy rate for people aged 10 and above. The tax return information comes from U.S. Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce (1932).
         The mean Democratic share of the presidential vote from 1896-1928, the percent voting for
Roosevelt in 1932 minus the mean Democratic share from 1896 to 1928, the standard deviation of the
Democratic share of the presidential vote from 1896 to 1932, and the percent of adults voting in 1932
were all calculated using information from ICPSR’s United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-1968
(ICPSR tape number 0001). The variables measuring House tenure and representation on House
committees between 1933 and 1938 are from U.S. Congress, Official Congressional Directory, for the
73rd Congress 1st session through 76th Congress. We then matched the congressional information with the
counties. For the majority of New Deal programs we used average congressional information from the
1933 to 1938 period. For shorter-lived programs we used congressional information tied to those periods.
For example, for the CWA we used the 1933 information, for FERA the 1933-1935 information, for the
WPA grants, SSAPA grants, and USHA loans we used 1935-1938 information.
         The data set consists of 3,060 counties and county/city combinations in the United States. The
New Deal program information was reported for some combined counties. For example, the New Deal
information was reported for all of New York City. Thus, in New York state, Bronx, Kings, New York,
Queens, and Richmond counties were combined into New York City. Similar situations developed in
other states. In Missouri, St. Louis City and County were combined. In Virginia we combined the
following districts that were reported separately in the Census, but together in the New Deal data:
Albemarle county and Charlottesville city; Allegheny county and Clifton Forge city; Augusta county and
Staunton city; Campbell county and Lynchburg city; Dinwiddie county and Petersburg city; Elizabeth
City county and Hampton city; Frederick county and Winchester city; Henrico county and Richmond city;
Henry county and Martinsville city; James City county and Williamsburg city; Montgomery county and
Radford city; Nansemond county and Suffolk city; Norfolk county with Norfolk city, South Norfolk city;
and Portsmouth city; Pittsylvania county and Danville city; Prince George county and Hopewell city;
Roanoke county and Roanoke city; Rockbridge county and Buena Vista city; Rockingham county and
Harrisonburg city; Spotsylvania county and Fredericksburg city; Warwick county and Newport News
city; Washington county and Bristol city; Arlington county and Alexandria city. A small number of
counties were dropped from the sample due to missing values for the variables above.
                                                                                                          26


                                                  FOOTNOTES
1
   See Arrington (1969) and the studies summarized in Table 2.
2
  As in the prior literature, we focus on the distribution of funds without examining the tax collection side
of the analysis. Federal tax rates were uniform nationwide, so variations in federal tax revenue from the
counties would have been driven by the number of families with incomes large enough to pay income
taxes (less than 7 percent nationwide), the extent of corporate activity, and differences in the consumption
of goods subject to excise taxes. We are also not trying to capture the indirect effects of payments that
might arise from changes in markets in response to the grants and loans.
3
  Another issue to consider is that not all federal dollars were alike. A dollar from the WPA was likely to
have a bigger economic effect than an AAA dollar. The AAA dollar was essentially a payment to a
farmer to take land out of production, thus the net benefit of the AAA dollar to the farmer was less than a
dollar. Similarly, in this analysis we take a look at specific loan programs for the first time. Since the
majority of loans that were made were to be repaid, it is clear that loan dollars had quite a different
meaning than grant dollars.
4
  For an appreciation of the variety of strategies followed by state and local governments in response to
the New Deal, see Patterson (1967), and the case studies on North Carolina by Abrams (1992), on
Arizona by Collins (1999), on the South by Biles (1994), and the series of studies of Massachusetts, Ohio,
Virginia, Pennsylvania, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Wyoming, Montana, Colorado, New Mexico, Oregon, and
Missouri edited by Braeman, Bremner, and Brody (1975).
5
  Wallis (1984) used a simultaneous equations model that explicitly examined matching; Wallis (1987 and
1998) used lagged grants to try to capture the pressures from state governments; and Fleck (1999b and
1999c) used state dummies in his county-level analysis to control for state government activities. Couch
and Shughart (1998) looked at the sponsor’s role in the WPA, but in another analysis they had panel data
but did not use state effects or lagged grants to control for state interests in the New Deal.
6
  For analyses of the factors influencing work relief, unemployment, and private employment at the
individual level for WPA workers in 1940, see Margo (1991), Finegan and Margo (1994), and Sundstrom
(1995).
7
  See Graham (1973) and Sitkoff (1985) for debates about the New Deal.
8
  For innovative approaches to theoretical modeling of the political process in this context, see the work
of Wright (1974), Fleck (1999a, 1999b, 2001a) and Rhode, Snyder, and Strumpf (2001).
9
  Estimating separate structural equations for each program, but directly taking into account the fact that
all programs were substitutes, would involve finding instrumental variables for each individual program.
That would be a most difficult task.
10
   For a discussion of the political nature of this variable, see Fleck (2001b) and Wallis (2001).
11
   The Social Security Administration’s public assistance programs required explicit matching from the
states. The FERA was originally designed such that half of the initial monies were to be distributed with
a strong matching grant component and the other half was to be distributed on a discretionary basis.
However, after spending $200 million on a matching basis by November 1933, FERA administrator
Harry Hopkins convinced Congress to allow the FERA to distribute the monies on a discretionary basis,
which is how the vast majority of FERA funds were spent. See U.S. Senate (1935, pp. xi-xiv), E. A.
Williams (1968, pp. 181-90, 203-17), and Couch and Shughart (1998). The WPA also asked state and
local governments to contribute funding to its projects, although there was never an explicit matching
formula and the federal share of the funding of projects varied substantially across states (Howard, 1943,
pp. 146-50).
12
   Because we are estimating separate equations for multiple programs, we might have needed to pay
attention to potential cross-equation error correlations by using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR)
analysis. However, since all of the equations we estimate have the same set of independent variables, the
SUR estimator is the same as the OLS estimator.
                                                                                                        27



13
   Wright (1974), Wallis (2001), and Fleck (2001b) have followed the procedure of comparing the R-
squareds from regressions with just the political variables to regressions with just the economics and
structural variables to see which sets of variables explain more of the variation in the sample. We have
performed similar comparisons (see Appendix Table 6) in which we compared the adjusted R-squareds
from regressions with only the presidential and congressional variables listed in Table 3 (percent voting
democrat for president 1896-1928 through the Congressional committee assignments) to regressions with
only the structural and reform, relief, and recovery variables (inverse population through average farm
size). The adjusted R-squared from the structural and three-R specifications are larger than those from
the political specifications in all but the SSA public assistance regression. We did not include the state
dummy variables in either regression because they control simultaneously for both political and non-
political factors. In the county studies, F-tests reject the hypothesis that all of the state effects are
simultaneously zero in nearly all cases.
14
   The WPA lasted through 1942, but our data set only records spending through June 1939 for any
program. The Social Security programs include Aid to Dependent Children, Aid to the Blind, and Old-
Age Assistance.
15
   Harold Ickes administered the PWA, with advice from a Special Board. Generally, the projects were
vetted by each of three sections of the central office and then sent on to the Special Board. Roosevelt had
the final say and E. A. Williams (1968, 106 and 114-16) claimed that Roosevelt did not just “rubber
stamp” Ickes’s decisions. In discussing how the PWA funds were distributed, Williams argued that the
Special Board did not focus on the variables that the National Planning Board deemed important to
consider, such as population, unemployment, relief spending, tax contributions, or land area, but that the
Special Board did take note occasionally of its comparative generosity to some states and restricted or
postponed allotments accordingly.
16
   The tax information has been used by a number of scholars (Smiley 2000, Schmitz and Fishback 1983)
as proxies for the share of income in the highest tail of the income distribution.
17
   Unlike most New Deal agencies, the AAA was administered by an existing department – the
Department of Agriculture – which established state and local committees or associations of producers to
help administer the act. The AAA Rental and Benefit payments were distributed to farmers who agreed
to participate in a program of controlled production. Farmers voluntarily signed production agreements in
which they would curtail the acreage they planted. The benefit payments were financed from special
processing taxes on the commodity being curtailed. The goal of the program was to increase the incomes
of farmers both through benefit payments and by raising market prices to pre-World War I levels (1920s
levels for tobacco). There was a general belief that most of the burden of the processing taxes would be
passed on to consumers of farm products. For detailed discussions of the AAA administration, see
Nourse, et. al. (1937, pp. 39-40, 92-114, 120-46, 287-323).
18
   The measure of farm size is problematic in southern plantation areas where there were large numbers of
sharecroppers who were treated by the census as farm operators, when in fact they were more like farm
laborers. See Alston and Kaufmann (1997).
19
   See Saloutos (1974 and 1982), Alston (1981), Whatley (1983), and Biles (1994).
20
   A key theme of Anderson and Tollison’s (1991) work was that it was important to include
Congressional pressures. We include them in several ways. For the House of Representatives we include
measures of the tenure of congressmen representing the district in which the county was located. House
members with longer tenures had more seniority on committees at this time. Weingast and Marshall’s
(1988) discussion of the organization of Congress suggests that committee members wield significant
power over the passage of bills and over the administration of administrative programs. Members of
committees have more clout than the typical representative in determining how monies will be
distributed, either through writing the rules for distributing funds in advance of the bill or through
pressures to spend the money after the program is in place. To capture this effect, we include
representation on a series of key committees in the House of Representatives at the opening of the 73rd
                                                                                                             28



Congress in 1933. The same issues obviously exist for the Senate. The impact of the Senate influences is
among several factors that are captured by the state dummy variables.
         The impact of House tenure was relatively small on the distribution process. The elasticity was
higher than 0.05 for only the U.S. Housing Authority loans. The coefficients of the congressional
committee variables suggest that for most programs there was one and sometimes more committees that
appeared to increase spending in the area in a statistically significant way. Membership on the
Agriculture Committee was associated with an extra $20 per capita in AAA spending, $6.5 in FCA loans,
and $1.23 in REA loans. Appropriations Committee membership was associated with an extra $6.86 in
non-federal PWA loans. The Irrigation and Control Committee raised FSA grants by $0.86. The Labor
Committee appeared to influence the most programs, raising FERA, CWA, and AAA grants and USHA
loans. The Public Lands Committee raised FERA spending, PRA spending and AAA spending. The
Roads Committee increased WPA, RFC, and HOLC funds. Finally, Ways and Means primarily
influenced the public buildings and public housing grants.
         We have experimented with using the Poole and Rosenthal (1997) measures of ideological
location in political space, but the elasticities were all low and the coefficients were typically statistically
insignificant. We also experimented with a dummy variable accounting for southern Democratic
congressmen, but the variable had little impact.
21
   This is similar to a key component of Wright’s presidential political productivity index. Other key
components included the number of electoral votes in each state and the standard deviation of the
democratic voting.
22
   Wright’s political productivity index for analysis at the state level was weighted by the votes in the
Electoral College. We have experimented with using an electoral votes measure for each county that
multiplied the state’s electoral votes by the county’s share of the population. Given the way electoral
votes were determined, this essentially becomes a measure of population share nationwide. Inclusion of
the variable leads to results that yield largely the same inferences as reported here.
                                                                                                     29


                                           REFERENCES

Abrams, D. C., 1992. Conservative Constraints: North Carolina and the New Deal. University Press of
         Mississippi, Jackson MS.
Alston, L. J., 1981. Tenure choice in southern agriculture, 1930-1960. Explorations in Economic History
         18, 211-32.
Alston, L. J., Kauffman K., 1997. Agricultural chutes and ladders: New estimates of sharecroppers and
         “true tenants” in the South, 1900-1920. Journal of Economic History 57, 464-75.
Anderson, G. M., Tollison, R. D., 1991. Congressional influence and patterns of New Deal spending,
         1933-1939. Journal of Law and Economics 34, 161-75.
Arrington, L. J., 1970. Western agriculture and the New Deal. Agricultural History 49, 337-16.
Bernstein, B., 1990. The New Deal: The conservative achievements of liberal reform. In: Dubofsky,
         M., Burwood, S. (Eds.), The Great Depression and the New Deal. Garland Publishing, New
         York, pp. 64-89.
Biles, R., 1994. The South and the New Deal. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington, KY.
Braeman, J., Bremner, R. H., Brody, D. (Eds.), 1975. The New Deal: The State and Local Levels,
         volume two. Ohio State University Press, Columbus, OH.
Brown, J. C., 1940. Public Relief, 1929-1939. H. Holt and Company, New York.
Clarke, J. N., 1996. Roosevelt’s Warrior: Harold L. Ickes and the New Deal. Johns Hopkins University
         Press, Baltimore.
Collins, W. S., 1999. The New Deal in Arizona. Arizona State Parks Board, Phoenix.
Conkin, P. K., 1967. FDR and the Origins of the Welfare State. Crowell, New York.
Couch, J., Atkinson, K. E., Wells, W. H., 1998. New Deal agricultural appropriations: A political
         influence. Eastern Economic Journal 24, 137-48.
Couch, J., Shughart, W., 1998. The Political Economy of the New Deal. Edward Elgar, New York.
Couch, J., Williams, P. M., 1999. New Deal or same old shuffle? The distribution of New Deal dollars
         across Alabama. Economics and Politics 11, 213-23.
Degler, C. N. 1959. Out of Our Past: The Forces that Shaped the Modern America. Harper, New York.
Finegan, T. A., Margo, R. A., 1994. Work relief and the labor force participation of married women.
         Journal of Economic History 54, 64-84.
Fleck, R. K., 1999a. Electoral incentives, public policy, and the New Deal realignment. Southern
         Economic Journal 63, 377-404.
Fleck, R. K., 1999b. The marginal effect of New Deal relief work on county-level unemployment
         statistics. Journal of Economic History 59, 659-87.
Fleck, R. K., 1999c. The value of the vote: A model and test of the effects of turnout on distributive
         policy. Economic Inquiry 37, 609-23.
Fleck, R. K., 2001a. Inter-party competition, intra-party competition, and distributive policy: A model
         and test using New Deal data. Public Choice 108, 77-100.
Fleck, R. K., 2001b. Population, land, economic conditions, and the allocation of New Deal spending.
         Explorations in Economic History 38, 296-304.
Freidel, F., 1971. Franklin D. Roosevelt: Launching the New Deal. Little, Brown, Boston.
Graham, O. (Ed.), 1973. The New Deal: The Critical Issues. Little, Brown, Boston.
Howard, D. S., 1943. The WPA and Federal Relief Policy. Russell Sage Foundation, New York..
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). Historical, Demographic,
         Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970, ICPSR dataset number 0003, as
         corrected by Michael Haines, Department of Economics, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). United States Historical Election
         Returns, 1824-1968, ICPSR Dataset Number 0001.
Key, V. O., 1937. The Administration of Federal Grants to States. Social Science Research Council,
         Chicago.
Leuchtenburg, W. E., 1963. Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal, 1932-1940. Harper and Row, New
                                                                                                      30


         York.
Lieberman, R. C., 1998. Shifting the Color Line: Race and the American Welfare State. Harvard
         University Press, Cambridge, MA.
McJimsey, G. T., 1987. Harry Hopkins: Ally of the Poor and Defender of Democracy. Harvard
         University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Margo, R. A., 1991. The microeconomics of depression unemployment. Journal of Economic History
         51, 333-41.
Mason, J., 2002. The political economy of Reconstruction Finance Corporation assistance during the
         Great Depression. Drexel University Working Paper.
Nourse, E. G., Davis, J. S., Black, J. D., 1937. Three Years of the Agricultural Adjustment
         Administration. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Patterson, J. T., 1967. Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal: The Growth of the Conservative
         Coalition in Congress, 1933-1939. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington, KY.
Poole, K. T., Rosenthal, H., 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting. Oxford
         University Press, New York.
Reading, D. C., 1973. New Deal activity and the states, 1933 to 1939. Journal of Economic History 33,
         792-810.
Rhode, P., Snyder, J., Strumpf, K. 2001. ‘The Great Arsenal of Democracy?’ The political economy of
         the county-level allocation of World War Two military spending. Working Paper presented at the
         NBER-DAE 2001 Summer Institute.
Roosevelt, F. D., 1934. Review of the achievements of the seventy-third congress. June 28, 1934
         Fireside Chat. Available at http://newdeal.feri.org.
Saloutos, T., 1982. The American Farmer and the New Deal. Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA.
Saloutos, T., 1974. New Deal agricultural policy: An evaluation. Journal of American History 61, 394-
         416.
Schlesinger, A. M., Jr., 1958. The Age of Roosevelt: The Coming of the New Deal. Houghton-Mifflin,
         Boston..
Schmitz, M., Fishback, P. V., 1983. The distribution of income in the Great Depression: Preliminary state
         estimates. Journal of Economic History 43, 217-30.
Sitkoff, H. (Ed.), 1985. Fifty Years Later: The New Deal Evaluated. Knopf, New York.
Smiley, G., 2000. A note on new estimates of the distribution of income in the 1920s. Journal of
         Economic History 60, 1120-28.
Sterner, R. M. E., Epstein, L. A., Winston, E., 1943. The Negro’s Share: A Study of Income,
         Consumption, Housing, and Public Assistance. Harper and Brothers, New York.
Strömberg, D., 2001. Radio’s impact on public spending. Institute for International Economic Studies,
         Stockholm University Working paper.
Sundstrom, W., 1995. Did the WPA displace private employment? Evidence from the 1940 census
         microsample. Santa Clara University Working Paper.
U.S. Congress., various years. Official Congressional Directory, 73rd Congress 1st session through 76th
         Congress. GPO, Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, 1932. General Consumer
         Market Statistics, Supplement 1 to the Market Data Handbook of the United States. GPO,
         Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, 1936. Consumer Market
         Data Handbook. GPO, Washington, DC.
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Statistical Section, 1940. Report No. 10, Volume 1, ‘County reports
         of estimated federal expenditures, March 4, 1933 - June 30, 1939’. Mimeo.
U.S. Senate, 1935. Expenditure of Funds: Federal Emergency Relief Administration. Senate Document
         No. 56, 74th Congress 1st session. GPO, Washington, DC.
Wallis, J. J., 1984. The birth of the old federalism: Financing the New Deal, 1932-1940. Journal of
         Economic History 44, 139-59.
                                                                                                        31


Wallis, J. J., 1987. Employment, politics, and economic recovery during the Great Depression. Review
        of Economics and Statistics 69, 516-20.
Wallis, J. J., 1989. Employment in the Great Depression: New data and hypotheses. Explorations in
        Economic History 26, 45-72.
Wallis, J. J., 1998. The political economy of New Deal spending revisited, again: With and without
        Nevada. Explorations in Economic History 35, 140-70.
Wallis, J. J., 2001. The political economy of New Deal spending, yet again: A reply. Explorations in
        Economic History 38, 305-14.
Wallis, J. J., Oates, W. E., 1998. The Impact of the New Deal on American Federalism. In: Bordo, M.
        D., Goldin, C., White, E. N. (Eds.), The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the
        American Economy in the Twentieth Century. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 155-80.
Weingast, B. R., Marshall, W. J., 1988. The industrial organization of Congress; or, why legislatures, like
        firms, are not organized as markets. Journal of Political Economy 96, 132-63.
Whatley, W. C., 1983. Labor for the picking: The New Deal in the South. Journal of Economic History
        43, 905-29.
Williams, E. A., 1968. Federal Aid for Relief. AMS Press, New York.
Williams, J. K., 1968. Grants-in-Aid Under the Public Works Administration: A Study in Federal-State-
        Local Relations. AMS Press, New York.
Wright, G., 1974. The political economy of New Deal spending: An econometric analysis. Review of
        Economics and Statistics 56, 30-38.
Zinn, H., 1966. New Deal Thought. Bobbs-Merrill, New York.
                                                                                          33


Table 1

Total Federal Grants, Loans, and Value of Mortgages Insured, March 1933 – June 1939, by
Program

NON-REPAYABLE GRANTS:                               Grant Dollars      % of
                                                                      Grants
 Agricultural Adjustment Adm. (AAA)                  $1,981,801,905     12.1
 Farm Security Adm. (FSA) Grants                         93,408,281      0.6
 U.S. Housing Authority (USHA)                          127,206,671      0.8
 Public Building Adm. (PBA) Federal Buildings           174,228,825      1.1
 Public Roads Adm. (PRA)                              1,556,290,368      9.5
 Public Works Adm. (PWA) Federal Projects               798,501,411      4.9
 Public Works Adm. (PWA) Non-Federal Projects         1,367,347,520      8.4
 Civil Works Adm. (CWA)                                 757,172,702      4.6
 Federal Emergency Relief Adm. (FERA)                 2,654,860,349     16.3
 Social Security Adm. Public Assistance (SSAPA)         596,010,054      3.6
 Works Progress Adm. (WPA)                            6,222,385,662     38.1
Total Grants                                         16,329,213,748    100.0

LOANS:                                                Loan Dollars     % of
                                                                      Loans
 Farm Credit Adm. (FCA) Loans                        $1,257,491,136    12.0
 Farm Security Adm. (FSA) Loans                         427,932,675     4.1
 Rural Electrification Adm. (REA) Loans                 226,247,292     2.2
 Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC)                  3,077,258,287    29.5
 U.S. Housing Authority (USHA) Loans                    449,854,991     4.3
 Disaster Loan Corp. (DLC)                              $10,504,466     0.1
 Reconstruction Finance Corp. (RFC)                   4,425,940,596    42.4
 Public Work Adm. (PWA) Non-Federal Program             567,616,807     5.4
    Loans
Total Loans                                          10,442,846,250    100.0

INSURANCE:
Federal Housing Adm. (FHA) Insurance: Value of       $2,707,560,412
   Loans Insured

Note: The RFC loans began in February 1932.

Source: U.S. Office of Government Reports (1940).
                                                                                                                                        34


                                                               Table 2

Summary of Prior Research Analyzing the Impact of Relief, Recovery, and Reform Motives on Aggregate New Deal Spending


                                           Consistent with Relief and                   Consistent with Reform?                 Controls for Politics
                                                  Recovery?
Research    Dependent           Cross-  Income Employ-    Lag-    Relief   Income   %        %       farm    Media     Mfg.   Pres.    Cong.    State
                                        drop   menta      ged     cases    per      tenant   black   value   n educ.   Wage                     and
            Variable            section
                                                          emp.             capita                                                               local
                                (CS) or
                                Panel
AGGREGATE NEW DEAL SPENDING ACROSS STATES:
Reading      Grants per capita, CS      Yes    yes                         no       maybe    no                               no       no       no
1973         33-39
Reading      Grants, loans, and CS      Yes    maybe                       no       maybe    no                               no       no       no
1973         insurance per
             capita, 33-39
Wright 1974 Grants per capita, CS       Maybe no                  maybe                                                       yes      no       no
             33-39
Wallis 1984  Annual grants per Panel    Maybe no                  yes                                                         yes      no       yes
             capita, 37-40
Wallis 1987  Annual grants per Panel    Maybe yes                          no                                                 yes      no       yes
             capita, 33-39
Anderson & Grants, loans, and CS        Maybe maybeb                                                 no                       yes      yes      no
Tollison     insurance per
1991         capita, 33-39
Couch &      Annual grants and Panel    Yes    maybe      no                                         no                       yes      yes      no
Shughart     loans per capita,
1998         33-39
Couch &      Annual loans per   Panel   Yes    no         no                                         no                       yes      yes      no
Shughart     capita, 33-39
1998
Couch &      Annual grants per Panel    Yes    yes        no                                         no                       yes      yes      no
Shughart     capita, 33-39
1998
Wallis 1998  Grants per capita, CS      Maybe yes                 maybe                              no                       yes      yes      no
             33-39
Wallis, 1998 Annual grants per Panel    Yes    maybe                       maybe                     no                       yes      yes      yes
             capita, 33-39
Fleck 1999a Grants per capita, CS       No     no                                                                             yes      yes      no
                                                                                                                  35


            33-39
Fleck 2001b Grants per capita, CS        Yes                  yes                                           yes   no    no
            33-39
Wallis 2001 Grants per capita, CS        Maybe                maybe                                         yes   no    no
            33-39
AGGREGATE NEW DEAL SPENDING ACROSS ALABAMA COUNTIES:
Couch &     Spending per       CS        Maybe yes            no      no                                    no    yes   yes
Williams    capita, 33-39
1999
 NEW DEAL SPENDING OR HIRING ON SPECIFIC PROGRAMS:
Wallis 1984 Annual Relief      State     Maybe Yes                                                          yes   no    yes
            Grants             Panel
Couch &     CWA Grants per     State CS  yes d   Maybe        maybe   no                                    no    yes   No
Shughart    capita, 33-34
1998
Couch &     FERA               State     Yes     No           maybe   no                                    yes   yes   No
Shughart    Expenditures per   Panel
1998        capita, 33-39
Fleck 1999c FERA spending      Southern          Yes                  maybe            no        maybe      yes   no    yes
            per capita, 33-35  mfg.
                               counties,
                               CS
Fleck 2001a FERA spending,     Mfg.                 yes               yes        yes        no         no   yes   no    yes
            33-35              Counties
                               CS
Stromberg,  FERA spending      Counties  Maybe      yes       yese    maybe      yes        no   maybe      yes   no    yes
                                               e
2001        per capita, 33-35  CS
Couch &     WPA                State CS                       maybe   no                                    no    yes   yes
Shughart    expenditures per
1998        capita
Wright 1974 Work Relief Jobs   State CS          Yes    yes                                                 yes   no    No
            per capita in 36
Fleck 1999b Relief Jobs, 37    Mfg.              Yes d                no               maybe     yes        yes   no    yes
                               Counties,
                               CS
Fleck 1999b Relief Jobs, 40    Mfg.              Yes? d               no               maybe     yes        yes   no    yes
                               Counties,
                               CS
Fleck 2001a Relief Jobs, 37    Mfg.              Yes                        no   yes   maybe           no   yes   no    yes
                               Counties,
                                                                                                                                                    36


                                   CS
Fleck 2001a     Relief Jobs, 40    Mfg.                 Yes                                                no        yes   maybe   no     yes      no    yes
                                   Counties,
                                   Cs
Mason 2002      Reconstruction     State CS    no                            yesf                                                         yes      yes   no
                Finance Corp.
                Bank Loans
Wallis 1984     Annual Highway     State       Maybe    Yes                                                                               yes      no    yes
                grants, 37-40      Panel
Anderson &      Highway            State CS    Maybe    Maybe                                                   No                        yes      yes   no
                                                        b
Tollison        spending per                   or no
1991            capita, 33-39
Couch &         Agricultural       State                                                     maybe    no        No                        yes      yes   no
Shughart        Spending per       Panel
1998            farm, 33-39
Couch,          Agricultural       Alabama     No                                   no                          No                        yes      yes   yes
Atkinson, &     Spending per       counties,
Wells 1999      farmer, 33-39      CS


a
 In the cross-sectional analyses, scholars have typical used a measure of unemployment from either 1930, 1937, or 1940. In the panels, scholars
have tended to use an index of employment for the states developed by Wallis (1989).
b
 Anderson and Tollison estimate several similar specifications. For New Deal spending the coefficients for the unemployment rate variables were
positive in all cases, but statistically significant in only half of the specifications. For highway spending the coefficients of the unemployment
rates were positive in all cases, but statistically significant in only one.
c
    The income drop variable here was the change in the number of business establishments.
d
 Fleck (1999b) estimated separate coefficients for 1930 male and female unemployment per capita and male and female layoffs per capita when
he looked at the distribution of 1937 and 1940 relief jobs. The “yes” for the 1937 jobs in the table refers to positive and statistically significant
coefficients for both male unemployment and male layoffs. The “yes?” in 1940 reflects positive coefficients for both male unemployment and
male layoffs, although only the male unemployment coefficient was statistically significant. For both 1937 and 1940 relief jobs, the female 1930
unemployment coefficient is negative, while the female 1930 layoff coefficient is positive but not statistically significant.
e
 Stromberg (2001) used bank deposits as a proxy for income change and the income drop, so we included those results under the income columns.
The results in the median education column refer to percent illiterate and the results in the manufacturing wage column refer to the retail wage.
                                                                                                                                                   37


f
    Mason (2002) had a variable for failed banks, which we treat in this table as the equivalent to relief cases.

Notes: In the various cells “yes” means that the estimated coefficient had a sign consistent with relief, recovery, or reform and was statistically
significant at the 10 percent level in a two-tailed test. “Maybe” indicates that the coefficient had the correct sign, but was not statistically
significant at the 10 percent level. Finally, “no” suggests that the coefficient had the wrong sign to be consistent with relief, recovery, or reform.
Many of the papers contained multiple specifications. We chose the specifications that included all of the variables that were discussed as
potentially important by the authors to avoid problems with omitted variable bias. A blank cell indicates that the variable was not included in the
study.
         The relief and recovery variables include measures of unemployment (or employment), the number of relief cases, and the fall in per
capita income from 1929 to 1932 or 1933. There has been some confusion on the change in per capita income variables. Some scholars referred
to an income drop and thus would take a negative growth rate and make it a positive number, such that a positive coefficient would be consistent
with the recovery motive. Others used the change in income, such that a negative coefficient would imply the recovery motive. In some cases
people used the terms interchangeably and we tried to use the reported mean of the variable to tell the difference. Where the mean was not
reported, we based our decision on the discussion of the variable in the text.
         The reform variables include the level of income per capita, percent of tenant farms, percent black, average value on farms, median
education, and the manufacturing wage.
         The estimation procedures used have been ordinary least squares except in the following cases: Wallis (1984 and 1987) used two-stage
and three-stage least squares; Fleck (1999b) used two-stage least squares; and Couch and Shughart used OLS estimates but included year dummies
for their estimations of all New Deal spending, New Deal grants, New Deal loans, agricultural spending, and FERA spending.
                                                                                                          38


Table 3

Summary Statistics and Interpretations of Independent Variables Included in the Regression Analysis of
Each New Deal Program


Variables                                    Sign and meaning of Coefficients         Mean Std. Dev.
Structural Economic:
Inverse of population, 1930                  Positive suggests program provided        8.90       14.0
                                             base level of spending
Area in square miles per capita, 1930        Positive suggests rewarding large         0.10       0.27
                                             areas with less population density
Percent of land in farms, 1929               Positive suggests focused on farm         64.5       27.3
                                             areas
Percent Urban, 1930                          Positive suggests focused on urban        21.0       24.8
                                             areas
Reform Motive:
Tax returns filed per capita, 1929           Negative suggests redistribution          1.41       1.32
Retail Sales per capita, 1929                Negative suggests redistribution         541.2      269.8

Percent black, 1930                          Positive suggests redistribution           11.1      18.4
Percent illiterate, 1930                     Positive suggests redistribution           5.41      5.83
Relief and Recovery Motives:
Difference in log retail sales per capita,   Negative suggests promoted relief         -0.47      0.24
1933-1929                                    and recovery
Unemployed as percent of gainfully           Positive suggests promoted relief and     2.79       2.20
employed, 1930                               recovery
Percent of farm acres with crop failures,    Positive suggests promoted relief and     3.19       4.07
1929                                         recovery
Average farm size, 1929                      Positive suggests larger farms            82.3       88.6
                                             benefited disproportionately
Political Influence:
Mean Democratic presidential vote            Positive suggests rewarded long-term          49.4    18.5
percentage, 1896-1928                        Democratic voters
Percent voting for Roosevelt in 1932         Positive suggests rewarded voters             18.8    10.3
minus above mean from 1896-1928              who swung to Roosevelt in 1932
Standard deviation of presidential voting    Positive suggests focused on long-            11.7    4.90
percentage for Democrats, 1896-1932          term volatility of swing voters
Votes cast in 1932 presidential election /   Positive suggests rewarded voter              31.6    15.0
1930 population                              activism
Average months of consecutive tenure in      Positive suggests House members               51.9    64.6
the House during period of program           with more seniority brought more
                                             dollars
House committee assignments during           Positive suggests congressional clout
period of program                            increased funds
Vector of State Dummies                      Controls for unmeasured differences across states common
                                             to the counties within each state, including Senate
                                             representation
Note: There are 3,060 observations.

Sources: See Data Appendix.
                                                                                                                                39



Table 4

Elasticities of Relief, Recovery, and Reform Variables


                                 Relief and Recovery                               Redistribution and Reform
                       Change
                       in log
                       retail
                       sales                                       Tax         Retail
                       per                                         returns     sales
                       capita        %            % farm           per         per        %          %             Avg.
                       1929-         unemp.       failures,        capita      capita     black,     illiterate    farm
 Programs              1933          1930         1929             1929        1929       1930       1930          size
 RELIEF
  FERA Grants           -0.238 *       0.105 *       0.020 *        -0.009     -0.135 *   -0.014        -0.042 *    0.098 *
  CWA Grants            -0.068 *       0.047 *      -0.007           0.004     -0.034      0.021 *      -0.011      0.062 *
  WPA Grants            -0.021         0.252 *       0.011          -0.079 *   -0.205 *   -0.055 *      -0.042 *   -0.023
  SSA Public
 Assistance Grants      -0.029         0.078 *         0.009        -0.167 *   -0.146 *    0.060 *      -0.067 *   0.010
 PUBLIC WORKS
 Federal PWA
 Grants                  0.990 *       0.693 *      -0.124          -0.641 *    0.856      0.444 *      -0.237     -0.376
 Nonfederal PWA
 Grants                  0.110        -0.122        -0.011          -0.064      0.831 *   -0.075        0.096      -0.164 *
 Nonfederal PWA
 Loans                  -0.380        -0.137        -0.132          -0.471      1.686 *   -0.503 *      0.545 *    -0.248
 PRA Grants              0.121 *      -0.025        -0.057 *        -0.026      0.251 *    0.058 *      0.032      -0.175 *
 PBA Grants              0.329 *      -0.143 *       0.030           0.018      1.056 *   -0.110 *      0.050      -0.046
 FARM
 PROGRAMS
  AAA Grants            -0.117   *    -0.131 *      -0.039     *     0.055      0.194 *    0.017        -0.025      1.204   *
  FCA Loans             -0.147   *    -0.108 *      -0.026     *     0.036      0.090     -0.014        -0.109 *    0.659   *
  FSA Grants            -0.392   *    -0.078         0.059     *    -0.239 *   -0.816 *   -0.004        -0.071      0.354   *
  FSA Loans             -0.223   *    -0.149 *       0.031     *    -0.293 *   -0.179 *    0.039 *      -0.117 *    0.309   *
  REA Loans              0.203   *    -0.007        -0.027          -0.015      0.044     -0.007        -0.025     -0.058
                                                                                                                                                40


 RFC, HOUSING LOANS, AND INSURANCE
  RFC Loans        0.009    -0.039                          0.015          0.172 *       0.749 *       -0.034           0.097         0.056
  HOLC Loans      -0.059     0.046 *                       -0.015          0.556 *       0.238 *       -0.021          -0.027         0.024
  FHA Loans
 Insured           0.189 *  -0.030                         -0.019          0.546 *       0.280 *       0.026           -0.073        -0.191 *
  USHA Loan
 Contracts         0.354     0.099                          0.095          0.864 *       1.040 *       0.010           -0.466 *      -0.089
  PWA/USHA
 Grants            0.342    -0.040                          0.085          1.589 *       2.221 *       0.557 *         -0.645 *      -0.437
 AGGREGATES
  Total Grants     0.001     0.058 *                       -0.021 *       -0.060 *        0.120 *       0.020          -0.027         0.303 *
   Relief Grants  -0.083 *   0.179 *                        0.012         -0.060 *       -0.165 *      -0.027 *        -0.041 *       0.019
   Public Works
 Grants            0.286 *   0.088                         -0.059 *       -0.147 *       0.494 *        0.101 *        -0.005        -0.208 *
  Total Loans     -0.094 *  -0.067 *                       -0.014          0.079 *       0.338 *       -0.042 *        -0.009         0.287 *



* = coefficient upon which the elasticity is based is statistically significant at the 10 percent level, or better, in a two-tailed test.

Notes: The sample size is 3,060 counties. The elasticities are based on the sample means and coefficients from regressions with all of the
variables listed in Table 3 included as independent variables. Each elasticity shows the percentage change in expenditures in each program
associated with a one percent increase in the variable in each column, holding all other variables constant. The coefficients and t-statistics are
reported in Appendix Tables 1 through 5. The US Housing Authority grants and Disaster Loan Corporation were small programs that were
focused on a relatively small number of places, so we did not include them. The USHA had several relatively large elasticities that were driven by
a very small mean value.

Sources: See Data Appendix.
                                                                                             41


Table 5

Elasticities for Presidential Political Variables and Tenure in the House


                                                    Std.
                       Mean                         dev.
                       Demo.                        Demo.       Presidential     Average
                       % for                        % for       votes 1932       tenure
                       Pres.                        Pres.       divided by       in
                       1896-
                         Roosevelt                  1896-       population       House,
Programs               1928
                         swing                      1932        1930             1933
RELIEF
 FERA Grants     0.012       0.209              *   -0.104 *           0.071       0.011
 CWA Grants     -0.026       0.064              *   -0.074 *           0.375 *    -0.002
 WPA Grants      0.005       0.165              *   -0.234 *          -0.050      -0.007
 SSA Pub. Asst.
Grants           0.036       0.016                  -0.062             0.719 *     0.011
PUBLIC WORKS
 Federal PWA
Grants           0.708       0.997                   2.526 *           8.417 *     0.019
 Nonfederal PWA
Grants           0.220      -0.292              *    0.276             0.430      -0.060
 Nonfederal PWA
Loans            1.280      -0.302                   0.146             0.792      -0.187
 PRA Grants      0.094       0.188              *   -0.170 *           0.654 *     0.003
 PBA Grants      0.772 *    -0.001                  -0.102             0.105      -0.022
FARM
PROGRAMS
 AAA Grants      0.262 *     0.269              *   -0.085             0.096       0.047 *
 FCA Loans      -0.009       0.046                   0.227 *           0.191 *     0.017
 FSA Grants      0.007       0.361              *    0.283 *          -0.449 *    -0.001
 FSA Loans       0.100       0.013                   0.090             0.139      -0.041 *
 REA Loans       0.922 *     0.453              *   -0.149             0.908 *     0.035
RFC, HOUSING LOANS, AND
INSURANCE
 RFC Loans      -0.108      -0.107                   0.206             0.216       0.004
 HOLC Loans     -0.180 *    -0.045                  -0.071            -0.327 *    -0.011
 FHA Loans
Insured         -0.209      -0.103                   0.143             0.299      -0.056 *
 USHA Loan
Contracts        0.074       0.128                   0.483            -1.408 *     0.009
 PWA/USHA
Grants          -0.063       0.737                   0.477            -0.738       0.071
AGGREGATES
 Total Grants    0.140 *     0.226              *    0.016             0.580 *     0.009
  Relief Grants  0.007       0.154              *   -0.170 *           0.088       0.000
                                                                                                              42


   Public Works
 Grants                    0.248             0.242 *      0.420 *              2.045 *        -0.007
  Total Loans              0.090            -0.001        0.139 *              0.183 *        -0.008

* = coefficient upon which the elasticity is based is statistically significant at the 10 percent level, or
better, in a two-tailed test.

Notes: The sample size is 3,060 counties. The elasticities are based on the sample means and coefficients
from regressions with all of the variables listed in Table 3 included as independent variables. Each
elasticity shows the percentage change in expenditures in each program associated with a one percent
increase in the variable in each column, holding all other variables constant. The coefficients and t-
statistics are reported in Appendix Tables 1 through 5.

Sources: See Data Appendix.
                                                                             43


Table 6

Elasticities for Structural Economic Variables



                                                                %
                                        Square                  land
                                        miles      %            in
                Inverse                 per        urban        farms,
Programs        population              capita     1930         1929
RELIEF
 FERA Grants         0.023          *    0.008     0.095 *      -0.564 *
 CWA Grants          0.058          *   -0.005     0.072 *      -0.449 *
 WPA Grants         -0.018              -0.020 *   0.109 *      -0.594 *
 SSA Pub. Asst.
Grants               0.022          *    0.002     0.019        -0.194 *
PUBLIC WORKS
 Federal PWA
Grants              -0.971          *    0.822 *   0.071        -0.272
 Nonfederal PWA
Grants              -0.005              -0.010     0.073        -0.010
 Nonfederal PWA
Loans               -0.071               0.044      0.076       -0.501
 PRA Grants          0.335          *    0.252 *   -0.030       -0.067
 PBA Grants         -0.117          *    0.023     -0.006       -0.598 *
FARM
PROGRAMS
 AAA Grants          0.056          *   -0.050 *   -0.193   *   -0.113   *
 FCA Loans           0.054          *    0.027 *   -0.189   *    0.172   *
 FSA Grants          0.021               0.000      0.095   *   -0.328   *
 FSA Loans           0.006               0.003     -0.051   *   -0.073
 REA Loans          -0.026              -0.027     -0.274   *    0.431   *
RFC, HOUSING LOANS, AND
INSURANCE
 RFC Loans           0.034              -0.049 *   0.203 *      -0.424 *
 HOLC Loans         -0.006              -0.030 *   0.368 *      -0.168 *
 FHA Loans
Insured              0.049          *   -0.072 *   0.241 *      -0.164
 USHA Loan
Contracts            0.082               0.034     1.323 *      -1.737 *
 PWA/USHA
Grants               0.165               0.082     0.793 *      -0.926
AGGREGATES
 Total Grants        0.024          *    0.067 *   -0.004       -0.278 *
  Relief Grants      0.003              -0.010      0.094 *     -0.538 *
  Public Works       0.016               0.302 *    0.009       -0.106
                                                                                                              44


 Grants
  Total Loans                   0.024 *       -0.004        0.020        -0.083

* = coefficient upon which the elasticity is based is statistically significant at the 10 percent level, or
better, in a two-tailed test.

Notes: The sample size is 3,060 counties. The elasticities are based on the sample means and coefficients
from regressions with all of the variables listed in Table 3 included as independent variables. Each
elasticity shows the percentage change in expenditures in each program associated with a one percent
increase in the variable in each column, holding all other variables constant. The coefficients and t-
statistics are reported in Appendix Tables 1 through 5.

Sources: See Data Appendix.
                                                                                               45



Appendix Table 1

OLS Regression Results for Relief Programs



                    FERA Grants      CWA Grants      WPA Grants      SSAPA Grants
                    Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.  t-stat. Coeff.  t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat.
Intercept            11.1134   2.27   2.5133    2.08 50.1770    4.10   3.8958   2.82
Inverse
Population            0.0421    1.94   0.0392     7.33    -0.0704    -1.30   0.0132    2.16
Square miles per
capita                1.2293    0.96   -0.2713    -0.85   -6.9397    -2.15   0.1125    0.31
% Urban               0.0743    4.80    0.0208     5.45    0.1815     4.69   0.0049    1.13
                                   -
% Land on Farms      -0.1433   11.74   -0.0420   -13.92   -0.3224   -10.54   -0.0163   -4.71
Tax returns per
capita               -0.1019   -0.30   0.0180     0.22    -1.9694    -2.34   -0.6399   -6.75
Retail Sales per
capita, 1929         -0.0041   -2.28   -0.0004    -0.86   -0.0133    -2.95   -0.0015   -2.88
% Black              -0.0208   -0.90    0.0116     2.02   -0.1723    -2.96    0.0293    4.45
% Illiterate         -0.1262   -1.97   -0.0119    -0.75   -0.2717    -1.69   -0.0671   -3.70
Growth retail
sales per cap.,
1929-33              -8.2329   -7.40   -0.8642    -3.15   -1.5523    -0.56   -0.3316   -1.05
Unemployment
rate                  0.6167    4.44    0.1012     2.95    3.1618     9.09   0.1507    3.84
% Farm failures       0.1031    1.74   -0.0140    -0.96    0.1233     0.83   0.0150    0.89
Average farm Size     0.0196    4.84    0.0046     4.57   -0.0100    -0.99   0.0006    0.56
Mean Demo. %
for Pres, 1896-
1928                  0.0040    0.15   -0.0031    -0.49   0.0036     0.05    0.0039    0.53
Roosevelt Swing       0.1823    4.51    0.0205     2.05   0.3074     3.04    0.0046    0.41
Std. Dev. Demo.
% for Pres. 1896-
1932                 -0.1451   -1.67   -0.0379    -1.77   -0.6980    -3.21   -0.0285   -1.16
Pres. Votes
1932/population
1930                  0.0370    0.76   0.0717     5.95    -0.0557    -0.46   0.1230    8.90
Avg. Tenure in
House                 0.0035    0.84   -0.0002    -0.21   -0.0045    -0.43   0.0012    1.00
Congressional
Committees
Agriculture          -0.7091   -0.78   -0.5266    -2.35   0.0316     0.01    -0.3410   -1.33
Appropriations       -2.4323   -2.59   -0.8100    -3.49   0.7042     0.30     0.1373    0.52
Banking and
Currency             -1.6283   -1.42   -0.1719    -0.61   -8.0389    -2.79   -0.1342   -0.41
                                                                                             46


Exports              -1.2407   -0.99   -0.3270   -1.06   -1.8414   -0.59   -0.2912   -0.82
Flood Control        -0.8263   -0.71   -0.0327   -0.11   -1.8954   -0.65    0.5766    1.76
Irrigation Control   -1.9970   -1.86   -1.0767   -4.06   -2.9604   -1.10    0.0346    0.11
Labor                 3.4260    2.75    0.5478    1.78    3.1127    1.00    0.1506    0.43
Public Buildings     -2.5463   -2.03   -0.2250   -0.73   -1.2583   -0.40    0.1251    0.35
Public Lands          1.9164    1.86    0.3053    1.20   -1.1271   -0.44    0.2375    0.81
Rivers and
Harbors               0.9491   0.91    -0.0919   -0.36    0.2533   0.10    -0.1089   -0.37
Roads                 1.6519   1.57    -0.2937   -1.13    5.1519   1.96     0.8301    2.80
Ways and Means        0.3237   0.28     0.1803    0.64    1.3886   0.48    -0.0355   -0.11
State Dummies
ME                    0.4662    0.09   -0.5944   -0.48    1.8339    0.15   -1.4692   -1.03
MA                    7.8608    1.53    0.4572    0.36   29.5264    2.30    5.6351    3.88
NH                   -4.2652   -0.78    0.4869    0.36   -9.5239   -0.69   -2.9745   -1.92
RI                   -7.5885   -1.17   -1.4472   -0.90   -4.7561   -0.29   -2.8955   -1.57
VT                   -1.7300   -0.34    0.6952    0.55   -3.1342   -0.24   -1.8019   -1.25
DE                    5.8826    0.74   -1.4975   -0.76   12.9152    0.65   -1.8049   -0.80
NJ                    4.8594    1.02    0.9806    0.83   15.8763    1.33   -2.4588   -1.82
NY                    0.8308    0.18    0.7113    0.63   -0.6754   -0.06   -1.7658   -1.37
PA                   12.5036    2.90    0.6544    0.61   33.9527    3.14   -1.2539   -1.03
IL                    1.7303    0.38    1.1909    1.06   21.1993    1.87   -1.2518   -0.98
IN                   -0.3541   -0.08    2.0244    1.89   23.5719    2.16   -2.8241   -2.30
MI                   11.3893    2.64    7.1026    6.67   21.4098    1.98   -0.3199   -0.26
OH                   10.0859    2.25    3.4655    3.13   28.5320    2.54    3.1833    2.51
WI                    8.8932    2.02    5.9446    5.48   18.1522    1.65    1.7176    1.38
IA                   -1.5531   -0.36    1.3456    1.26    4.0715    0.38   -0.5531   -0.45
KS                    8.2819    1.90    2.3421    2.18   21.6482    1.99   -3.6972   -3.01
MN                    6.6973    1.23    2.3331    1.74   16.8066    1.24    3.3958    2.21
MO                   -0.6065   -0.12    1.1842    0.92   15.6639    1.20   -2.1275   -1.44
NE                   -1.0501   -0.24    0.0767    0.07   15.8358    1.43    1.2085    0.97
NDK                  17.0072    3.52    3.8932    3.27   32.9788    2.73   -3.0946   -2.27
SD                   31.1441    6.89    7.6785    6.89   47.7913    4.22   -1.6064   -1.26
VA                    3.3491    0.70    4.7236    4.02   -3.8780   -0.33   -3.4625   -2.57
AL                    3.4697    0.76    4.1329    3.65   -3.3894   -0.30   -3.0288   -2.34
AR                    3.9310    0.87    3.9603    3.56   -0.2717   -0.02   -3.0216   -2.37
FL                   17.4146    3.88    4.9829    4.50   -3.6165   -0.32   -0.1041   -0.08
GA                    0.6073    0.14    2.3184    2.11   -5.2920   -0.48   -3.1631   -2.52
LA                    4.6846    1.02    2.3609    2.09   -7.4363   -0.65   -1.7824   -1.38
MS                    2.8654    0.62    2.2431    1.96    4.1759    0.36   -3.6074   -2.76
NC                    0.9038    0.21    1.1237    1.05   -5.8848   -0.54   -4.8338   -3.95
SC                   13.7815    2.88    4.7020    3.99    8.8730    0.74   -2.6041   -1.93
TX                    2.8768    0.63    3.9456    3.53    6.3028    0.56    1.1693    0.91
KY                    8.6120    1.75    1.9306    1.59   15.8042    1.28   -4.8428   -3.49
                                                                                      47


MD               3.8403    0.81   0.4651   0.40    6.2391    0.53   -1.1907   -0.89
OK               3.6756    0.84   4.3510   4.01   16.4334    1.49    2.6256    2.11
TN               2.0954    0.48   2.5809   2.38   -4.6257   -0.42   -2.6126   -2.11
WV              15.3645    3.50   3.7234   3.43   27.7103    2.52   -4.0161   -3.23
AZ               7.1935    1.38   6.5172   5.08    7.9045    0.61    0.9557    0.65
CO              12.9721    2.90   0.4248   0.38   26.2968    2.34   10.0091    7.91
ID               7.6465    1.67   6.7913   6.01    8.7717    0.76    4.0978    3.16
MT               8.6388    1.90   5.0165   4.47   43.6240    3.83    1.7503    1.36
NV               5.3659    0.99   7.1910   5.40   20.7122    1.53    0.7694    0.50
NM              14.9452    3.12   1.2481   1.06   30.5011    2.54   -3.9201   -2.90
UT              10.3338    2.17   2.0374   1.74   12.6562    1.06    4.3158    3.21
WY               3.7870    0.77   3.6870   3.02   31.2655    2.52    0.3741    0.27
CA              -3.0902   -0.70   0.4001   0.37    9.7518    0.89   10.5580    8.49
OR              -10.778   -2.34   0.0545   0.05   -5.6534   -0.49   -0.9539   -0.73
WA              -6.6712   -1.47   3.7617   3.35   10.1620    0.89    5.5591    4.32
R-squared        0.4132           0.4830           0.3137            0.6140
R-bar-squared    0.3982           0.4699           0.2962            0.6041
                                                                                                         48


Appendix Table 2

OLS Regression Results for Public Works Programs


                                     PWA Non-
                    PWA Federal      Federal       PWA Non-
                    Grants           Grants        Federal Loans    PRA Grants        PBA Grants
                                             t-               t-
                    Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.  stat. Coeff.     stat. Coeff.    t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat.
Intercept           -90.5670  -2.72   4.4346  0.52  -15.0645  -1.03  -10.6473  -0.86   -0.4296 -0.45
Inverse
Population           -0.9121   -6.19   -0.0046   -0.12    -0.0337   -0.52    1.0099 18.35     -0.0131   -3.08
Square miles per
capita               66.6841    7.62   -0.8623   -0.38     1.7895    0.47   65.4926 20.05      0.2259    0.89
% Urban               0.0284    0.27    0.0303    1.12     0.0152    0.33   -0.0384 -0.98     -0.0003   -0.09
% Land on Farms      -0.0353   -0.42   -0.0013   -0.06    -0.0326   -0.89   -0.0281 -0.90     -0.0093   -3.86
Tax returns per
capita               -3.8093   -1.67   -0.3926   -0.67    -1.4086   -1.40   -0.4993   -0.59   0.0125    0.19
Retail Sales per
capita, 1929          0.0132    1.08    0.0133    4.24     0.0131    2.44    0.0124   2.73     0.0020    5.52
% Black               0.3347    2.12   -0.0584   -1.44    -0.1905   -2.74    0.1399   2.37    -0.0099   -2.17
% Illiterate         -0.3654   -0.84    0.1543    1.38     0.4230    2.21    0.1598   0.98     0.0092    0.73
Growth retail
sales per cap.,
1929-33              17.4998    2.31   2.0085      1.03   -3.3792   -1.02    6.8904   2.44    0.6946    3.18
Unemployment
rate                  2.0795    2.20   -0.3795   -1.56    -0.2068   -0.50   -0.2390   -0.68   -0.0512   -1.88
% Farm failures      -0.3252   -0.81   -0.0287   -0.28    -0.1737   -0.98   -0.4798   -3.19    0.0093    0.80
Average farm Size    -0.0382   -1.39   -0.0173   -2.45    -0.0126   -1.05   -0.0572   -5.57   -0.0006   -0.70
Mean Demo. %
for Pres, 1896-
1928                  0.1199    0.67    0.0386    0.84     0.1089    1.39    0.0511   0.77    0.0156    3.04
Roosevelt Swing       0.4439    1.61   -0.1349   -1.91    -0.0675   -0.56    0.2680   2.61    0.0000    0.00
Std. Dev. Demo.
% for Pres. 1896-
1932                  1.7989    3.05   0.2036      1.34   0.0524    0.20    -0.3891   -1.77   -0.0087   -0.51
Pres. Votes
1932/population
1930                  2.2289    6.71   0.1182      1.38   0.1054    0.72     0.5560   4.48    0.0033    0.34
Avg. Tenure in
House                 0.0031    0.11   -0.0100   -1.38    -0.0152   -1.23    0.0016   0.15    -0.0004   -0.53
Congressional
Committees
Agriculture           6.0724    0.98   -0.4337   -0.27    -1.8793   -0.69    1.1597    0.50   -0.1324   -0.74
Appropriations        0.7482    0.12    2.5267    1.54     6.8569    2.44   -2.7494   -1.15    0.1065    0.58
Banking and
Currency              1.5660    0.20   3.7736      1.88   4.5172    1.31    -1.4044   -0.48   -0.1122   -0.50
                                                                                                         49


Exports                5.9626    0.70   -0.4468   -0.20   -0.4366   -0.12   -0.0128    0.00   -0.0715   -0.29
Flood Control         -3.9228   -0.50   -0.3611   -0.18    1.4713    0.42   -1.3246   -0.45   -0.1509   -0.66
Irrigation Control     3.0791    0.42   -2.7322   -1.46    0.0264    0.01   -8.4374   -3.10   -0.2351   -1.12
Labor                  2.8185    0.33    0.9910    0.45    0.6493    0.17   -1.8257   -0.58   -0.0399   -0.16
Public Buildings       4.8151    0.56   -1.5997   -0.73   -0.8184   -0.22    3.4642    1.09    0.1167    0.47
Public Lands          -3.4761   -0.49   -0.9636   -0.53   -3.2813   -1.06    7.4955    2.86    0.0229    0.11
Rivers and
Harbors               -0.0761   -0.01    0.0310    0.02   -1.2165   -0.39   -0.0035    0.00   -0.2096   -1.03
Roads                  1.6573    0.23   -0.4964   -0.27    0.8899    0.28   -3.5658   -1.34   -0.1328   -0.64
Ways and Means        -2.3899   -0.31   -1.6625   -0.83    0.3717    0.11    0.2221    0.08    0.4806    2.13
State Dummies
ME                     4.6051    0.13   -15.766   -1.80    1.2129    0.08    6.0623    0.48    0.3689    0.37
MA                     0.3617    0.01   -12.348   -1.37    0.1245    0.01   -4.9920   -0.38   -0.4300   -0.43
NH                   -32.9910   -0.88   -8.6626   -0.90    2.6397    0.16   -1.9467   -0.14    0.7641    0.71
RI                    10.9573    0.25    8.3592    0.73    5.5676    0.29    9.4557    0.57    0.0382    0.03
VT                   -12.3589   -0.36   -3.8358   -0.43    5.9399    0.39    4.5303    0.35    1.0884    1.08
DE                   -34.5998   -0.64   -0.3723   -0.03    5.8397    0.25    7.3278    0.36    2.1389    1.37
NJ                   -19.2639   -0.59   -8.5585   -1.03    6.8873    0.48   -7.5083   -0.62    0.2341    0.25
NY                   -30.9292   -1.00   -6.2640   -0.79    3.9670    0.29    8.7147    0.75    1.1504    1.29
PA                    -0.1230    0.00   -5.1549   -0.68    5.4584    0.42    6.8054    0.62    0.6472    0.76
IL                   -35.3619   -1.15   -6.9255   -0.87    5.2303    0.39    2.1909    0.19    1.2782    1.43
IN                   -37.3404   -1.26   -6.5546   -0.86    3.1908    0.25   -7.9712   -0.72    0.9938    1.16
MI                   -30.0970   -1.03   -6.1794   -0.82    3.7356    0.29    5.9843    0.55    1.0527    1.24
OH                   -35.0495   -1.15   -5.2631   -0.67    5.5890    0.42   -5.1630   -0.45    0.9256    1.05
WI                   -28.8080   -0.96   -5.1633   -0.67    5.8367    0.44   -0.7821   -0.07    0.8407    0.97
IA                   -26.8661   -0.91   -6.9747   -0.92    4.5445    0.35    1.8505    0.17    0.9477    1.11
KS                   -21.8094   -0.74   -7.5591   -0.99    4.9534    0.38    9.1375    0.83    0.7651    0.90
MN                   -36.7470   -1.00    0.2640    0.03    6.2271    0.38    4.6987    0.34    0.7990    0.75
MO                   -16.8863   -0.48   -12.837   -1.41   -7.8290   -0.50    7.4919    0.57    0.6517    0.64
NE                   -26.8770   -0.90   -1.1679   -0.15   16.7475    1.27    1.9703    0.18    0.8767    1.01
NDK                  -22.8605   -0.70   -3.1896   -0.38    8.0879    0.56   16.2833    1.33    1.0419    1.10
SD                   -18.3767   -0.60   -6.3733   -0.81   10.4314    0.77    7.3907    0.64    1.1304    1.27
VA                    43.0782    1.33   -5.1571   -0.62    6.6429    0.47    6.2403    0.52    1.0548    1.13
AL                    31.2983    1.00   -3.7090   -0.46   10.0604    0.73   10.6479    0.92    0.9813    1.09
AR                    29.0853    0.95   -3.6287   -0.46   12.9986    0.97    7.3761    0.65    0.8602    0.97
FL                     6.5421    0.21   -1.7974   -0.23   17.2550    1.29   -4.0232   -0.35    0.5599    0.64
GA                    31.8355    1.05   -4.1178   -0.53   10.9230    0.82    3.0794    0.27    0.9357    1.07
LA                    31.7603    1.02   -1.8067   -0.23    5.5990    0.41    6.9149    0.59    0.6288    0.70
MS                    51.8874    1.65   -5.4315   -0.67    6.3544    0.46   10.4059    0.89    1.0775    1.19
NC                     9.6745    0.33   -4.8497   -0.64    9.0361    0.70    0.7594    0.07    1.1497    1.35
SC                    51.2485    1.58    0.3477    0.04   16.5805    1.16    7.4269    0.61    0.4837    0.52
TX                    12.1384    0.39   -1.5998   -0.20   17.6660    1.30    9.6155    0.84    0.8677    0.98
KY                    -9.8599   -0.30   -12.239   -1.42   -5.0251   -0.34   -2.8578   -0.23    0.5420    0.56
                                                                                                50


MD               19.5112    0.61   -1.0753   -0.13    8.3023   0.59    -5.0129 -0.42   2.4482   2.64
OK              -10.1685   -0.34   -0.2063   -0.03   15.8630   1.21     6.9812 0.63    0.8626   1.00
TN               39.4553    1.32   -4.9806   -0.65    9.6551   0.74     3.1108 0.28    1.0807   1.25
WV              -17.5854   -0.59   -9.4866   -1.23    5.3585   0.41    -9.6816 -0.87   0.8776   1.02
AZ              275.4149    7.79   -7.1117   -0.78    5.0519   0.33    42.0813 3.19    0.1886   0.18
CO              -42.6053   -1.40   -8.1495   -1.04    3.3421   0.25    16.9614 1.49    0.3867   0.44
ID              -47.0487   -1.51   -6.6069   -0.82    6.7779   0.49    -0.3550 -0.03   1.1886   1.32
MT              -25.9795   -0.84    7.5954    0.96   24.0003   1.77    26.1363 2.26    1.3238   1.48
NV               46.4145    1.27    4.8942    0.52    4.3855   0.27   141.0288 10.30   1.3199   1.25
NM               -5.1964   -0.16   -0.7534   -0.09    8.9626   0.63    33.5038 2.76    0.8024   0.85
UT              -32.7021   -1.01    1.3658    0.16   10.2887   0.72    19.5715 1.62    0.3474   0.37
WY              -59.0923   -1.76   -4.2214   -0.49    8.0795   0.55    41.6576 3.32    1.2519   1.29
CA              -15.3471   -0.51   -4.9913   -0.65    5.4106   0.41    14.0747 1.26    0.2181   0.25
OR              -18.4752   -0.59   -1.1970   -0.15    8.4506   0.61     2.2006 0.19    1.3085   1.45
WA              -16.3501   -0.53    4.1316    0.52    5.4214   0.40    10.6247 0.92    0.9297   1.04
R-squared         0.1316            0.5710            0.3050            0.6113         0.6790
R-bar-squared     0.1095            0.3310            0.5800            0.6014         0.4410
                                                                                                          51


Appendix Table 3

OLS Regression Results for Farm Programs

                     AAA Grants         FCA Loans        FSA Grants        FSA Loans        REA Loans
                     Coeff.     t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.    t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.  t-stat.
Intercept             -13.7358 -0.90     -0.3825 -0.04     5.3538 2.58       9.2977   3.03 -5.3719 -2.11
Inverse
Population              0.2707    3.99     0.1653   4.13    0.0064    0.70    0.0046     0.34   -0.0121   -1.07
Square miles per
capita                 -21.0818   -5.24    7.2006    3.03   -0.0039   -0.01    0.2034    0.25   -1.0891   -1.62
% Urban                 -0.3980   -8.24   -0.2452   -8.60    0.0123    1.87   -0.0181   -1.87   -0.0540   -6.71
% Land on Farms         -0.0757   -1.98    0.0726    3.22   -0.0137   -2.64   -0.0084   -1.10    0.0276    4.33
Tax returns per
capita                  1.7000    1.62     0.7055   1.14    -0.4570   -3.21   -1.5597   -7.41   -0.0435   -0.25
Retail Sales per
capita, 1929             0.0155    2.76    0.0045    1.36   -0.0041   -5.33   -0.0025   -2.19    0.0003    0.36
% Black                  0.0661    0.91   -0.0340   -0.79   -0.0010   -0.10    0.0264    1.81   -0.0024   -0.20
% Illiterate            -0.2014   -1.00   -0.5493   -4.64   -0.0355   -1.30   -0.1614   -4.01   -0.0190   -0.57
Growth retail
sales per cap.,
1929-33                -10.7206   -3.08   -8.4344   -4.11   -2.2345   -4.73   -3.5266   -5.05   1.7717     3.06
Unemployment
rate                    -2.0329 -4.68     -1.0571 -4.13     -0.0756   -1.28   -0.3988   -4.58   -0.0099   -0.14
% Farm failures         -0.5335 -2.88     -0.2206 -2.02      0.0500    1.98    0.0729    1.96   -0.0346   -1.12
Average farm Size        0.6336 50.13      0.2176 29.18      0.0116    6.76    0.0281   11.07   -0.0029   -1.38
Mean Demo. %
for Pres, 1896-
1928                    0.2294    2.81    -0.0051   -0.11   0.0004    0.03    0.0152     0.93   0.0770     5.66
Roosevelt Swing         0.6214    4.92     0.0661    0.89   0.0517    3.01    0.0050     0.20   0.0995     4.72
Std. Dev. Demo.
% for Pres. 1896-
1932                    -0.3139   -1.16    0.5254   3.28    0.0649    1.76    0.0575     1.05   -0.0525   -1.16
Pres. Votes
1932/population
1930                    0.1315    0.86     0.1645   1.82    -0.0383   -1.85   0.0329     1.07   0.1187     4.66
Avg. Tenure in
House                   0.0392    3.03     0.0087   1.14    -0.0001   -0.04   -0.0060   -2.29   0.0028     1.28
Congressional
Committees
Agriculture            20.3306     7.17    6.4896    3.88   -0.4200   -1.09   -0.0096   -0.02    1.2280    2.60
Appropriations         -9.9392    -3.38   -1.6625   -0.96   -0.2599   -0.65   -0.5457   -0.92   -0.9172   -1.87
Banking and
Currency                -0.9138   -0.25    1.9820    0.93   -0.2197   -0.45    0.5993    0.83    0.6461    1.08
Exports                 -2.8680   -0.73    1.7876    0.77   -0.0735   -0.14   -0.0606   -0.08    0.3768    0.58
Flood Control            2.7696    0.76   -0.3325   -0.16   -0.2985   -0.61   -1.6012   -2.20    0.0509    0.08
Irrigation Control      -7.5366   -2.24   -1.3248   -0.67    0.8643    1.90    0.3980    0.59   -0.0131   -0.02
                                                                                                        52


Labor               31.0280    7.96      4.0449    1.76   -0.3128   -0.59    0.8296    1.06   -0.6424   -0.99
Public Buildings     8.0341    2.05      1.4440    0.62    0.0870    0.16    0.9054    1.15   -0.6488   -0.99
Public Lands         3.4877    1.08     -1.2547   -0.66    0.4855    1.11   -0.5333   -0.82    0.4966    0.92
Rivers and
Harbors              -2.3336   -0.72    -2.6514   -1.38   -0.2782   -0.63    0.1111    0.17   0.1860     0.34
Roads                -0.1668   -0.05     3.1469    1.63   -0.2806   -0.63   -0.4089   -0.62   0.0291     0.05
Ways and Means        2.2013    0.61    -0.3755   -0.18    0.1345    0.28    0.7493    1.04   0.3755     0.63
State Dummies
ME                  -18.5647   -1.18   -13.5307   -1.46   -1.5598 -0.73     -1.7811   -0.57   -1.3641   -0.52
MA                   -6.3404   -0.39    -3.4611   -0.37    0.1032 0.05       1.2147    0.38    1.1334    0.42
NH                  -22.5855   -1.32   -11.3027   -1.12   -0.2387 -0.10     -0.3387   -0.10   -1.9627   -0.69
RI                    7.5111    0.37     2.8550    0.24   -1.3278 -0.48     -0.4992   -0.12    0.7399    0.22
VT                  -32.9341   -2.06   -19.6199   -2.08   -1.5692 -0.72     -2.4033   -0.75   -1.6319   -0.61
DE                  -33.4715   -1.35   -20.3997   -1.39   -0.1343 -0.04     -5.4579   -1.09    4.4841    1.08
NJ                  -14.9785   -1.00    -4.4538   -0.51   -0.3247 -0.16     -1.1059   -0.37    0.1447    0.06
NY                  -55.4797   -3.90   -18.2843   -2.18    0.4242 0.22      -3.2061   -1.12   -0.5912   -0.25
PA                  -19.0678   -1.41   -13.7481   -1.73   -2.4087 -1.32     -4.6436   -1.72    2.2206    0.99
IL                  -58.0380   -4.09   -21.0055   -2.51   -2.1615 -1.12     -6.8141   -2.39    2.5374    1.07
IN                  -14.5450   -1.07   -12.7449   -1.59   -2.1953 -1.19     -5.7271   -2.10    2.6264    1.16
MI                  -23.2810   -1.73    -9.9551   -1.25   -2.8453 -1.55     -4.1023   -1.51    4.2735    1.90
OH                  -19.0853   -1.36   -15.0477   -1.82   -1.5980 -0.84     -5.3484   -1.90    2.1804    0.93
WI                  -36.5363   -2.66    -2.2721   -0.28   -1.2839 -0.69     -3.2345   -1.17    3.1679    1.38
IA                   -1.5422   -0.11    -9.8338   -1.23   -3.2498 -1.77     -5.5893   -2.06    4.1456    1.84
KS                   17.2793    1.27    -4.2028   -0.52    1.8475 1.00      -0.8471   -0.31   -0.4448   -0.20
MN                 -112.1009   -6.60   -15.1175   -1.51   -1.7206 -0.75     -3.2537   -0.95    2.3272    0.82
MO                  -30.2350   -1.86   -17.8704   -1.86    0.6145 0.28      -2.9463   -0.90    0.5762    0.21
NE                  -33.3224   -2.42   -10.7541   -1.32    1.8089 0.97      -0.3190   -0.12    3.5221    1.53
NDK                 -73.1425   -4.85    39.2487    4.41   25.6946 12.54     -1.0714   -0.35   -1.7920   -0.71
SD                  -50.7771   -3.59    17.4094    2.09   28.1018 14.65      6.7433    2.38   -3.3049   -1.40
VA                  -24.6360   -1.65   -12.5404   -1.43   -3.4328 -1.70     -5.6179   -1.88    1.5122    0.61
AL                   -8.4834   -0.59    -6.6644   -0.79   -5.2825 -2.71     -1.2245   -0.43    0.4691    0.20
AR                  -12.6502   -0.90    -8.2145   -0.99   -5.4105 -2.83     -0.7798   -0.28    0.4737    0.20
FL                  -18.4285   -1.31    -0.0596   -0.01   -4.5856 -2.41     -2.1489   -0.76    1.2435    0.53
GA                  -17.6524   -1.27    -2.4901   -0.30   -5.6144 -2.97     -3.1661   -1.13    2.7257    1.18
LA                   -2.7256   -0.19     0.3426    0.04   -4.8011 -2.47      0.1205    0.04   -0.1536   -0.06
MS                  -14.3888   -0.99    -3.6128   -0.42   -4.8653 -2.48     -2.0895   -0.72    1.5842    0.66
NC                   -7.1400   -0.53    -2.1829   -0.27   -4.2322 -2.30     -6.0583   -2.23   -0.7778   -0.34
SC                   -5.9435   -0.40    15.1025    1.71   -3.4777 -1.71     -1.7728   -0.59   -0.5000   -0.20
TX                    2.8795    0.20     4.4105    0.53   -4.4069 -2.29     -2.0411   -0.72    1.0424    0.44
KY                   -7.1825   -0.47   -15.4250   -1.70   -1.4875 -0.71     -7.5006   -2.43   -0.9176   -0.36
MD                  -27.3470   -1.85   -12.2973   -1.41   -2.2940 -1.14     -6.3290   -2.14   -2.2758   -0.92
OK                   -5.0639   -0.37   -17.8716   -2.21   -2.5609 -1.37     -1.1138   -0.40   -0.6865   -0.30
TN                  -11.6153   -0.85    -6.2708   -0.77   -4.6146 -2.48     -6.9970   -2.54    2.7918    1.22
                                                                                                    53


WV              -22.0385   -1.60   -12.8288   -1.58   -2.2051   -1.18   -5.8947   -2.14   -3.2237   -1.41
AZ              -11.9143   -0.73   -11.8308   -1.23   -3.3045   -1.50   -1.4585   -0.45    2.6213    0.97
CO              -51.7813   -3.70   -20.3937   -2.47   -1.3273   -0.70    7.5321    2.68    2.7133    1.16
ID              -17.4534   -1.22   -10.6750   -1.26   -4.0212   -2.07    4.7883    1.67    1.7035    0.71
MT              -51.6625   -3.63   -13.2835   -1.58    4.8039    2.49    6.7864    2.38    1.2075    0.51
NV              -66.9753   -3.97   -51.6280   -5.19   -3.6424   -1.59    0.7543    0.22    1.1975    0.43
NM               -1.9666   -0.13     3.3400    0.38   -4.1946   -2.06    1.2661    0.42   -0.9891   -0.40
UT              -11.5194   -0.78    -4.3202   -0.49   -3.0040   -1.49   11.7366    3.94    3.6254    1.46
WY              -85.7267   -5.54     1.1017    0.12    2.1995    1.05   29.6679    9.56    3.9249    1.52
CA              -43.6836   -3.18    -3.2094   -0.40   -1.5408   -0.83    0.4687    0.17   -0.8971   -0.39
OR              -48.3945   -3.36   -24.3369   -2.86   -3.6471   -1.86   -2.4008   -0.83    0.4748    0.20
WA              -42.7250   -3.00   -30.7315   -3.66   -3.8264   -1.98   -1.3582   -0.48    2.8439    1.20
R-squared         0.7466             0.6934            0.6831            0.4747            0.1923
R-bar-squared     0.7402             0.6856            0.6751            0.4613            0.1717
                                                                                                           54


Appendix Table 4

OLS Regression Results for Loan and Housing Programs

                                                          FHA Loans
                    RFC Loans           HOLC Loans        Insured             USHA Loans USHA Grants
                                                                                                 t-
                    Coeff.    t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.   t-stat. Coeff.  stat.
Intercept            -24.9665 -1.81    -4.4768 -1.31    -8.5017 -1.38     0.2743    0.20 -0.6112 -1.37
Inverse
Population             0.0635   1.04    -0.0061   -0.40    0.0526     1.93      0.0053     0.87   0.0018    0.91
Square miles per
capita                -7.7720   -2.14   -2.8769   -3.20    -6.6808    -4.13     0.1850    0.52     0.0776 0.66
% Urban                0.1590    3.65    0.1722   15.94     0.1101     5.67     0.0358    8.31     0.0037 2.61
% Land on Farms       -0.1081   -3.14   -0.0256   -2.99    -0.0243    -1.58    -0.0153   -4.48    -0.0014 -1.25
Tax returns per
capita                 2.0112   2.13     3.8808   16.55    3.7223     8.83      0.3485     3.73   0.1102    3.59
Retail Sales per
capita, 1929           0.0228    4.50    0.0043    3.43     0.0050     2.20     0.0011    2.18     0.0004 2.44
% Black               -0.0502   -0.77   -0.0190   -1.17     0.0228     0.78     0.0005    0.08     0.0049 2.30
% Illiterate           0.2932    1.62   -0.0494   -1.10    -0.1287    -1.60    -0.0488   -2.73    -0.0116 -1.98
Growth retail
sales per cap.,
1929-33                0.2973   0.09    -1.2170   -1.57    3.8190     2.73      0.4247     1.37   0.0705    0.69
Unemployment
rate                  -0.2326   -0.59    0.1618    1.67    -0.1035    -0.59     0.0202    0.52    -0.0014 -0.11
% Farm failures        0.0761    0.45   -0.0472   -1.14    -0.0583    -0.78     0.0169    1.02     0.0026 0.48
Average farm Size      0.0111    0.97    0.0029    1.02    -0.0223    -4.38    -0.0006   -0.55    -0.0005 -1.40
Mean Demo. %
for Pres, 1896-
1928                  -0.0358   -0.49   -0.0358   -1.96    -0.0405    -1.23     0.0008     0.12   -0.0001 -0.05
Roosevelt Swing       -0.0934   -0.82   -0.0235   -0.83    -0.0526    -1.03     0.0039     0.34    0.0038 1.03
Std. Dev. Demo.
% for Pres. 1896-
1932                   0.2884   1.18    -0.0596   -0.98    0.1168     1.07      0.0233     0.96   0.0040    0.50
Pres. Votes
1932/population
1930                   0.1123   0.82    -0.1017   -2.98    0.0908     1.48     -0.0253   -1.86    -0.0023 -0.51
Avg. Tenure in
House                  0.0013   0.11    -0.0020   -0.71    -0.0104    -1.99     0.0001     0.08   0.0001    0.35
Congressional
Committees
Agriculture           -0.3161   -0.12    1.1259    1.78     0.8019     0.70     0.0036    0.01    0.0277    0.33
Appropriations         5.0264    1.90    0.5653    0.86    -0.3006    -0.25    -0.1014   -0.39    0.0799    0.93
Banking and
Currency               2.6330    0.81   -1.5972   -1.99    -1.7824    -1.23     0.1074    0.33     0.1318 1.25
Exports               -2.6420   -0.75   -0.7310   -0.83    -3.1821    -2.02    -0.5043   -1.44    -0.1148 -1.00
Flood Control         -5.4848   -1.68    1.8072    2.23     3.7556     2.58     0.0803    0.25     0.1991 1.87
                                                                                                       55


Irrigation Control   -4.4054   -1.46   -0.4445   -0.59   -0.5737   -0.43   0.1061    0.35    0.0463     0.47
Labor                 4.7455    1.35   -0.6395   -0.73   -1.2436   -0.79   1.1119    3.20    0.3448     3.02
Public Buildings     -1.1071   -0.31   -2.0852   -2.38   -0.7025   -0.45   0.4002    1.14    0.0878     0.76
Public Lands         -6.0680   -2.08    1.4134    1.96   -2.4608   -1.90   0.1235    0.43    0.0234     0.25
Rivers and
Harbors               0.6666   0.23     0.3557    0.49   -0.4864   -0.37    0.0608    0.21    0.2346    2.46
Roads                11.3827   3.85     1.4259    1.94    1.1633    0.88   -0.2710   -0.93   -0.0002    0.00
Ways and Means        0.1363   0.04    -1.2339   -1.54   -0.3369   -0.23    0.0809    0.25    0.2377    2.26
State Dummies
ME                   46.6492    3.29    3.4153    0.97    1.9139    0.30   -1.5669   -1.12    0.0699    0.15
MA                   -9.5206   -0.66   -3.6886   -1.03   -6.8312   -1.06   -0.7678   -0.54    0.0178    0.04
NH                    5.3194    0.34   -5.5638   -1.45   -0.2733   -0.04   -2.3670   -1.55   -0.1861   -0.37
RI                   -7.2312   -0.39    8.3303    1.83    6.2033    0.76   -3.4667   -1.91   -0.2150   -0.36
VT                   65.4724    4.54    5.4113    1.52    7.8467    1.22   -0.1891   -0.13    0.1098    0.23
DE                    9.7187    0.43   10.0632    1.81   13.8298    1.38   -0.7569   -0.34    0.0696    0.10
NJ                   29.2933    2.18   14.0724    4.22   23.0547    3.84    0.3336    0.25    0.7593    1.74
NY                   16.2290    1.27    5.1669    1.63    7.7636    1.36   -2.3577   -1.86   -0.1303   -0.31
PA                   24.1905    1.99    1.8803    0.62    5.6039    1.03   -0.7890   -0.66    0.0840    0.21
IL                   18.3023    1.43    9.1740    2.89   10.2261    1.79   -1.0900   -0.86    0.0687    0.17
IN                   24.5439    2.00   16.7399    5.51   12.4240    2.27    0.5113    0.42    0.4291    1.08
MI                   27.0302    2.22   10.2926    3.41    9.1638    1.69   -1.0425   -0.87    0.1037    0.26
OH                   25.6486    2.03   17.1197    5.46   11.6092    2.06    0.2756    0.22    0.3561    0.87
WI                   23.3371    1.88   13.3686    4.35    4.5127    0.82   -1.1757   -0.96   -0.0061   -0.02
IA                   28.6972    2.35    9.3547    3.09    6.5368    1.20   -0.1010   -0.08    0.2066    0.52
KS                    8.3547    0.68   11.0874    3.65   11.3420    2.07   -0.5136   -0.42    0.1094    0.27
MN                   25.1133    1.64    6.8248    1.80    2.6328    0.39   -1.6330   -1.08   -0.7018   -1.41
MO                    3.9852    0.27   10.5744    2.90   10.2982    1.57   -0.4430   -0.30   -0.7523   -1.58
NE                   17.8534    1.44   14.1383    4.59    8.8778    1.60    0.4764    0.39    0.3855    0.96
NDK                  24.1773    1.78   11.3928    3.38   18.1090    2.99    0.3770    0.28    0.2801    0.63
SD                   32.0263    2.51   14.0203    4.44   13.6620    2.41    0.2147    0.17    0.3353    0.81
VA                   24.4286    1.82   10.7943    3.24   21.8782    3.65    0.8464    0.64    0.3777    0.87
AL                   22.5867    1.75   12.3661    3.86   17.3538    3.01    1.0626    0.83    0.5484    1.31
AR                   33.9766    2.68   10.2084    3.24   14.8071    2.61   -0.2654   -0.21    0.2358    0.57
FL                   20.8133    1.65   11.2823    3.60   20.8316    3.70    0.7498    0.60    0.1855    0.45
GA                   27.6051    2.20   11.7613    3.78   15.6881    2.81    1.4859    1.20    0.3790    0.93
LA                   42.1708    3.26   10.8618    3.39   15.7408    2.73    0.7380    0.58    0.2522    0.60
MS                   33.4586    2.57   10.6937    3.31   18.9203    3.25    1.3231    1.03    0.2227    0.53
NC                   23.2627    1.90   12.5916    4.16   13.6294    2.50    1.2388    1.03    0.3824    0.96
SC                   27.8538    2.07   11.1794    3.35   17.9332    2.99    1.6342    1.23    0.8346    1.91
TX                   24.2703    1.90    8.3144    2.63   18.1602    3.19    0.3334    0.26    0.2800    0.67
KY                    8.9130    0.64   10.6759    3.11   11.3826    1.84    2.1669    1.58    0.3570    0.79
MD                   38.4909    2.89   14.4764    4.38   23.0059    3.87    1.5322    1.16    0.1220    0.28
OK                   14.4946    1.17   14.8974    4.85   13.7389    2.49   -0.1559   -0.13    0.4913    1.22
                                                                                                56


TN              35.1262   2.84    9.7461    3.18   15.2025   2.76    1.3435    1.10    0.8682    2.16
WV              26.2991   2.12   12.2785    4.00    8.1009   1.47    1.4508    1.18    0.3628    0.90
AZ               4.7638   0.32   12.4180    3.42   24.8876   3.81   -1.9103   -1.32   -0.0099   -0.02
CO              18.2915   1.45    9.5128    3.04    9.0020   1.60   -0.6653   -0.53    0.1378    0.34
ID              24.9472   1.93   12.1080    3.78   15.9237   2.77   -1.3156   -1.03    0.0856    0.20
MT              29.7904   2.32    6.7979    2.14   14.3526   2.51   -0.2668   -0.21    0.1194    0.29
NV              71.0754   4.67    7.3473    1.95   30.3546   4.48   -3.2084   -2.13   -0.5071   -1.03
NM              34.3300   2.54    9.2016    2.75   21.0328   3.49   -0.3273   -0.25    0.2992    0.68
UT              18.6770   1.39   20.4736    6.16   15.9506   2.67   -1.1767   -0.89    0.2057    0.47
WY               9.4666   0.68   13.5953    3.93   29.9867   4.82   -2.5657   -1.86   -0.3815   -0.84
CA              51.1405   4.12   -2.5918   -0.84   47.7099   8.63   -2.0575   -1.68   -0.3463   -0.86
OR              28.9480   2.23    2.4506    0.76   16.9384   2.92   -1.4424   -1.12    0.0239    0.06
WA              17.9019   1.40    1.2841    0.40   16.7896   2.93   -1.9774   -1.56   -0.2072   -0.50
R-squared        0.1713           0.5874            0.3771           0.1910            0.8830
R-bar-squared    0.1502           0.5769            0.3612           0.1704            0.6500
                                                                                                   57



Appendix Table 5

OLS Regression Results for Aggregate Programs


                                        Total Relief        Total Public
                    Total Grants        Grants              Works Grants       Total Loans
                    Coeff.      t-stat. Coeff.     t-stat.  Coeff.     t-stat. Coeff.    t-stat.
Intercept             -26.0720 -0.59 67.6995           4.44 -97.2093 -2.54 -40.0274 -1.71
Inverse
Population              0.3982    2.02    0.0242      0.36    0.0801    0.47     0.1877    1.81
Square miles per
capita                97.8550     8.35   -5.8692     -1.46 131.5403 13.05        -2.3770   -0.39
% Urban               -0.0293    -0.21    0.2814      5.85   0.0200 0.17          0.0651    0.88
% Land on Farms       -0.6467    -5.81   -0.5240    -13.77  -0.0738 -0.77        -0.0897   -1.53
Tax returns per
capita                 -6.4079   -2.10   -2.6932     -2.58    -4.6887   -1.78    3.9072    2.43
Retail Sales per
capita, 1929            0.0332    2.03   -0.0192     -3.44     0.0409    2.91     0.0436    5.07
% Black                 0.2651    1.25   -0.1523     -2.10     0.4063    2.23    -0.2653   -2.38
% Illiterate           -0.7407   -1.27   -0.4768     -2.39    -0.0422   -0.08    -0.1132   -0.37
Growth retail
sales per cap.,
1929-33                 0.4590    0.05   -10.981     -3.17   27.0932    3.11    -13.9475   -2.62
Unemployment
rate                    3.1342 2.48       4.0304      9.32     1.4099    1.30    -1.6877 -2.54
% Farm failures        -0.9820 -1.82      0.2274      1.23    -0.8245   -1.77    -0.3005 -1.06
Average farm Size       0.5520 14.99      0.0148      1.17    -0.1133   -3.58     0.2433 12.57
Mean Demo. %
for Pres, 1896-
1928                    0.4266    1.79    0.0083      0.10    0.2251    1.10      0.1278    1.02
Roosevelt Swing         1.8031    4.90    0.5148      4.09    0.5771    1.82     -0.0053   -0.03
Std. Dev. Demo.
% for Pres. 1896-
1932                    0.2069    0.26   -0.9095     -3.36    1.6046    2.36     0.8276    1.99
Pres. Votes
1932/population
1930                    2.7561    6.19    0.1760      1.16    2.9064    7.60     0.4055    1.73
Avg. Tenure in
House                   0.0274    0.73    0.0000      0.00    -0.0058   -0.18    -0.0105   -0.53
Congressional
Committees
Agriculture            23.7676    2.88   -1.5451     -0.55    6.6660    0.94     6.6952    1.54
Appropriations        -11.7471   -1.37   -2.4007     -0.82    0.6320    0.09     9.1898    2.04
Banking and
Currency               -7.2145   -0.69   -9.9732     -2.78    3.8230    0.42      8.8585    1.61
Exports                -0.3763   -0.03   -3.7002     -0.95    5.4315    0.55     -2.2083   -0.37
                                                                                                 58


Flood Control          -5.2001   -0.49   -2.1777   -0.60    -5.7594   -0.63   -4.1650    -0.75
Irrigation Control    -20.8424   -2.13   -5.9996   -1.79    -8.3256   -0.99   -5.5611    -1.08
Labor                  39.3860    3.47    7.2371    1.86     1.9439    0.20   10.0680     1.69
Public Buildings       10.0966    0.88   -3.9044   -1.00     6.7963    0.69   -1.6642    -0.28
Public Lands            7.2117    0.77    1.3322    0.41     3.0787    0.38   -9.1307    -1.85
Rivers and
Harbors                -1.1888   -0.13    1.0016   0.31     -0.2581   -0.03   -2.2874    -0.46
Roads                   2.8006    0.29    7.3402   2.24     -2.5377   -0.31   16.1604     3.21
Ways and Means          0.4273    0.04    1.8571   0.52     -3.3497   -0.37    0.4093     0.07
State Dummies
ME                    -20.5707   -0.45    0.2363    0.02    -4.7296   -0.12    32.3304    1.34
MA                     22.2427    0.48   43.4795    2.72   -17.4087   -0.43   -15.4975   -0.63
NH                    -77.8722   -1.56   -16.277   -0.95   -42.8362   -1.00   -13.9653   -0.53
RI                     16.7490    0.28   -16.687   -0.82    28.8104    0.57     7.3421    0.24
VT                    -50.6839   -1.09   -5.9710   -0.38   -10.5760   -0.26    52.3619    2.14
DE                    -41.2803   -0.57   15.4953    0.62   -25.5054   -0.41     2.5051    0.07
NJ                    -25.3494   -0.58   19.2575    1.29   -35.0967   -0.94    44.3516    1.94
NY                    -81.7167   -1.97   -0.8992   -0.06   -27.3280   -0.77     0.2156    0.01
PA                     25.5150    0.65   45.8569    3.41     2.1748    0.06    13.8015    0.67
IL                    -72.6048   -1.76   22.8686    1.62   -38.8183   -1.09     6.0047    0.28
IN                    -40.7139   -1.03   22.4182    1.65   -50.8725   -1.49    28.7883    1.38
MI                    -13.2196   -0.34   39.5818    2.94   -29.2394   -0.87    29.3689    1.42
OH                    -15.7292   -0.39   45.2667    3.24   -44.5500   -1.27    29.5721    1.38
WI                    -35.6180   -0.89   34.7075    2.54   -33.9127   -0.99    38.1824    1.81
IA                    -31.5192   -0.80    3.3110    0.25   -31.0426   -0.92    30.5056    1.47
KS                     28.5344    0.72   28.5750    2.11   -19.4660   -0.57    17.7285    0.85
MN                   -111.9644   -2.26   29.2329    1.73   -30.9852   -0.73    19.7579    0.76
MO                    -34.3703   -0.72   14.1140    0.87   -21.5792   -0.53   -14.9334   -0.60
NE                    -41.4022   -1.03   16.0709    1.17   -25.1979   -0.73    40.9651    1.94
NDK                    -6.4276   -0.15   50.7846    3.38    -8.7249   -0.23    79.7698    3.45
SD                     45.7383    1.11   85.0076    6.04   -16.2289   -0.46    76.8703    3.55
VA                     12.3426    0.28    0.7322    0.05    45.2162    1.21    25.1659    1.10
AL                     19.7406    0.47    1.1845    0.08    39.2185    1.09    37.7223    1.72
AR                     12.8852    0.31    4.5980    0.33    33.6929    0.95    47.6301    2.21
FL                     -4.6601   -0.11   18.6769    1.34     1.2815    0.04    48.0349    2.24
GA                     -5.8773   -0.15   -5.5293   -0.40    31.7328    0.91    47.8728    2.25
LA                     20.0420    0.48   -2.1732   -0.15    37.4972    1.04    58.7408    2.68
MS                     35.2301    0.84    5.6770    0.39    57.9392    1.60    46.7574    2.11
NC                    -15.3661   -0.39   -8.6911   -0.64     6.7339    0.20    36.1903    1.74
SC                     68.0705    1.56   24.7524    1.66    59.5069    1.59    69.0236    3.01
TX                     26.0486    0.63   14.2945    1.01    21.0218    0.59    53.0715    2.44
KY                     -7.1586   -0.16   21.5040    1.40   -24.4144   -0.63    -7.7321   -0.33
MD                     -6.0444   -0.14    9.3538    0.64    15.8712    0.43    41.0349    1.81
                                                                                        59


OK               15.2355    0.38   27.0856    1.98  -2.5310   -0.07   24.5374    1.17
TN               13.8849    0.35   -2.5621   -0.19 38.6663     1.13   44.6854    2.13
WV              -13.2476   -0.33   42.7821    3.13 -35.8759   -1.04   22.7711    1.08
AZ              312.5128    6.60   22.5708    1.39 310.5732    7.63    8.8344    0.35
CO              -40.7821   -1.00   49.7027    3.56 -33.4068   -0.95   19.5822    0.91
ID              -39.8185   -0.95   27.3073    1.91 -52.8220   -1.47   37.7895    1.72
MT               18.3187    0.44   59.0296    4.17   9.0760    0.25   54.3343    2.49
NV              162.4684    3.31   34.0386    2.03 193.6574    4.58   29.0344    1.12
NM               64.5628    1.48   42.7743    2.87 28.3563     0.76   54.9862    2.40
UT                1.9793    0.05   29.3431    1.98 -11.4175   -0.31   58.6017    2.57
WY              -64.3489   -1.43   39.1136    2.54 -20.4042   -0.53   62.5916    2.64
CA              -32.4316   -0.81   17.6197    1.29  -6.0456   -0.18   47.7188    2.26
OR              -82.4779   -1.96   -17.331   -1.21 -16.1631   -0.45   11.3864    0.52
WA              -31.0679   -0.75   12.8116    0.90  -0.6642   -0.02   -7.3958   -0.34
R-squared         0.4405            0.4258           0.3010            0.3476
R-bar-squared     0.4262            0.4112           0.2832            0.3310
                                                                                                            60


Appendix Table 6

Comparisons of Adjusted R-squareds from Regressions with Political Variables Only and Structural, Relief,
Recovery, and Reform Variables Only for Each Program



                                           Structural,
                                                          All variables
                                           relief,
                              Political                   and state
                                           recovery,
                              variables                   dummy
                                           and reform
                              only                        variables
                                           variables
                                                          included
                                           only
 RELIEF:
  FERA Grants                      0.117          0.200            0.398
  CWA Grants                       0.146          0.232            0.470
  WPA Grants                       0.106          0.201            0.296
  SSA Pub. Asst. Grants            0.327          0.258            0.604
 PUBLIC WORKS:
 Federal PWA Grants                0.007          0.055            0.110
 Nonfed. PWA Grants                0.008          0.028            0.331
 Nonfed PWA Loans                  0.003          0.005            0.580
 PRA Grants                        0.151          0.555            0.601
 PBA Grants                        0.007          0.040            0.441
 FARM PROGRAMS:
  AAA Grants                       0.175          0.665            0.740
  FCA Loans                        0.284          0.613            0.686
  FSA Grants                       0.272          0.282            0.675
  FSA Loans                        0.145          0.301            0.461
  REA Loans                        0.065          0.090            0.172
 LOANS AND HOUSING:
  RFC Loans                        0.019          0.105            0.150
  HOLC Loans                       0.080          0.505            0.577
  FHA Loans Insured                0.034          0.259            0.361
  USHA Loan Contracts              0.019          0.137            0.170
  USHA Grants                      0.004          0.047            0.650
 AGGREGATES:
  Total Grants                     0.206          0.367            0.426
   Relief Grants                   0.151          0.268            0.411
   Public Works Grants             0.065          0.229            0.283
  Total Loans                      0.175          0.290            0.331
