                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MONETARY POLICY AND EXCHANGE RATE
                         VOLATILITY IN A SMALL OPEN ECONOMY


                                             Jordi Galí
                                          Tommaso Monacelli


                                          Working Paper 8905
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8905


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




We are thankful to Nils Bjorsten, Mick Devereux, Philip Lane, Luca Sessa, Lars Svenssson, Guido Tabellini
and Alex Wolman for useful comments. We are particularly grateful to Christopher Erceg, who pointed out
an error in an earlier version of the paper. We have also benefited from comments by participants in seminars
at the EUI, Banca d'Italia, Bocconi, Boston College, Brandeis, Harvard, Rutgers, the Bank of Portugal's
Conference on Monetary Economics, NBER Summer Institute, Riksbank, IMF, and the Federal Reserve
Board. An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title “Optimal Monetary Policy and
Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open Economy." The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Jordi Galí and Tommaso Monacelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open Economy
Jordi Galí and Tommaso Monacelli
NBER Working Paper No. 8905
April 2002
JEL No. E52, F41



                                               ABSTRACT


        We lay out a small open economy version of the Calvo sticky price model, and show how the
equilibrium dynamics can be reduced to a tractable canonical system in domestic inflation and the output
gap. We employ this framework to analyze the macroeconomic implications of three alternative monetary
policy regimes for the small open economy: domestic inflation targeting, CPI targeting and an exchange
rate peg. We show that a key difference among these regimes lies in the relative amount of exchange rate
volatility that they entail. We also discuss a special case for which domestic inflation targeting constitutes
the optimal policy, and where a simple second order approximation to the utility of the representative
consumer can be derived and used to evaluate the welfare losses associated with suboptimal regimes.




Jordi Galí                                                         Tommaso Monacelli
CREI                                                               Boston College
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona, Spain
and NBER
jordi.gali@econ.upf.es
1       Introduction
Much recent work in macroeconomics has involved the development and evaluation
of monetary models that bring imperfect competition and nominal rigidities into the
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium structure that for a long time had been the
hallmark of RBC theory. In the resulting models —often referred to as New Keynesian—
changes in monetary settings generally have nontrivial eﬀects on real variables. Mon-
etary policy may thus become a potential stabilization tool, as well as an independent
source of economic ßuctuations. Not surprisingly, the study of the properties of al-
ternative monetary policy rules (i.e., speciÞcations of how the central bank changes
the settings of its instrument in response to changes in macroeconomic conditions)
has been a fruitful area of research in recent years and a natural application of the
new generation of models.1
    In the present paper we lay out a small open economy version of a model with
Calvo-type staggered price-setting, and use it as a framework to analyze the properties
and macroeconomic implications of alternative monetary policy regimes.2 The use
of a staggered price-setting structure allows for richer dynamic eﬀects of monetary
policy than those found in the models with one-period advanced price-setting that
are common in the recent literature.3 Most importantly, and in contrast with most of
the existing literature —where monetary policy is introduced by assuming that some
monetary aggregate follows an exogenous stochastic process— we model monetary
policy as endogenous, with a short-term interest rate being the instrument of that
policy.4 For this very reason our framework allows us to model alternative monetary
regimes. Furthermore, we believe that our approach accords much better with the
practice of modern central banks, and provides a more suitable framework for policy
analysis than the traditional one.
    Our assumptions on preferences and technology, combined with the Calvo price-
    1
     The volume edited by Taylor (1999) contains several signiÞcant contributions to that literature.
See, e.g., Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999) for a recent survey.
   2
     See, e.g., King and Wolman (1996), Yun (1996), and Woodford (1999), for an analysis of the
canonical closed economy Calvo model.
   3
     See, e.g., Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995, 1999), Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), Betts and Devereux
(2000), and Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (1999)
   4
     See Lane (2001) for a survey of the new open economy macroeconomics literature. The intro-
duction of price staggering in an open economy model follows the lead of Kollman (2001) and Chari
et al. (1998), though both papers specify monetary policy as exogenous, restricting their analysis
to the eﬀects of a monetary shock. A recent exception is given by Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1999), who
solve for the optimal money supply rule in the context of a model with one-period sticky wages. A
more similar methodological approach can be found in Svensson (2000), in which optimal policy is
derived from the minimization by the central bank of a quadratic loss function. His model, however,
diﬀers from the standard optimizing sticky price model analyzed here in that it assumes a predeter-
mined output and inßation (resulting from their dependence on lagged variables, with a somewhat
arbitrary lag structure), and introduces an ad-hoc cost-push shock in the inßation equation (which
creates a trade oﬀ between the output gap and inßation). Since we wrote and circulated the Þrst
version of the present paper there have been several contributions to the literature on monetary
policy regimes in open economies, including Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2000), Benigno and Benigno
(2000), McCallum and Nelson (2000), Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), Parrado and Velasco (2002), and
Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2001), among others.



                                                 1
setting structure and the assumption of complete Þnancial markets, give rise to a
highly tractable framework and to simple and intuitive log-linearized equilibrium
conditions for the small open economy. In fact, the latter can be reduced to a Þrst or-
der, two-equation dynamical system for domestic inßation and the output gap whose
structure, consisting of a new Keynesian Phillips curve and a new IS-type equation,
is identical to the one that has been derived (and is often used) for the workhorse
model of a closed economy with Calvo-type staggered price setting.5 Of course, the
coeﬃcients in the open economy’s equilibrium also depend on parameters that are
speciÞc to the open economy (in our case, the degree of openness and the substi-
tutability between domestic and foreign goods), while the driving forces also include
world output ßuctuations (which are taken as exogenous to the small open economy).
As in the closed economy benchmark, the two equations must be augmented with a
third one describing how monetary policy is conducted, in order to close the model.
    As hinted above we employ our framework to analyze the macroeconomic impli-
cations of alternative monetary policy arrangements for the small open economy: (a)
domestic inßation targeting, (b) CPI inßation targeting and (c) an exchange rate peg.
    We show that these regimes can be ranked in terms of their implied nominal
and real exchange rate volatility. Hence, a policy of domestic inßation targeting,
which in our framework can achieve a simultaneous stabilization of the output gap
and domestic inßation, implies a substantially larger volatility of both nominal and
real exchange rates than CPI targeting and/or an exchange rate peg. In general, a
CPI targeting regime delivers equilibrium dynamics that allow to characterize it as
a hybrid regime between domestic inßation targeting and an exchange rate peg. In
particular, CPI targeting coincides with domestic inßation targeting when the small
economy approaches the limiting case of a closed economy, while it tends to mimic
the dynamics under a peg when the small economy converges to the highest possible
degree of openness.
    Next we address the issue of a welfare evaluation of the above policy regimes. We
show that under a speciÞc parameterization it is possible to derive a tractable second
order approximation of the consumer’s utility, which can be used for policy evalua-
tion purposes. In the particular case considered (which entails log-utility and a unit
elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods), domestic price stabil-
ity stands out as the policy regime that is able to replicate the eﬃcient allocation,
while both CPI targeting and the exchange rate peg are shown to lead to deviations
from the economy’s optimal response to shocks. The basic intuition is that the excess
smoothness in the nominal exchange rate implied by both these regimes, combined
with the assumed inertia in nominal prices, prevents relative prices from adjusting
suﬃciently fast in response to changes in relative productivity, causing thus a sig-
niÞcant deviation from the Þrst best allocation. Interestingly, while CPI targeting
has qualitative implications similar to those of an exchange rate peg, the former is
shown to dominate the latter from a welfare viewpoint (except for the limiting case
of identical consumption baskets).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we lay out
the basic model. Section 3 derives the equilibrium in log-linearized form and its
  5
      See, e.g., Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2000), among others.


                                                 2
canonical representation in terms of output gap and inßation. Section 4 analyzes the
macroeconomic implications of alternative monetary policy regimes, such as domestic
inßation targeting, CPI inßation targeting and an exchange rate peg. Section 5
analyzes optimal monetary policy in both the world and the small economy under
a particular parameterization in the latter, and conducts a welfare evaluation of the
alternative monetary regimes. Section 6 concludes.


2     A Small Open Economy Model
2.1       Households
Our small open economy is inhabited by a representative household who seeks to
maximize
                             X∞
                          E0     β t [U (Ct ) − V (Nt )]                   (1)
                                                  t=0

where Nt denotes hours of labor, and Ct is a composite consumption index deÞned
by
                         h        1     η−1    1
                                                        i η
                                                     η−1 η−1
                    Ct = (1 − α) CH,t
                                  η      η  + α CF,t
                                               η      η                      (2)
with CH,t and CF,t being indices of consumption of domestic and foreign goods. Such
indices are in turn given by the following CES aggregators of the quantities consumed
of each type of good:
                   µZ   1                         ¶ ε−1
                                                     ε                 µZ       1                         ¶ ε−1
                                                                                                             ε
                                       ε−1                                                     ε−1
          CH,t =            CH,t (i)    ε    di           ;   CF,t =                CF,t (i)    ε    di
                    0                                                       0

    Notice that under our speciÞcation η measures the elasticity of substitution be-
tween domestic and foreign goods. The elasticity of substitution among goods within
each category is given by ε. We assume η > 0 and ε > 1.
    The maximization of (1) is subject to a sequence of intertemporal budget con-
straints of the form:
    Z 1
        [PH,t (i)CH,t (i) + PF,t (i)CF,t (i)] di + Et {Qt,t+1 Dt+1 } ≤ Dt + Wt Nt + Tt (3)
      0

for t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where PH,t (i) and PF,t (i) denote the prices of domestic and foreign
good i respectively , Dt+1 is the nominal payoﬀ in period t + 1 of the portfolio held at
the end of period t (and which includes shares in Þrms), Wt is the nominal wage, and
Tt denotes lump-sum transfers/taxes. All the previous variables are expressed in units
of domestic currency. Qt,t+1 is the stochastic discount factor for nominal payoﬀs. We
assume that households have access to a complete set of contingent claims, traded
internationally. Notice that money does not appear in either the budget constraint
or the utility function: throughout we specify monetary policy in terms of an interest




                                                          3
rate rule; hence, we do not need to introduce money explicitly in the model.6
    The optimal allocation of any given expenditure within each category of goods
yields the demand functions:
                      µ          ¶−ε                      µ          ¶−ε
                        PH,t (i)                            PF,t (i)
           CH,t (i) =                CH,t ;    CF,t (i) =                CF,t (4)
                         PH,t                                PF,t
                                  R1                  1              R1                  1
for all i ∈ [0, 1], where PH,t ≡ ( 0 PH,t (i)1−ε di) 1−ε and PF,t ≡ ( 0 PF,t (i)1−ε di) 1−ε are
the price indexes for domestic and imported goods.
    The optimal allocation of expenditures between domestic and foreign goods im-
plies:                       µ      ¶−η                            µ      ¶−η
                               PH,t                                  PF,t
             CH,t = (1 − α)               Ct      ;      CF,t = α              Ct           (5)
                                Pt                                    Pt
                                                  1
where Pt ≡ [(1 − α) PH,t 1−η + α PF,t 1−η ] 1−η is the consumer price index (CPI).7 No-
tice that, when the price indexes for domestic and foreign goods are equal (as in
the steady state described below), parameter α corresponds to the share of domes-
tic consumption allocated to imported goods. It thus represents a natural index of
openness.
    Once we account for the above optimality conditions, the intertemporal budget
constraint can be rewritten as:

                         Pt Ct + Et {Qt,t+1 Dt+1 } ≤ Dt + Wt Nt + Tt                               (6)

    In what follows we specialize the period utility function to take the form U(Ct ) ≡
Ct1−σ               Nt1+ϕ
1−σ
      and V (Nt ) ≡ 1+ϕ   . Then we can rewrite the remaining optimality conditions
for the household’s problem as follows:
                                                       Wt
                                           Ctσ Ntϕ =                                               (7)
                                                       Pt
which is a standard intratemporal optimality condition, and
                             µ      ¶−σ µ      ¶
                               Ct+1        Pt
                           β                     = Qt,t+1                                          (8)
                                Ct        Pt+1
   Taking conditional expectations on both sides of (8) and rearranging terms we
obtain a conventional stochastic Euler equation:
                                (µ       ¶−σ µ      ¶)
                                    Ct+1         Pt
                         βRt Et                        =1                     (9)
                                     Ct        Pt+1
   6
     That modelling strategy has been adopted in much recent research on monetary policy. In it
money can be thought of as playing the role of a unit of account only. See Schmitt-Grohé and
Uribe (2001) for an analysis of an open economy where the monetary distortion is taken to be
non-negligible.
   7
     It is usefult to notice, for future reference, that in the particular case of η = 1, the CPI takes
                    1−α α
the form Pt = PH,t                                                                  1
                       PF,t , while the consumption index is given by Ct = (1−α)(1−α)      C 1−α CF,t
                                                                                        αα H,t
                                                                                                  α




                                                  4
where Rt−1 = Et {Qt,t+1 } is the price of a riskless one-period bond (denominated in
domestic currency) and, hence, Rt is its gross return.
    For future reference it is useful to note that (7) and (9) can be respectively written
in log-linearized form as:

                                    wt − pt = σ ct + ϕ nt
                                          1
                          ct = Et {ct+1 } − (rt − Et {π t+1 } − ρ)
                                          σ
where lower case letters denote the logs of the respective variables, ρ ≡ − log β is the
time discount rate, and π t ≡ pt − pt−1 is CPI inßation (with pt ≡ log Pt ).
    In the rest of the world (which, for convenience, we refer to as the world economy)
a representative household faces a problem identical to the one outlined above. A
set of analogous optimality conditions characterize the solution to the consumer’s
problem in the world economy. We assume, however, that the size of the small open
economy is negligible relative to the rest of the world, which allows us to treat the
latter as if it was a closed economy.8

2.1.1    Domestic Inßation, CPI Inßation, the Real Exchange Rate, and the
         Terms of Trade: Some Identities
Before proceeding with our analysis of the economy’s equilibrium we introduce several
assumptions and deÞnitions, and derive a number of identities that are extensively
used below.
    Thus, log-linearization of the CPI formula around a steady state with PH,t = PF,t
yields:


                                pt ≡ (1 − α) pH,t + α pF,t
                                   = pH,t + α st                                            (10)

where st ≡ pF,t − pH,t denotes the (log) terms of trade, i.e., the price of foreign goods
in terms of home goods. It is useful to note, for future reference, that (10) holds
exactly (as opposed to up to a Þrst order approximation) when η = 1.
    It follows that domestic inßation —deÞned as the rate of change in the index
of domestic goods prices, i.e., π H,t ≡ pH,t+1 − pH,t — and CPI-inßation are linked
according to

                                      π t = πH,t + α ∆st                                    (11)
which makes the gap between our two measures of inßation proportional to the percent
change in the terms of trade, with the coeﬃcient of proportionality given by the index
of openness α. Our treatment of the rest of the world as an (approximately) closed
   8
    Formally, this can be done by deriving the optimality conditions for the world consumer under
preferences analogous to (2) with a weight α∗ on goods produced in the small economy. Once the
equilibrium conditions are derived and log-linearized, we focus on the limiting case, α∗ → 0.



                                               5
economy (with goods produced in the small open economy (SOE) representing a
negligible fraction of the world’s consumption basket) implies that the foreign price
index Pt∗ (where a star denotes foreign variables henceforth) coincides with PF,t          ∗
                                                                                              (i.e.,
                                                                               ∗      ∗
the foreign currency price of foreign goods). Therefore we have π t = π F,t , for all t,
i.e., an equivalence between domestic and CPI inßation holds in the world economy.
     In addition, we assume throughout that the law of one price holds, implying that
               ∗
PF,t (i) = Et PF,t (i) for all i ∈ [0, 1], where Et is the nominal exchange rate (the price of
                                                              ∗
foreign currency in terms of home currency), and PF,t           (i) is the price of foreign good i
                                                                                                 ∗
denominated in foreign currency. Integrating over all goods we obtain PF,t = Et PF,t               ,
                                          ∗
or, in log-linear form, pF,t = et + pF,t . Combining the previous results we can re-write
the terms of trade as
                                         st ≡ et + p∗t − pH,t                                 (12)
   Next, let us derive the relationship between the terms of trade  and the real ex-
                                                             Et Pt∗
change rate. We deÞne the (log) real exchange rate as Qt ≡ Pt , i.e. the ratio of
CPIs expressed in a common currency. Under our assumptions it follows that

                                        qt = st + pH,t − pt                                    (13)
                                           = (1 − α) st

where the second equality holds up to a Þrst order approximation.
   In words, we have that the (log) real exchange rate is proportional to the (log)
terms of trade, with the proportionality coeﬃcient being an inverse function of the
degree of openness. Notice that while the law-of-one-price is assumed to hold for each
individual good, the real exchange rate may still ßuctuate over time as a result of
variations in the relative price of domestic vs. world consumption baskets, which will
generally diﬀer in composition.

2.1.2       International Risk Sharing
Under the assumption of complete securities markets, a Þrst order condition analogous
to (8) must also hold for consumers in the foreign country:
                          µ ∗ ¶−σ µ ∗ ¶ µ           ¶
                            Ct+1       Pt        et
                       β                              = Qt,t+1                   (14)
                             Ct∗        ∗
                                      Pt+1     et+1
Combining (8) and (14), together with the deÞnition of the real exchange rate intro-
duced above, it follows (after iterating) that:
                                                         1
                                           Ct = ϑ Ct∗ Qtσ                                      (15)

for all t, where ϑ is a constant that depends on initial conditions.9 Taking logs on both
sides of (15), using (13), and ignoring the constant term yields the exact relationship:
                                             µ      ¶
                                         ∗     1−α
                                   ct = ct +           st                            (16)
                                                σ
   9
       See Appendix 1 for a detailed discussion.


                                                   6
We thus see that the assumption of complete markets at the international level leads
to a simple relationship linking consumption at home and abroad and the terms of
trade.10

2.1.3      Uncovered Interest Parity and the Terms of Trade
Under the assumption of complete international Þnancial markets, the equilibrium
price (in terms of domestic currency) of a riskless bond denominated in foreign cur-
rency is given by Et Rt∗ −1 = Et {Qt,t+1 Et+1 }. The previous pricing equation can be
combined with the domestic bond pricing equation, Rt−1 = Et {Qt,t+1 } to obtain a
version of the uncovered interest parity condition:
                              Et {Qt,t+1 [Rt − R∗t (Et+1 /Et )]} = 0
       Linearization around a perfect-foresight steady state yields the familiar expression:
                                      rt − rt∗ = Et {∆et+1 }                             (17)
   Combining the deÞnition of the (log) terms of trade with (17) yields the following
stochastic diﬀerence equation:
                    st = (rt∗ − Et {π ∗t+1 }) − (rt − Et {π H,t+1 }) + Et {st+1 }        (18)
    As we show in Appendix 1, the terms of trade are pinned down uniquely in the
perfect foresight steady state. That fact, combined with our assumption of station-
arity of the model’s driving forces, implies that limT →∞ Et {sT } = 0, implying that
purchasing power parity (PPP) holds “in the long run.” Hence, we can solve (18)
forward to obtain:
                               ∞
                               X
                                   ∗
                      st = Et { [(rt+k − π ∗t+k+1 ) − (rt+k − π H,t+k+1 )]}              (19)
                               k=0

i.e., variations in the terms of trade are a function of current and anticipated real
interest rate diﬀerentials.
     We must point out that while equation (18) (and (19)) provides a convenient (and
intuitive) way of representing the terms of trade dynamics, it is not an additional
independent equilibrium condition. In particular, it is easy to check that (18) can
be derived by combining the consumption Euler equations for both the domestic and
world economies with the risk sharing condition (16) and equation (11).

2.2       Firms
2.2.1      Technology
Each Þrm produces a diﬀerentiated good with a linear technology represented by the
production function
                                Yt (i) = At Nt (i)
  10
    A similar relationship holds in many international RBC models. See, e.g., Backus and Smith
(1993).

                                                 7
where at ≡ log At follows an AR(1) process at = ρa at−1 + εt . Hence, the (nominal)
marginal cost will be common across Þrms and given by

                                  mcnt = −ν + wt − at

where ν ≡ − log(1 − τ ) , with τ being an employment subsidy whose role is discussed
later in more hdetail.        i ε−1
               R1          1
                                 ε

    Let Yt ≡ 0 Yt (i)1− ε di        represent an index for aggregate output, analogous
to the one introduced for consumption. It is useful, for future reference, to derive an
approximate aggregate production function relating the previous index to aggregate
employment. Hence, notice that
                                      Z 1
                                                      Yt Ut
                                Nt ≡      Nt (i) di =
                                       0               At
             R1
where Ut ≡ 0 YYt (i)
                  t
                       di. In Appendix 3 we show that equilibrium variations in ut ≡
log Ut around the perfect foresight steady state are of second order. Thus, and up to
a Þrst order approximation, we have an aggregate relationship

                                      yt = nt + at                                   (20)
     Firms in the rest of the world are assumed to have access to an identical technology,
with (log) productivity following an exogenous process a∗t = ρ∗a a∗t−1 + ε∗t , where
{ε∗t } is white noise, possibly correlated with {εt }. Finally, an approximate aggregate
relationship between output and employment identical to (20) also holds for the world
economy.

2.2.2   Price setting
We assume that Þrms set prices in a staggered fashion, as in Calvo (1983). Hence,
a measure 1 − θ of (randomly selected) Þrms sets new prices each period, with an
individual Þrm’s probability of reoptimizing in any given period being independent
of the time elapsed since it last reset its price. As we show in Appendix 2, the
optimal price-setting strategy for the typical Þrm resetting its price in period t can
be approximated by the (log-linear) rule:
                                             ∞
                                             X
                       pH,t = µ + (1 − βθ)         (βθ)k Et {mcnt+k }                (21)
                                             k=0
                                                                         ¡ ε ¢
where pH,t denotes the (log) of newly set domestic prices, and µ ≡ log ε−1     , which
corresponds to the log of the (gross) markup in the steady state (or, equivalently, the
optimal markup in a ßexible price economy). An analogous price setting rule obtains
for Þrms operating in the rest of the world.
    Hence, we see that the pricing decision in our model (as in its closed economy
counterpart) is a forward-looking one. The reason is simple: Þrms that are adjusting
prices in any given period recognize that the price they set will remain eﬀective for
a (random) number of periods. As a result they set the price as a markup over

                                             8
a weighted average of expected future marginal costs, instead of looking at current
marginal cost only. Notice that in the ßexible price limit (i.e., as θ → 0), we recover
the familiar markup rule pH,t = µ + mcnt .
   The price setting problem facing Þrms in the rest of the world is also identical to
that of domestic Þrms, and leads to an optimal price setting rule analogous to (21).
For simplicity, and without loss of generality, we assume throughout our analysis that
the degree of price stickiness in the world economy, θ∗ , is identical to that in the small
open economy.


3       Equilibrium
3.1     Aggregate Demand and Output Determination
3.1.1    World Consumption and Output
First we describe how consumption and output are determined in the world economy.
As mentioned above, in that economy the preferences of the representative household
are identical to those introduced above, but with a negligible weight on the goods
imported from the small economy. The log-linearized Euler equation, combined with
the market clearing condition yt∗ = c∗t , implies:
                                            1 ∗
                        yt∗ = Et {yt+1
                                   ∗
                                       }−     (rt − Et {π ∗t+1 } − ρ)                 (22)
                                            σ
    Hence, as in the standard New Keynesian closed economy model, world output is
inversely related to current and anticipated world real interest rates. The previous
equation, often referred to as the new IS equation, is one of the key building blocks
of optimizing sticky price models. Next we derive a version of such an equation for
the small open economy.

3.1.2    Consumption and Output in the Small Open Economy
      ∗
Let CH,t (i) denote the world demand for the domestic good i. Then market clearing
in the small economy requires
                               ∗
         Yt (i) = CH,t (i) + CH,t (i)
                  µ          ¶−ε "µ       ¶                 µ        ¶         #
                    PH,t (i)          PH,t −η                 PH,t −η ∗ ∗
                =                              (1 − α) Ct +               α Yt
                     PH,t              Pt                     Et Pt∗
                  µ          ¶         "µ      ¶−η                 µ        ¶−η #
                    PH,t (i) −ε           PH,t
                                                             1        PH,t
                =                ϑYt∗              (1 − α) Qtσ +               α      (23)
                     PH,t                  Pt                        Et Pt∗

for all i ∈ [0, 1] and all t, where the second equality follows from (4),and (5) (together
with an analogous expression for the rest of the world), and the third equality makes
                                    ∗
use of (15) and the condition αϑ = α required for a zero trade balance in the steady
state (see appendix 1).


                                              9
                                                                 hR                        i ε−1
                                                                                              ε
                                                                    1         1− 1ε
   Plugging (23) into the deÞnition of aggregate output Yt ≡       0
                                                                        Yt (i)        di           we
obtain
                                       h          1      i
                                                    −η
                        Yt = ϑ Yt∗ Stη (1 − α) Qtσ + α                                         (24)
which, up to a Þrst order approximation, can be rewritten as:
                                                 ωα
                                    yt = yt∗ +      st                                         (25)
                                                 σ
where ω α ≡ 1 + α (2 − α)(ση − 1) > 0, and where the subscript α is meant to
emphasize the dependence of ω α on the degree of openness of the economy. Notice
that in the particular case of ση = 1 we obtain the exact log-linear relationship:

                                     yt = yt∗ + η st                                           (26)

Alternatively, if we use (16) to substitute out for st in (25) we can derive a simple
expression for domestic consumption as a weighted average of domestic and world
output, which will hold as a Þrst order approximation:

                               ct = Φα yt + (1 − Φα ) yt∗                                      (27)

where Φα ≡ 1−α
             ωα
                 > 0. Notice that in the particular case of α = 0, corresponding to a
closed economy, we have ω 0 = 1 , Φ0 = 1, and hence ct = yt for all t. Furthermore, in
the particular case of ση = 1, we can combine the exact relationships (16) and (26)
to obtain:

                                 ct = (1 − α) yt + α yt∗                                       (28)
    Finally we can combine (27), (11), and (25), with the consumer’s log-linear Euler
equation to derive a diﬀerence equation for domestic output in terms of domestic real
interest rates and world output:
                            ωα                                             ∗
          yt = Et {yt+1 } −     (rt − Et {π H,t+1 } − ρ) + (ω α − 1) Et {∆yt+1 }     (29)
                             σ
    By solving (29) forward, it is easy to see the level of output in the small economy
is negatively related to current and anticipated domestic real interest rates. It is also
related to anticipated world output growth (which in turn depends on expected future
world real interest rates), with a coeﬃcient ω α − 1 whose sign is positive (negative)
if ση > 1 (< 1).

3.1.3    The Trade Balance
            ¡ ¢³              ´
Let nxt ≡ Y1 Yt − PPH,t   t
                            Ct denote net exports in terms of domestic output, ex-
pressed as a fraction of steady state output Y . In the particular case of σ = η = 1, it
follows from (15) and (24) that PH,t Yt = Pt Ct for all t, thus implying a balanced trade



                                           10
at all times. More generally, a Þrst-order approximation yields nxt ' yt − ct − α st
which combined with (25) and (27) implies

                              nxt = (1 − Φα ) (yt − yt∗ ) − αst
                                    αΛ
                                  =     (yt − yt∗ )                                           (30)
                                    ωα
where Λ ≡ (2 − α)(ση − 1) + (1 − σ).
    Again, in the special case of σ = η = 1 we have nxt = 0 for all t, though the latter
property will also hold for any conÞguration of parameters such that Λ = 0. As we will
see below, when that condition is satisÞed, the objective function for the small open
economy’s monetary authority collapses into that of the closed economy counterpart.
More generally, the sign of the relationship between the output diﬀerential and net
exports is ambiguous, depending on the sign of Λ, which is in turn increasing in both
σ and η. If Λ > 0, a positive output diﬀerential (favorable to the small economy)
generates a trade surplus, whereas the sign of the reversed if Λ < 0. Notice, also, the
sign of Λ determines the sign of the eﬀect on net exports of a change in the terms of
trade, given that nxt = αΛ σ
                              st . Therefore the condition Λ > 0 is our model’s analog
to the Marshall-Lerner conditions.

3.2     The Supply Side: Marginal Cost and Inßation Dynamics
3.2.1    Marginal Cost and Inßation Dynamics in the Rest of the World
Under our assumptions, the dynamics of inßation in the world economy correspond
to those of a closed economy characterized by staggered price setting à la Calvo.
By combining the optimal price setting equation (21) corresponding to the world
economy, with the log-linear version of the equation describing the evolution of the
aggregate price level, one can derive the diﬀerence equation:11

                                                            c ∗t
                                  π ∗t = β Et {π ∗t+1 } + λ mc                                (31)

       c ∗t ≡ mc∗t + µ denotes the (log) real marginal cost, expressed as a deviation
where mc
from its steady state value (−µ), while the slope coeﬃcient is given by λ ≡ (1−θ)(1−βθ)
                                                                                 θ
                                                                                        .
   Notice that, under our assumptions the (log) real marginal cost is given by

                          mc∗t = −ν ∗ + (wt∗ − p∗t ) − a∗t
                               = −ν ∗ + σ c∗t + ϕ n∗t − a∗t
                               = −ν ∗ + (σ + ϕ) yt∗ − (1 + ϕ) a∗t                             (32)

where ν ∗ ≡ − log(1 − τ ∗ ), with τ ∗ denoting a constant employment subsidy whose
role is discussed below.
  11
     The derivation of the inßation equation in the world economy follows that of the small open
economy found in Appendix 2 (as well as in numerous papers in the literature), with suitable change
of notation. See, e.g., Galí and Gertler (1999) or Sbordone (1999) for an empirical assessment of
the implied inßation dynamics.



                                                11
3.2.2   Marginal Cost and Inßation Dynamics in the Small Open Economy
In the small open economy, the dynamics of domestic inßation in terms of real mar-
ginal cost are described by an equation analogous to the (closed) world economy
counterpart. Hence,
                                                       ct
                           π H,t = β Et {π H,t+1 } + λ mc                     (33)
    The determination of the real marginal cost as a function of domestic output in
the small open economy diﬀers somewhat from that in the closed economy, due to the
existence of a wedge between output and consumption, and between domestic and
consumer prices. We indeed have


                      mct =     −ν + wt − at − pH,t
                          =     −ν + (wt − pt ) + (pt − pH,t ) − at
                          =     −ν + σ ct + ϕ nt + α st − at
                          =     −ν + σ yt∗ + ϕ yt + st − (1 + ϕ) at                     (34)

where ν ≡ − log(1 − τ ), where the last equality makes use of (16). Thus, we see that
marginal cost is increasing in the terms of trade and world output. Both variables
end up inßuencing the real wage, through the wealth eﬀect on labor supply resulting
from their impact on domestic consumption. In addition, changes in the terms of
trade have a direct eﬀect on the product wage, for any given real wage. The inßuence
of technology (through its direct eﬀect on labor productivity) and of domestic output
(through its eﬀect on employment and, hence, the real wage) is analogous to that
observed in the closed economy.
    Finally, using (25) to substitute for st , we can rewrite the previous expression for
the real marginal cost in terms of domestic output and productivity, as well as world
output:
                             µ         ¶
                               σ                        1
                mct = −ν +         + ϕ yt + σ(1 −         ) y ∗ − (1 + ϕ) at         (35)
                               ωα                      ωα t
    Before turning our attention to the analysis of the properties of such an equilibrium
under alternative monetary policy regimes, we describe a convenient representation
of the model’s equilibrium dynamics, in terms of the output gap and inßation.

3.3     Equilibrium Dynamics: A Canonical Representation
In this section we show that the linearized equilibrium dynamics for the small open
economy have a representation in terms of output gap and domestic inßation analo-
gous to that of its closed economy counterpart. That representation, which we refer
to as the canonical one, has provided the basis for the analysis and evaluation of
alternative policy rules in much of the recent literature. Let’s deÞne the output gap
yet as the deviation of (log) output yt , from its natural level y t , where the latter is in
turn deÞned as the equilibrium level of output in the absence of nominal rigidities
(and conditional on output in the rest of the world). Formally,

                                             12
                                       yet ≡ yt − y t

   An analogous deÞnition holds for the world output gap, i.e. yet∗ ≡ yt∗ − y ∗t . For
expository convenience we start by deriving the equilibrium dynamics for the world
economy.

3.3.1   World Equilibrium Dynamics
Under ßexible prices, real marginal costs (and hence markups) in the world economy
will be constant over time, and given by mc∗ ≡ −µ, the level that would obtain under
ßexible prices. One can thus use (32), evaluated at the ßexible price equilibrium, to
determine the natural level of world output:

                                    y ∗t = Ω0 + Γ0 a∗t                              (36)
              ∗
where Ω0 ≡ vσ+ϕ
              −µ             1+ϕ
                 , and Γ0 ≡ σ+ϕ  . In addition one can derive a simple relationship
between real marginal cost (in terms of deviations from its steady state value) and
the output gap:

                                   c ∗t = (σ + ϕ) yet∗
                                   mc

   The latter result, combined with (31), gives rise to the so-called New Keynesian
Phillips curve (or NKPC for short):

                               π ∗t = β Et {π ∗t+1 } + κ0 yet∗                      (37)
where κ0 ≡ λ (σ + ϕ). We can also rewrite (22) in terms of the world output gap:
                                          1 ∗
                      yet∗ = Et {e∗
                                 yt+1 }−    (rt − Et {π ∗t+1 } − rr∗t )             (38)
                                          σ
where rr∗t ≡ −σ(1 − ρ∗a )Γ0 a∗t + ρ is the natural (or Wicksellian) expected real rate of
interest, i.e., the one that would prevail in a ßexible price equilibrium. Notice that
(37) and (38), combined with a monetary policy rule determining the world interest
rate fully describe the equilibrium dynamics of the world inßation and output gap.

3.3.2   Equilibrium Dynamics for the Small Open Economy
The natural level of output in the small open economy can be found after imposing
mct = −µ for all t and solving for domestic output in equation (35):

                               y t = Ωα + Γα at + Θα yt∗                            (39)
where Ωα ≡ ωσ+ω α (v−µ)
                    αϕ
                        , Γα ≡ ωσ+ϕω
                                 α (1+ϕ)
                                      α
                                         > 0, and Θα ≡ σ(1−ω α)
                                                        σ+ϕω α
                                                                .
    It also follows from (35) that the real marginal cost and the output gap will be
related according to:


                                             13
                                       µ         ¶
                                           σ
                                ct =
                                mc            + ϕ yet
                                           ωα
which we can combine with (33) to derive a NKPC for the small open economy in
terms of the output gap:

                                π H,t = β Et {π H,t+1 } + κα yet                   (40)
               ³           ´
where κα ≡ λ ωσα + ϕ . Notice that for α = 0 the slope coeﬃcient is given by
κ0 ≡ λ (σ + ϕ) and (40) corresponds to the standard, closed economy NKPC. The
same is true for the ση = 1 case, for the latter condition implies that ω α = 1.
More generally, we see that the form of the Phillips equation for the open economy
corresponds to that of the closed economy, at least as far as domestic inßation is
concerned. The degree of openness aﬀects the dynamics of inßation only through its
inßuence on the size of the slope of the Phillips curve, i.e., the size of the inßation
response to any given variation in the output gap. In the open economy, a change
in domestic output has an eﬀect on marginal cost through its impact on employment
(captured by ϕ), and the terms of trade (captured by ωσα , which is a function of the
degree of openness and the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods).
In particular, under the assumption that ση > 1, an increase in openness lowers
the size of the adjustment in the terms of trade necessary to absorb a change in
domestic output (relative to world output), thus dampening the impact of the latter
on marginal cost and inßation.
    Using (29) it is straightforward to derive a version of the new IS equation for the
open economy in terms of the output gap:
                                          ωα
                       yet = Et {e
                                 yt+1 } −     (rt − Et {πH,t+1 } − rrt )           (41)
                                          σ
where
                             σ(1 + ϕ)(1 − ρa )                  ∗
                   rrt ≡ ρ −                   at − ϕΘα Et {∆yt+1  }
                                 σ + ϕω α
is the small open economy’s natural rate of interest.
    Thus we see that the small open economy’s equilibrium is characterized by an
IS-type equation similar to that found in the closed economy. Two diﬀerences can be
pointed out, however. First, the degree of openness inßuences the sensitivity of the
output gap to interest rate changes. In particular, if ση > 1, an increase in openness
raises that sensitivity. Second, openness makes the natural interest rate depend on
expected world output growth, in addition to domestic productivity.


4    Simple Monetary Policy Rules for the Small Open
     Economy
In the present section we analyze the macroeconomic implications of three alternative
monetary policy regimes for the small open economy: a policy that aims at fully

                                           14
stabilizing domestic inßation (domestic inßation targeting, or DIT, for short), a policy
that stabilizes CPI inßation (CPI inßation targeting, CIT for short) and a policy that
pegs the exchange rate to the world currency (a PEG, for short). In all cases we
assume that the world monetary authority succeeds in fully stabilizing world prices
and the output gap; hence, we assume yet∗ = π ∗t = 0 for all t. As discussed below that
is the policy which is optimal for the closed economy under our assumptions.

4.1     Domestic Inßation Targeting
In this section we characterize the equilibrium processes for the diﬀerent variables of
our small open economy, under the assumption that the domestic pursue a domestic
inßation targeting policy (DIT), which implies:

                                         yet = π H,t = 0
all t. This in turn implies yt = y t and rt = rrt for all t, with all the remaining
variables matching their natural level all the time.
    In particular, it is evident from inspecting equation (39) that, under DIT, output
in the small open economy always increases in response to a positive technology shock
at home. The sign of the response to a rise in world output is ambiguous, however.
That response is negative if ω α > 1, which in turn requires that the expenditure-
switching eﬀect resulting from the real appreciation associated with a lower world
interest rate dominates the positive direct demand eﬀect; that phenomenon obtains
whenever ση > 1, which in turn implies ω α > 1.
    Given that under DIT both domestic and world inßation are zero, it follows that
et = st , i.e., the nominal exchange rate moves one to one with the terms of trade.
Hence, under DIT, the nominal exchange rate inherits all the statistical properties
of the terms of trade, including its stationarity (and thus its reversion to a constant
mean).12 More speciÞcally, by combining (25) with (39) and (36) it is possible to
derive the equilibrium behavior of the nominal exchange rate as

                                       σ
                                 et =     (y − y ∗t )                                       (42)
                                       ωα t
                                       σ(1 + ϕ)
                                     =          (at − a∗t )                                 (43)
                                       σ + ϕω α
where the second equality holds up to a constant term. Hence we see that the nominal
exchange rate varies with the productivity diﬀerential, depreciating (appreciating) in
response to a relative increase in domestic (world) productivity.
    Of course, stationarity does not necessarily imply low volatility. The latter will be
a function of the relative variances of domestic and world productivity, as well as the
correlation between the two. More precisely, the variance of the nominal exchange
rate under ßexible prices will be proportional to
                             (σ a − σ a∗ )2 + 2 σ a σ a∗ (1 − ρa,a∗ )                       (44)
  12
    The stationarity of the terms of trade is, in turn, an implication of the stationarity of the
productivity diﬀerential coupled with our assumption of complete asset markets.

                                               15
where σ a and σ a∗ denote the standard deviation of domestic and world productivity,
and ρa,a∗ their correlation. Hence, we see that the required volatility of the nominal
exchange rate under DIT is increasing with the extent of the asymmetry between the
two shocks, both in terms of their magnitude (represented by the Þrst term) and their
comovement (measured by the second term).
   In addition we can also derive the implied equilibrium process for the CPI level.
Given the constancy of domestic and world prices it is given by:


                             pt = α et
                                  ασ(1 + ϕ)
                                =           (at − a∗t )
                                   σ + ϕω α

where the second equality follows from (42). Thus, we see that under domestic
inßation targeting the CPI level will vary with the productivity diﬀerential, and will
inherit its statistical properties. The same is true for the real exchange rate, which
under the present regime will be given by qt = (1 − α) et .

4.2    CPI Inßation Targeting
Under the regime analyzed here the monetary authority of the small economy seeks
to stabilize CPI inßation (as opposed to domestic inßation). Formally, such a policy
requires

                                        πt = 0

for all t. Under the assumption that the world economy pursues an optimal policy
(implying that the foreign price level is constant), and setting pt = p∗t = 0 for all t
(without loss of generality), we can write:

                                    pH,t = −α st                                  (45)
thus implying common dynamics for the domestic price level and the terms of trade.
Using the previous expression to substitute for st in (25), and plugging the resulting
equation into (35), we obtain:
                            1³      ϕω α ´
                   mct = −     1+          pH,t − (1 + ϕ) (at − a∗t )             (46)
                            α        σ
   By substituting the latter equality in (25), plugging the resulting equation into
(35) and combining with the inßation equation (33) one can derive the following
stochastic second order diﬀerence equation describing the equilibrium behavior of the
domestic price level:

                γ c pH,t = pH,t−1 + β Et {pH,t+1 } − λ(1 + ϕ) (at − a∗t )         (47)
                      ¡         ¢
where γ c ≡ 1 + β + αλ 1 + ϕωσ α . Under the simplifying assumption that ρa = ρ∗a this
equation has a unique stationary representation given by

                                          16
                             pH,t = ξ c pH,t−1 − ζ c (at − a∗t )                    (48)
               ³      p          ´
             1                                           λξ c (1+ϕ)
where ξ c ≡ 2β   γ c − γ 2c − 4β ∈ (0, 1), and ζ c ≡ (1−ξ              > 0.
                                                               c βρa )
    Notice that under CIT the sign of the response of domestic prices to a change
in relative productivity is unambiguously negative. The reason is simple: a rise in
domestic productivity leads to a real depreciation of the terms of trade and, given
domestic prices, to an increase in CPI inßation (see (11)). The desired stabilization
of CPI inßation is therefore achieved by inducing a decline in domestic prices and
a smaller real depreciation, both of which can be attained by means of a negative
output gap.
    By combining (47) and (45) it is then possible to derive the equilibrium processes
for the terms of trade and in turn for the nominal and real exchange rates (notice
that under CIT we have qt = et all t , i.e., nominal and real exchange rate coincide).
In particular we will have
                                               1−α
                                 et = qt = −          pH,t                          (49)
                                                α
    Thus, under CIT, the equilibrium nominal exchange rate must be stationary and,
given the evolution of the domestic price level, it must depreciate in response to a rise
in productivity. Furthermore, and in contrast with the DIT regime, the exchange rate
(nominal and real) will display some endogenous persistence, beyond that inherited
from the productivity diﬀerential.

4.3    An Exchange Rate Peg
The third monetary arrangement for the small open economy consists of a permanent
(and credible) exchange rate peg vis a vis the rest of the world. In the context of our
model, this is equivalent to the adoption of the world currency by the small economy,
with the corresponding relinquishment of an autonomous monetary policy. Again, for
simplicity, we maintain the assumption of an optimal monetary policy for the world
economy. That policy is based on world aggregates, and is not aﬀected by the joining
of the world monetary union by our small economy, given the negligible size of the
latter.
    In the absence of capital controls, an implication of monetary integration is the
equalization of the domestic interest rate to the world interest rate. Furthermore,
constancy of the nominal exchange rate and world prices implies that st = −pH,t and
qt = −pt , for all t.
    Employing a similar strategy to the one followed in the case of CPI targeting
above, we can derive a second order diﬀerence equation for the domestic price level:

                  γ e pH,t = pH,t−1 + β Et {pH,t+1 } − λ(1 + ϕ) (at − a∗t )       (50)
                        ¡        ¢
where γ e ≡ 1 + β + λ 1 + ϕωσ α . The unique stationary representation for pH,t in this
case is given by:

                            pH,t = ξ e pH,t−1 − ζ e (at − a∗t )

                                            17
                ³     p         ´
              1                                       λξe (1+ϕ)
where ξ e ≡ 2β   γ e − γ 2e − 4β ∈ (0, 1), and ζ e ≡ (1−ξ          > 0.
                                                           e βρa )
    The stationarity of the domestic price level is again a direct implication of the
stationarity of the terms of trade, given the constancy of the nominal exchange rate
and the world price level. Notice that the sign and qualitative pattern of the response
of domestic prices under a peg is identical to the one derived for a CIT regime.
In particular, it displays some endogenous persistence beyond that inherited from
variations in the productivity diﬀerential. The diﬀerence between the two responses
is easy to characterize: notice that γ e < γ c , which in turn implies ξ e > ξ c and
ζ e > ζ c . Accordingly, an exchange rate peg leads to a stronger and more persistent
adjustment of domestic prices (and, hence, of the output gap) in response to a shock
in the productivity diﬀerential, relative to a CPI targeting regime.
    Furthermore, and given et = p∗t = 0 for all t, it follows that the CPI level is
proportional to the domestic price level:

                                         pt = (1 − α) pH,t

and, hence, it shares its statistical properties and response patterns. In particular,
and in contrast with a DIT regime, the CPI must fall under a peg in response to a
rise in the productivity diﬀerential.
    Let us point out, as a general remark, that there is an interesting similarity across
the alternative regimes considered here: they all imply a stationary price level and
nominal exchange rate. That feature is in stark contrast with the non-stationarity of
both variables observed in the data. That contrast may suggest that neither regime
provides a good approximation to the policies pursued by actual economies. On the
other hand, it is worth noticing that both the DIT and CIT regimes can be considered
as limiting cases of simple linear Taylor-type rules of the form rt = ρ + φπ π H,t (for
DIT) and rt = ρ + φπ π t (for CIT), when φπ → ∞. Under such “ßexible” inßation
targeting regimes, the implied equilibrium dynamics would result in non-stationary
price level and nominal exchange rate.13 By way of contrast, the stationarity of
the price level under an exchange rate peg would also carry over to a more ßexible,
managed system in which the nominal exchange rate was allowed to ßuctuate around
a constant central parity. In that case, the stationarity of the terms of trade (a
consequence of our assumptions of complete asset markets) and the stability of world
prices would guarantee that both domestic and consumer prices remained stationary.

4.4     Dynamic Eﬀects of a Domestic Productivity Shock
In this section we present some quantitative results based on a calibrated version of
our model economy. Let’s Þrst state the main assumptions underlying our baseline
calibration, which we take as a benchmark. We set σ equal to unity, which corresponds
to a log utility speciÞcation, and η equal to 1. We assume ϕ = 3, which implies a labor
supply elasticity of 13 , and a value for the steady-state markup µ = 1.2, which implies
that ε, the elasticity of substitution between diﬀerentiated goods, is 6. Parameter
  13
    These results are, for the sake of brevity of exposition, not displayed here but are available upon
request from the authors.


                                                  18
θ is set equal to 0.75, a value consistent with an average period of one year between
price adjustments. We assume β = 0.99, which implies a riskless annual return of
about 4 percent in the steady state. We set ρa = 0.9 and then calibrate σ 2a so that the
standard deviation of the natural level of output in the (closed) world economy is 2
percent, which we take as a (reasonable) benchmark. All the previous parameters are
assumed to take identical values in the small open economy and the world economy.
In addition, the small economy is characterized by an openness index α for which we
assume a value of 0.4; the latter corresponds roughly to the share of imports in GDP
for Canada. Furthermore, the correlation between the domestic and world shocks is
set to 0.77, a value that we estimate using quarterly productivity data for Canada
and the U.S.
    We start by describing the dynamic eﬀects of a domestic productivity shock on
a number of macroeconomic variables. Figure 1 displays the impulse responses to a
unit innovation in at under the three regimes considered. By construction, domestic
inßation and the output gap remain unchanged under DIT (solid line), whereas they
both fall under CIT (dashed) and the peg (short dashes). We also see that the
shock leads to a persistent reduction in the domestic interest rate as it is needed
in order to support the transitory expansion in consumption and output consistent
with the ßexible price allocation. Given the constancy of the world nominal interest
rate the uncovered interest parity implies an initial nominal depreciation followed
by expectations of a future appreciation, as reßected in the response of the nominal
exchange rate. Relative to the other regimes, the constancy of domestic prices under
DIT then accounts for a larger real depreciation and therefore for a further expansion
in demand and output through a rise in net exports (not shown here). Notice also
that CPI inßation rises at Þrst (with this rise being proportional to the degree of
openness), but becomes negative ever after, in accordance with the exchange rate
response.
    It is interesting to contrast the implied dynamic behavior of several macro vari-
ables under CIT (dashed line) with the one under DIT. Notice, in particular, that
stabilization of CPI inßation leads to a deviation from DIT on two margins: a decline
in domestic prices and a more muted depreciation of both the nominal and the real
exchange rate, both on impact and along the transition. That, in turn, requires a
more contractionary policy (a higher interest rate), which is reßected in a higher
nominal (and real) interest rate. Under our calibration this implies an overshooting
in the interest rate, which rises at Þrst and then falls over time.14 As shown above,
this policy arrangement is consistent with stationarity of both the price level and the
exchange rate. Yet both output gap and inßation fall sharply under CIT relative to
DIT, so that their implied volatility largely exceeds the one under DIT. As discussed
below, and under some special assumptions, that higher volatility is unambiguously
associated with a welfare loss, relative to DIT.15
  14
     Notice that this initial rise of the nominal intrest rate (for a given world interest rate), followed
by a subsequent fall, is still consistent with the observed depreciation of the nominal exchange rate
on impact. It is, in fact, the behavior of current and expected future interest rate diﬀerentials
that matters for the current nominal exchange rate, as can be easily seen by solving the uncovered
interest parity condition forward.
  15
     We develop our results on welfare later. Notice, however, that the cost of dampening exchange


                                                   19
    Finally the same Þgure displays the corresponding impulse responses under an
exchange rate peg. Notice that the responses of output gap and inßation are quali-
tatively similar to the CIT case. However, the impossibility of lowering the nominal
rate and letting the currency depreciate, as would be needed in order to support the
expansion in consumption and output required in order to replicate the ßexible price
allocation, determines an ampliÞcation of the same responses and therefore further
volatility in inßation and output gap. Again the stationarity of the price level im-
plied by the peg requires that the initial, short-lived deßation is eventually followed
by a period of persistent (albeit low) inßation. That pattern, combined with the con-
stancy of the nominal rate, implies a decline in expected long real rates (not shown
in the Þgure), with the consequent expansion in consumption and a real depreciation.
However the real depreciation is in this case much more muted on impact (though
more persistent), given that it can be achieved only through an adjustment in relative
prices.
    In order to complement our quantitative analysis, Table 1 reports the standard
deviation of several key variables under alternative monetary policy regimes. For each
case we display statistics for three scenarios: domestic shocks only, foreign shocks only,
and both foreign and domestic shocks. The numbers conÞrm some of the Þndings that
were already evident from visual inspection of the impulse responses. Hence, we see
that a DIT regime requires substantially more volatility in the nominal exchange rate
than a CIT regime, independently of the source of shocks. The PEG regime ampliÞes
both output gap and inßation volatility relative to DIT, with the CIT regime lying
somewhere in between. Notice also that in the scenario with both shocks the implied
volatility of the real and nominal exchange rate is substantially lower than the one
of output and, hence, far lower than the relative volatility observed in the data.16
Furthermore the real exchange rate is more stable under an exchange rate peg than
under any other policy regime. That Þnding, which is consistent with the evidence of
Mussa (1986), points to the existence of “excess smoothness” in real exchange rates
under Þxed exchange rates. That feature is a consequence of the inability of prices
(which are sticky) to compensate for the constancy of the nominal exchange rate.17

4.4.1    Monetary regimes and Macroeconomic Volatility: Sensitivity Analy-
         sis
To conclude our quantitative section we conduct a sensitivity analysis of the second
moments of selected variables to the calibration of three key parameters. Figures 2,
3 and 4 display the eﬀect on the volatility of output gap, inßation, nominal and real
exchange rates of varying, respectively, the elasticity of substitution between domestic
and foreign goods η, the degree of openness α, and the index of price stickiness θ. In
rate volatility (and therefore the relative ranking between DIT and CIT ) may be a function of the
lags with which exchange rate movements aﬀect prices, i.e., of the degree of pass-through. Intuitively,
the lower the degree of pass-through, the smaller (ceteris paribus) the cost of short-run relative
price inertia, and therefore the more desirable to pursue a policy of CIT relative to DIT.
  16
     The standard deviation of the real exchange rate relative to that of output reported in Backus
et al. (1985) is 1.91 for the U.S., 2.0 for Canada, 1.76 for Germany, and 1.95 for the U.K..
  17
     See Monacelli (1999) for a detailed analysis of the implications of Þxed exchange rates.


                                                  20
each panel we maintain our benchmark calibration σ = η = 1 (with the exception
of Figure 2 where η can vary) and compare the implied volatility under the three
monetary regimes analyzed so far.
    Several interesting observations are in order. To begin with, notice that in all
cases the ranking between rules is robust to the choice of parameter values. A clear
trade-oﬀ emerges between the stabilization of both the nominal and real exchange
rates, on the one hand, and the stabilization of inßation and the output gap on the
other. Thus, the DIT regime achieves full stabilization of output gap and inßation,
but at the cost of boosting the instability of the exchange rates. The converse is true
for the exchange rate peg, with CIT emerging as a hybrid regime.
    In particular, notice (see Figure 2) that an increase in the elasticity of substitution
between domestic and foreign goods lowers the volatility of both the nominal and the
real exchange rate. In the limit, as η becomes arbitrarily large (i.e., as goods become
perfectly substitutable), that volatility approaches zero, since the size of the necessary
relative price adjustments in response to shocks is dampened.
    Consider next the eﬀect of increasing the degree of openness α, as displayed in
Figure 3. Notice Þrst that under our benchmark calibration both DIT and PEG
regimes imply that output gap and inßation volatility are independent of openness,
so that in both these cases the equilibrium dynamics is isomorphic to the one of a
closed economy. This can be easily seen by recalling that pH,t = 0 under DIT and
by inspecting equation (50) for the case of a PEG, which is independent of α when
σ = η = 1. Yet the same is not true for the CIT regime, which corresponds to DIT
for α = 0 and converges to a PEG when α → 1. As it is clear from equation (47),
the dynamics of the domestic price level depend on α, even in the special case of
σ = η = 1. In fact, when α → 1, and given our assumption of complete international
asset markets, the consumption basket in the small economy corresponds to that of
the world economy, with the law of one price implying a constant real exchange rate
(and therefore aggregate PPP). Given the fact that qt = et − pt , it must be the case
that CIT and the PEG must be equivalent.
    Interestingly, and unlike the conventional wisdom on the eﬀects of exchange rate
instability on trade, a higher degree of openness (i.e., trade intensity) has a negative
eﬀect on the volatility of the real exchange rate.18 Under risk sharing, in fact, and
for given ßuctuations in relative consumption baskets, a larger degree of openness
requires smaller ßuctuations in real relative prices.
    Finally, we look at the eﬀect of varying the degree of price stickiness (i.e., the
probability of not resetting prices θ). Figure 4 reports the corresponding volatility
measures. As we approach full rigidity of prices (i.e., θ → 1) inßation volatility is
reduced, but at the cost of boosting output gap volatility. In this case, in fact, full
price rigidity is imposed as a constraint, and Þrms are prevented from adjusting prices
even if they wished to do so. This implies large ßuctuations in markups and therefore
in the output gap. Notice also that, under DIT, the volatility of the nominal exchange
rate is independent of θ, as implied by equation (42). An analogous invariance holds
for the real exchange rate (or any other variable). Intuitively, the constraints on price
adjustment are not binding under that regime, since all Þrms manage to maintain
 18
      See Hau (2000) for an empirical assessment of this point, in the context of a diﬀerent model.


                                                  21
their desired markup at all times, at unchanged prices. Equilibrium allocations and
relative prices are thus independent of the degree of price stickiness.
    On the other hand, under the CIT regime, as θ approaches 1, the volatility of
both the nominal and real exchange rates approaches zero as the rigidity of prices
increases, as implied by equation (49). The same is true for the real exchange rate
under a PEG.


5     Optimal Monetary Policy
In this section we derive and discuss the properties of the equilibrium dynamics
when both the domestic and world monetary authorities pursue an optimal monetary
policy. Our analysis is restricted to a special case—which corresponds to the baseline
calibration considered above—for which a second order approximation to the welfare
of the representative consumer can be easily derived.
    We start by recalling the form of the welfare-based objective function in the closed
economy, which is the one relevant to the world economy in our case. Then we proceed
with the corresponding analysis for the small open economy, trying to identify the
issues that are speciÞc to it.

5.1     Optimal Monetary Policy in the World Economy
Following Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) we assume that the Þscal authority in
the (closed) world economy fully neutralizes the distortions associated with Þrms’
market power by means of a constant employment subsidy τ ∗ . Under that assumption
it is easy to show that the ßexible price equilibrium allocation is optimal in the
(closed) world economy. To see this, notice that the optimal allocation must maximize
U (Ct∗ ) − V (Nt∗ ) subject to Ct∗ = A∗t Nt∗ , for all t, where the constraint already imposes
an even allocation of resources across Þrms (a necessary condition for eﬃciency, and
which is satisÞed in the ßexible price allocation since all Þrms will be setting the same
prices). The associated Þrst order condition is given by V 0 (Nt∗ ) = U 0 (Ct∗ )A∗t .
    On the other hand, the ßexible price equilibrium satisÞes
                                    1       ∗
                               1−     = MC t
                                    ε
                                                          ∗
                                        (1 − τ ∗ ) V 0 (N t )
                                      =                   ∗
                                           A∗t     U 0 (C t )

   Hence, by setting τ ∗ = 1ε (or, equivalently, ν ∗ = µ) the world policymaker guar-
antees the optimality of the ßexible price equilibrium allocation. It follows that the
optimal monetary policy in such an environment is the one that succeeds in closing
the output gap and fully stabilizing prices, i.e. yet∗ = π ∗t = 0 at t = 0.
   Notice that the equilibrium level of world output associated with that optimal
policy corresponds to its natural level, as derived in (36). Given (38), we can easily
derive an expression for the interest rate that supports the optimal allocation in the


                                             22
world economy:19

                                  rt∗ = rr∗t                                                  (51)
                                      = ρ − σ(1 − ρ∗a )Γ0 a∗t

5.2     Optimal Monetary Policy in the Small Open Economy:
        A Special Case
As noted by Corsetti and Pesenti (2001a), among others, in an open economy there is
a second factor that distorts the incentives of the monetary authority (in addition to
market power): the possibility of inßuencing the terms of trade in a way beneÞcial to
domestic consumers. This possibility is a consequence of the imperfect substitutabil-
ity between domestic and foreign goods, combined with sticky prices (which render
monetary policy non-neutral).20 Below we assume the presence of an employment
subsidy that exactly oﬀsets the combined eﬀects of market power and the terms of
trade distortions in the steady state. That assumption rules out the existence of an
average inßation (or deßation) bias, and allows us to focus on the policies consistent
with a zero average inßation, in a way analogous to the world economy.
    Let us Þrst characterize the optimal allocation from the viewpoint of a social
planner facing the resource constraints that the small open economy is subject to in
equilibrium (vis a vis the rest of the world), and given our assumption of complete
markets. In that case, that optimal allocation must maximize U (Ct ) − V (Nt ) subject
to the technological constraint Yt = At Nt and the consumption/output possibilities
set Ct = f (Yt , Yt∗ ) (with the latter embedding the risk sharing condition (15), as well
as the equilibrium relationship between the terms of trade, and domestic and foreign
output implicit in (24)).
    The derivation of a tractable, analytical solution requires that we restrict ourselves
to the special case of σ = η = 1. In that case, and as shown above, we have the exact
expression Ct = Yt1−α (ϑYt∗ )α . The optimal allocation (from the viewpoint of the
small open economy, which takes world output as given) must satisfy,

                                 V 0 (Nt )Nt = (1 − α)U 0 (Ct )Ct
                                                                                               1
which, under the assumed preferences, implies a constant employment N = (1−α) 1+ϕ .
    On the other hand, the ßexible price equilibrium in the small open economy
satisÞes:

                                 1
                            1−     = M Ct
                                 ε
  19
     In order for equation (51) to be interpretable as an optimal rule, one could add an extra term
(e.g., ϕπ π ∗t with ϕπ > 1). In that case we would eliminate the indeterminacy that would otherwise
be associated with an interest rate that depends on exogenous variables only. Notice however that
such a term will be zero in equilibrium. See, e.g., Woodford (2000), for a detailed discussion.
  20
     This distinguishes our analysis from Goodfriend and King (2001) who assume that the price of
domestic goods is determined in the world market.



                                                23
                                              µ          ¶α
                                   (1 − τ )        Yt         V 0 (N t )
                                 =                   ∗
                                      At          ϑY t        U 0 (C t )
                                                  1+ϕ
                                 = (1 − τ ) N t

    Hence, by setting τ such that (1 − τ )(1 − α) = 1 − 1ε is satisÞed (or, equivalently,
ν = µ + log(1 − α)) the small open economy’s policy maker guarantees the optimality
of the ßexible price equilibrium allocation. As in the closed economy case, the optimal
monetary policy requires stabilizing the output gap (i.e., yet = 0, for all t). Equation
(40) then implies that domestic prices are also stabilized under that optimal policy
(π H,t = 0 for all t). Thus, in the special case under consideration, domestic inßation
targeting is indeed the optimal policy.

5.2.1   The Welfare Costs of Alternative Simple Rules
As we show in Appendix 3, and for the special case considered in the present section,
a second order approximation to the utility of the representative consumer in the
small open economy, expressed as a fraction of steady state consumption, can be
written as:

               (1 − α) X t h ε 2                   i
                        ∞
           W≡−             β   π H,t + (1 + ϕ) yet + t.i.p. + o(kak3 )
                                                 2
                                                                                    (52)
                  2    t=0
                             λ
    Taking unconditional expectations on (52) and letting β → 1, the expected welfare
losses of any policy that deviated from strict inßation targeting can be written in
terms of the variances of inßation and the output gap:

                          (1 − α) h ε                               i
                   V≡                 var(π H,t ) + (1 + ϕ) var(e
                                                                yt ) .               (53)
                             2      λ
    Table 2 reports the welfare losses associated with the two simple rules analyzed in
the previous section: CPI targeting and an exchange rate peg. In both cases we report
welfare numbers for the usual three scenarios: domestic shocks only, foreign shocks
only and both shocks. There are four panels in this table. The top panel reports
welfare losses in the case of our benchmark parameterization, while the remaining
three panels display the eﬀects of lowering, respectively, the steady-state markup,
the elasticity of labor supply and both. All entries are to be read as percentage units
of steady state consumption, and in deviation from the Þrst best represented by DIT.
    Under our baseline calibration both rules are suboptimal since they involve non-
trivial deviations from domestic price stability. As it stands clear, the exchange rate
peg implies in all scenarios a substantially larger deviation from the Þrst best relative
to CIT, as already arguable from the quantitative evaluation of the second moments
conducted above. However, and as is usually the case in welfare exercises of this sort
found in the literature, the implied welfare losses are quantitatively small for both
policy regimes. This is particularly true in the two-shock scenario, which implies a
lower volatility of both the nominal and real exchange rate relative to the scenarios
with one shock only.


                                           24
    Consider next the eﬀect of lowering, respectively, the steady-state markup to 1.1,
by setting ε = 11 (which implies a larger penalization of inßation variability in the loss
function) and the elasticity of labor supply to 0.1 (which implies a larger penalization
of output gap variability). Although the relative ranking between CIT and PEG is
unaltered, the eﬀect is a substantial magniÞcation of welfare losses relative to the
benchmark case, especially in the third exercise where both parameters are lowered
simultaneously. However, as a percentage of steady state consumption, the losses
continue to remain quantitatively small.

5.3    Sensitivity Analysis: the Role of Openness and of Co-
       movement with World Shocks
In this section we investigate to what extent the welfare-based ranking of the monetary
policy regimes discussed above may be sensitive to the calibration of two central
parameters characterizing the small open economy: the degree of openness and the
correlation between domestic and world shocks.
    Figure 5 displays how our welfare measure associated with alternative policies
varies with α, the openness index. Notice, Þrst, that the relative ranking among
monetary policy regimes is invariant to the degree of openness. In particular, for all
α ∈ (0, 1), both CIT and the exchange rate peg imply substantially larger welfare
losses relative to DIT, with the former always dominating the latter.
    In the limiting case of α = 0, the domestic economy becomes closed and DIT
coincides with CIT. As a result, their associated welfare measures also coincide. Only
the exchange rate peg implies a larger welfare loss in that limiting case.
    When α → 1, and given our assumption of complete international asset markets,
the consumption basket in the small economy corresponds to that of the world econ-
omy, with the risk sharing condition implying a constant real exchange rate and a
perfect correlation between domestic and world consumption. In that context there
are no possible welfare gains (or losses) associated with deviations from a DIT policy,
as implied by the welfare function (52). Therefore both CIT and the PEG converge
to DIT as a limiting case, and under this scenario all rules replicate the eﬃcient
allocation.
    Notice also that CIT dominates the exchange rate peg for any α value (other
than 1). In particular, the exchange rate peg is the only regime for which welfare is
monotonically increasing in openness. Under that regime, the lower is α, the larger is
the variation in domestic prices required to bring about any relative price adjustment.
    Therefore the key intuition to be applied to the analysis of all the rules above is
that, as long as aggregate PPP does not hold (which is the case for values of α < 1),
a lower degree of openness makes limiting exchange rate ßexibility more costly by
boosting the volatility of inßation and output gap.
    Finally, Figure 6 illustrates the eﬀect on welfare of varying the cross-country
correlation of shocks under alternative monetary regimes. Notice that, for all the
rules considered, the deviation from DIT converges to zero as the shock correlation
approaches unity. For both CIT policies and the exchange rate peg the cost of limiting
the ßexibility of relative prices is inversely related to the correlation of shocks. In the

                                            25
limit, as the correlation with world shocks becomes perfect, the cost of mimicking the
interest rate decision made by the (optimizing) world monetary authority vanishes.


6    Summary and Concluding Remarks
The present paper has developed and analyzed a model of a small open economy with
staggered price setting à la Calvo. We have shown that the equilibrium dynamics for
the small open economy model have a canonical representation (in terms of domestic
inßation and the output gap) analogous to that of its closed economy counterpart.
More precisely, their representations diﬀer only in two respects: (a) some coeﬃcients
of the equilibrium dynamical system for the small open economy depend on parame-
ters that are speciÞc to the latter (the degree of openness and the substitutability
between domestic and foreign goods), and (b) the natural levels of output and in-
terest rates in the small open economy are a function of both domestic and foreign
disturbances. In particular, the closed economy is nested in the small open economy
model, as a limiting case.
    We have then used our framework to analyze the properties of three alternative
monetary regimes for the small open economy: (a) domestic inßation targeting, (b)
CPI inßation targeting, and (c) an exchange rate peg. Our analysis point to a clear
tradeoﬀ between the stabilization of both the nominal and real exchange rates, on the
one hand, and the stabilization of inßation and the output gap on the other. Hence
a policy of domestic inßation targeting, which achieves a simultaneous stabilization
of both domestic prices and the output gap, entails a substantially larger volatility
of nominal and real exchange rates relative to a policy of CPI targeting and/or an
exchange rate peg. The converse is true for the latter regime. In general a regime
of CPI targeting delivers equilibrium dynamics that allow us to characterize it as
a hybrid regime, somewhere between domestic inßation targeting and a peg. In
particular, CPI targeting coincides with domestic inßation targeting in the limiting
case of a closed economy, while it mimics the dynamics under a peg when domestic
and foreign consumption baskets are identical (which happens when the degree of
openness reaches its highest limit).
    We have also shown that, under a speciÞc parameterization, a tractable second
order approximation to the utility of the small open economy’s consumer can be
derived, and the welfare level implied by alternative monetary policy rules can be
evaluated. In that case, the implied loss function is analogous to the one applying
to the corresponding closed economy, which penalizes ßuctuations in domestic inßa-
tion and the output gap. In particular, under our assumptions, domestic inßation
targeting emerges as the optimal policy regime. Relative to the latter, CPI inßation
targeting and an exchange rate peg deliver higher welfare losses, due to the excess
smoothness of real exchange rates that they involve. Quantitatively, however, the
welfare losses involved are small.
    Our framework lends itself to several extensions. First, it is important to em-
phasize that domestic price stability (along with fully ßexible exchange rates) stands
out as the welfare maximizing policy in the particular case of log-utility and unitary
elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods that we analyze here.

                                         26
The derivation of a more general welfare function for the small open economy would
allow a more thorough analysis and quantitative evaluation of the optimal monetary
policy and should certainly be the object of future research.
    Second, a two-country version of the framework developed here would allow us
to analyze a number of issues that cannot be addressed with the present model,
including the importance of spillover eﬀects in the design of optimal monetary policy,
the potential beneÞts from monetary policy coordination, and the implications of
exchange rate stabilization agreements. Recent work by Benigno and Benigno (2001),
Clarida et al. (2001), and Pappa (2001) has already made some inroads on that front.
Our current work in progress seeks to recast that analysis in terms of the simple
canonical model representation developed in the present paper.
    A further interesting extension would involve the introduction, along with sticky
prices, of sticky nominal wages in the small open economy. As pointed out by Erceg,
Henderson and Levin (2000), the simultaneous presence of both forms of nominal
rigidity introduces an additional tradeoﬀ that renders strict price inßation targeting
policies suboptimal. It may be interesting to analyze how that tradeoﬀ would aﬀect
the ranking across monetary policy regimes of the present paper.
    Finally, it is worth noticing that our analysis features complete exchange rate
pass-through of nominal exchange rate changes to prices of imported (or exported)
goods. Some of the implications of less than complete pass-through associated with
local currency pricing by exporters and importers have already been analyzed by
several authors in the context of two-country models with one-period, price-setting
in advance (see, e.g., Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2001), Devereux and Engle (2000),
and Corsetti and Pesenti (2001b)). It would be interesting to explore some of those
implications (e.g., for the nature of the optimal monetary policy problem and the
relative performance of alternative policy regimes) in the context of the simple small
open economy with staggered price-setting proposed here.




                                         27
   Appendix 1: The Steady State
    Next we characterize the perfect foresight, zero inßation steady state of our small
open economy model, taking Y ∗ as given and setting At ≡ 1, for all t. We use
variables without time subscripts to refer to steady state values. Markups are constant
                                   ε
in the steady state at the level ε−1  , implying (1−τPH
                                                       ) W
                                                            = (1 − 1ε ). The latter fact,
                                                                                1
                                             P
combined with (7) and the identity          PH
                                                 = [(1 − α) + α S 1−η ] 1−η ≡ g(S), implies
           (1− 1 )
C σ Y ϕ = g(S)(1−τ
                ε
                   )
                     .
    In steady state, the risk sharing condition (15) takes the form C σ = (ϑY ∗ )σ q(S)
                  S
where q(S) ≡ g(S)      links the real exchange rate and the terms of trade in the steady
state. One can easily check that g 0 (S) > 0 and q 0 (S) > 0. Combining the previous
results we obtain (up to a multiplicative constant):
                              µ                           ¶ ϕ1
                                       1 − 1ε
                        Y =                                      ≡ H(S, Y ∗ )         (54)
                                  S (ϑY ∗ )σ (1 − τ )
   Notice that Hs < 0, with lims→0 H(S, Y ∗ ) = +∞ and lims→∞ H(S, Y ∗ ) = 0.
   On the other hand, market clearing requires
                                         ∗
                          Y   = CH,t + CH,t
                              = (1 − α) g(S)η C + α∗ S η Y ∗

   The latter expression can be combined with (15) to yield:
                                                      1
                 Y = (1 − α) g(S)η ϑY ∗ q(S) σ + α∗ S η Y ∗ ≡ J(S, Y ∗ )              (55)
    Notice that function J satisÞes Js > 0, and lims→0 J(S, Y ∗ ) = 0 and lims→∞ J(S, Y ∗ ) =
+∞. Hence, given a value for Y ∗ and ϑ, (54) and (55) jointly (and uniquely) deter-
mine the steady state values for S and q(S), i.e., the steady state terms of trade and
the real exchange rate.
    For convenience, and without loss of generality, we can assume that initial con-
ditions (i.e., initial distribution of wealth) are such that αϑ
                                                             α∗
                                                                 = 1. In that case, (55)
                                                ∗
implies that S = q(S) = 1, and C = Y = ϑY . The latter condition implies zero net
exports (i.e., balanced trade) in the new steady state.
    One can view the small open economy setup used in the present paper as corre-
sponding to the limiting case of α∗ → 0 and ϑ → 0 , though with a well deÞned ratio
α∗
 ϑ
   = α ∈ (0, 1).




                                                 28
 Appendix 2: Optimal Price Setting in the Calvo
Model
    Following Calvo (1983) we assume that each individual Þrm resets its price with
probability 1 − θ each period, independently of the time elapsed since the last ad-
justment. Thus, each period a measure 1 − θ of (randomly selected) Þrms reset
their prices, while a fraction θ keep their prices unchanged. Let P H,t (j) denote the
price set by a Þrm j adjusting its price in period t. Under the Calvo price-setting
structure, PH,t+k (j) = P H,t (j) with probability θk for k = 0, 1, 2, ....Since all Þrms
resetting prices in any given period will choose the same price, we henceforth drop
the j subscript.
    When setting a new price in period t Þrm j seeks to maximize the current value
of its dividend stream, conditional on that price being eﬀective:
                               ∞
                               X          ©                               ª
                      max            θk Et Qt,t+k [Yt+k (P H,t − M Ct+k
                                                                    n
                                                                        )]
                       P H,t
                               k=0

subject to the sequence of demand constraints
                           µ        ¶−ε
                              P H,t                ∗           d
                Yt+k (j) ≤              (CH,t+k + CH,t+k ) ≡ Yt+k (P H,t )
                             PH,t+k

where M Ctn = (1−τAt)Wt denotes the nominal marginal cost.
  Thus, P H,t must satisfy the Þrst order condition
                 ∞
                 X               ½                                     ¾
                         k                                 ²     n
                       θ Et Qt,t+k Yt+k          (P H,t −     M Ct+k )] = 0                    (56)
                 k=0
                                                          ²−1

   Using the fact that Qt,t+k = β k (Ct /Ct+k )σ (Pt /Pt+k ), we can rewrite the previous
condition as:
              X∞         ½                                            ¾
                      k      −1    −σ                   ²         n
                  (βθ) Et Pt+k Ct+k Yt+k (P H,t −             MCt+k )] = 0
              k=0
                                                      ²−1

or, in terms of stationary variables,
       X∞           ½                  µ                             ¶¾
               k       −σ       PH,t−1    P H,t   ²   H
           (βθ) Et Ct+k Yt+k                    −    Π        M Ct+k    =0
       k=0
                                 Pt+k    PH,t−1 ² − 1 t−1,t+k

                  P                              MC n
where ΠH           H,t+k                    t+k
        t−1,t+k ≡ PH,t−1 , and M Ct+k = PH,t+k . Log-linearizing the previous condition
around the perfect foresight, zero inßation steady state with balanced trade we obtain:
                             ∞
                             X                                       ∞
                                                                     X
                                         k
        pH,t = pH,t−1 +              (βθ) Et {π H,t+k } + (1 − βθ)         (βθ)k Et {mc
                                                                                     c t+k }
                               k=0                                   k=0

       c t ≡ mct − mc is the (log) deviation of real marginal cost from its steady
where mc
                        ε
state value mc = − log ε−1 ≡ −µ.

                                                   29
   Notice, that we can rewrite the previous expression in more compact form as:

                                                                       ct
             pH,t − pH,t−1 = βθ Et {pH,t+1 − pH,t } + π H,t + (1 − βθ) mc          (57)
                                          c t = mcnt − pH,t + µ to substitute for mc
    Alternatively, using the relationship mc                                      c t in
(57), and after some straightforward algebra, we obtain a version of the price-setting
rule in terms of expected nominal marginal costs:
                                            X
                                            ∞
                      pH,t = µ + (1 − βθ)         (βθ)k Et {mcnt+k }
                                            k=0

which corresponds to expression (21) in the text.
   Under the assumed price-setting structure, the dynamics of the domestic price
index are described by the equation
                           £                                  ¤ 1
                     PH,t ≡ θ PH,t−1 1−ε + (1 − θ) (P H,t )1−ε 1−ε                 (58)

which can be log-linearized around the zero inßation steady state to yield,

                            π H,t = (1 − θ) (pH,t − pH,t−1 )

   Finally, we can combine the previous expression with (57) above to yield, after
some algebra,
                                                      ct
                          π H,t = β Et {π H,t+1 } + λ mc
where λ ≡ (1−θ)(1−βθ)
               θ
                      , and which corresponds to (33) in the text.
  The inßation equation for the world economy can be derived in an analogous
manner.




                                          30
  Appendix 3: Derivation of the Welfare Loss Func-
tion for the Special Case
    In the present appendix we derive a second order approximation of representa-
tive consumer’s utility about the ßexible price equilibrium allocation. function. As
discussed in the main text, we eventually restrict our analysis to the special case
of σ = η = 1. For expository purposes we start with the general case. Below we
make frequent use of the following second order approximation of percent deviations
in terms of log deviations:
                                   Yt − Y       1
                                          = yt + yt2 + o(kak3 )
                                      Y         2
where o(kakn ) represents terms that are of order higher than nth , in the bound kak
on the amplitude of the relevant shocks.
   The approximation of U (Ct ) = log Ct about the ßexible price equilibrium yields:


                                             ct + o(kak3 )
                               U(Ct ) = ct + e
                                      = ct + (1 − α) yet + o(kak3 )

where o(kak3 ) refers to terms of third or higher order. Notice that in deriving the
second equality we have made use of (28) and the fact that yt∗ is taken as exogenous
by the monetary authority.
   Similarly, and letting V t ≡ V (N t ), we have
                                         ·                 ¸
                                   0           1
                 V (Nt ) = V t + V t N t n              et + o(kak3 )
                                           et + (1 + ϕ) n2
                                               2


   The next step consists in rewriting
                               ³ ´ R the
                                       ³ previous´−ε expression in terms of the output
                                Yt    1 PH,t (i)
gap. Using the fact that Nt = At 0 PH,t             di , we have

                                             et = yet + ut
                                             n
                  R 1 ³ PH,t (i) ´−ε
where ut ≡ log 0 PH,t          di. The following lemma shows that ut is proportional
to the cross-sectional distribution of relative prices (and, hence, of second order).


   Lemma 1: ut =         ε
                         2
                             vari {pH,t (i)} + o(kak3 ).
   Proof: Let pbH,t (i) ≡ pH,t (i) − pH,t . Notice that,

         µ              ¶1−ε
             PH,t (i)
                                = exp [(1 − ε) pbH,t (i)]
              PH,t
                                                             (1 − ε)2
                                = 1 + (1 − ε) pbH,t (i) +             pbH,t (i)2 + o(kak3 )
                                                                2
                                                   31
                                                              R 1 ³ P (i) ´1−ε
    Furthermore, from the deÞnition of PH,t , we have 1 = 0 PH,t       H,t
                                                                               di. Hence, it
follows that
                                          (ε − 1)
                          Ei {b
                              pH,t (i)} =             pH,t (i)2 }
                                                  Ei {b
                                             2
                                                   ³         ´−ε
                                                      P (i)
    In addition, a second order approximation to PH,t   H,t
                                                                  , yields:
                  µ              ¶−ε
                      PH,t (i)                                 ε2
                                         = 1 − ε pbH,t (i) +      pbH,t (i)2 + o(kak3 )
                       PH,t                                    2

   Combining the two previous results, it follows that

                        Z    1   µ              ¶−ε
                                     PH,t (i)                ε
                                                      di = 1 +     pH,t (i)2 }
                                                               Ei {b
                         0            PH,t                   2
                                                             ε
                                                        = 1 + vari {pH,t (i)}
                                                             2
from which follows that ut =             ε
                                         2
                                             vari {pH,t (i)} + o(kak3 ).

   We can thus rewrite the second order approximation to the disutility of labor as:
                                     ·                      ¸
                               0               1
             V (Nt ) = V t + V t N t yet + ut + (1 + ϕ) yet + o(kak3 )
                                                          2
                                               2
                                                                                                   0
   Under the optimal subsidy scheme assumed, the optimality condition V t N t =
(1 − α) holds for all t, allowing us to rewrite the period utility as:
                                        ·                  ¸
                                              1
         U (Ct ) − V (Nt ) = −(1 − α) ut + (1 + ϕ) yet + t.i.p. + o(kak3 )
                                                         2
                                              2

where t.i.p. denotes terms independent of policy.
               P∞ t                      1
                                           P∞ t 2                                    (1−θ)(1−βθ)
  Lemma 2:       t=0 β vari {pH,t (i)} = λ  t=0 β π H,t , where λ ≡                       θ
  Proof: Woodford (2001, NBER WP8071), pp 22-23.

    Collecting all the previous results, we can write the second order approximation
to the small open economy’s consumer’s utility function as follows:

               (1 − α) X t h ε 2                   i
                        ∞
           W≡−             β   π H,t + (1 + ϕ) yet2 + t.i.p. + o(kak3 )
                  2    t=0
                             λ

   which is equation (52) in the text.




                                                        32
   References
    Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop (2000): “Does Exchange Rate Stabil-
ity Increase Trade and Welfare?”, American Economic Review, 90:5, 1093-1109
    Backus, David and G. Smith: “Consumption and Real exchange Rates in Dynamic
Exchange Economies with Nontraded Goods”, Journal of International Economics
35:297-316.
    Backus, David, P.K Kehoe and F. E. Kydland (1995): ”International Business
Cycles: Theory and Evidence”, in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Edited by
Thomas F. Cooley, Princeton University Press.
    Ball, Laurence (1999): “Policy Rules for Open Economies,” in J.B. Taylor ed.,
Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press.
    Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe (2001) “The Perils
of Taylor Rules”, Journal of Economic Theory 96, January/February 2001, 40-69.
    Benigno, Gianluca and Pierpaolo Benigno (2001): “Price Stability in Open Economies”,
mimeo.
    Benigno, Pierpaolo (1999): “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Currency Area”,
mimeo.
    Betts, Caroline and Michael B. Devereux (1996): “The Exchange Rate in a Model
of Pricing-to-Market,” European Economic Review 40, 1996.
    Betts, Caroline and Michael B. Devereux (2000): “Exchange Rate Dynamics in a
Model of Pricing-to-Market”, Journal of International Economics 50,1,215-244.
    Bullard, James and K. Mitra (2001): “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
    Calvo, Guillermo, 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
    Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan (1998): “Monetary Shocks
and Real Exchange Rates in Sticky Price Models of International Business Cycles,”
mimeo.
    Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1998): “Monetary Policy Rules
in Practice: Some International Evidence” European Economic Review, vol. 42, 1033-
1067.
    Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999): “The Science of Monetary
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37,
1661-1707.
    Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules
and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 105, issue 1, 147-180.
    Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2001): “Optimal Monetary Pol-
icy in Open vs. Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach,” American Economic
Review, vol. 91, no. 2, 248-252.
    Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti (2001a): “Welfare and Macroeconomic In-
terdependence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. CXVI,issue 2, 421-446.
    Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti (2001b): ”International Dimensions of Op-
timal Monetary Policy”, mimeo.


                                        33
    Devereux, Michael B. and Charles Engel (1998): “Fixed vs. Floating Exchange
Rates: How Price Setting Aﬀects the Optimal Choice of Exchange Rate Regime,”
mimeo.
    Devereux, Michael B. and Charles Engel (2001): ”Exchange Rate Pass-Through,
Exchange Rate Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect”, mimeo.
    Erceg Christopher J., D.W. Henderson and A.T. Levine (2000): “Optimal Mon-
etary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts”, Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics 46 281-313.
    Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999): “Inßation Dynamics: A Structural Econo-
metric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44, no. 2, 195-222.
    Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli (2000): “Monetary Policy Coordination and
Exchange Rate Volatility in a Two Country Model,” work in progress.
    Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King (2001): “The Case for Price Stability,”
in Garcia-Herrero et al. (eds.) Why Price Stability? European Central Bank.
    Hau, Harald (2000): “Real Exchange Rate Volatility and Economic Openness:
Theory and Evidence”, unpublished manuscript.
    Judd, John P., and Glenn Rudebusch (1998): “Taylor’s Rule and the Fed: A Tale
of Three Chairmen,” mimeo.
    King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1996): “Inßation Targeting in a St.
Louis Model of the 21st Century,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol.
78, no. 3. (NBER WP #5507).
    Kollmann, Robert (2001): “The Exchange Rate in a Dynamic Optimizing Current
Account Model with Nominal Rigidities: A Quantitative Investigation,” Journal of
International Economics vol.55, 243-262.
    Lane, Philip R. (1999): “The New Open Economy Macroeconomics: A Survey,”
Journal of International Economics, vol. 54, 235-266.
    McCallum Bennet and Edward Nelson (2000) “Monetary Policy for an Open Econ-
omy: An Alternative Framework with Optimizing Agents and Sticky Prices”, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 16, 74-91.
    Monacelli, Tommaso (1999): “Into the Mussa Puzzle: Monetary Policy Regimes
and the Real Exchange Rate in a Small Open Economy” mimeo.
    Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1995): “Exchange Rate Dynamics Re-
dux,” Journal of Political Economy 103, no. 3, 624-660.
    Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1999): “New Directions for Stochastic
Open Economy Models,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 50, no. 1, 117-
153.
    Orphanides, Athanasios (1999): “The Quest for Prosperity Without Inßation”
mimeo.
    Pappa, Evi (2001): “Should the Fed and the ECB Cooperate ? Optimal Monetary
Policy in a Two-Country World,” mimeo.
    Parrado, Eric and Andrés Velasco (2002): “Optimal Interest Rate Policy in a
Small Open Economy,” NBER WP# 8721.
    Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1999): “Interest Rate Rules in an Esti-
mated Sticky Price Model,” in J.B. Taylor ed., Monetary Policy Rules, University of
Chicago Press.


                                        34
    Sbordone, Argia (1998): “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: Testing Models of Pricing
Behavior,” mimeo.
    Schmitt-Grohé Stephanie and Martín Uribe (1999): “Stabilization Policy and the
Costs of Dollarization”, mimeo.
    Schmitt-Grohé Stephanie and Martín Uribe (2001): “Optimal Fiscal and Mone-
tary Policy Under Sticky Prices”, mimeo.
    Svensson, Lars E.O. (2000): “Open-Economy Inßation Targeting,” Journal of
International Economics, vol. 50, no. 1.
    Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-
Rochester Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
    Taylor, John B. editor (1999): Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago
Press.
    Vestin, D. (1999): “Price level Targeting versus Inßation Targeting in a Forward
Looking Model,” unpublished manuscript, IIES, Stockholm University.
    Woodford, Michael (2000), Interest and Prices, chapter 2, mimeo.
    Yun, Tack (1996), “Monetary Policy, Nominal Price Rigidity, and Business Cy-
cles”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 37:345-70.




                                        35
                                          Table 1
     Macroeconomic Volatility under Alternative Monetary Policy Regimes
                                (standard deviation in %)

                                DIT                               CIT                          PEG
           shocks    domestic   foreign     both       domestic   foreign   both    domestic   foreign   both

Output Gap           0.000      0.000      0.000        0.425     0.425     0.286   0.635      0.635     0.428
Domestic Inflation   0.000      0.000      0.000        0.210     0.210     0.142   0.397      0.397     0.267
Output               2.007      0.000      2.007        1.791     0.425     1.971   1.647      0.635     1.955
CPI Inflation        0.359      0.359      0.242        0.000     0.000     0.000   0.238      0.238     0.160
Nominal I. Rate      0.201      0.000      0.201        0.124     0.215     0.212   0.000      0.201     0.201
Real Ex. Rate        1.204      1.204      0.812        1.074     1.074     0.724   0.988      0.988     0.666
Nominal Ex. Rate     2.007      2.007      1.353        1.074     1.074     0.724   0.000      0.000     0.000
                                                    Table 2

                                Contribution to Welfare Loss
      l =1.2, w =3                 benchmark

                                            DIT
                                             CIT                                 PEG
                 shocks        domestic      foreign        both      domestic   foreign    both

Var(Domestic Inflation)         -0.009       -0.009       -0.004      -0.033     -0.033    -0.015
   Var(Output Gap)              -0.002       -0.002       -0.001      -0.005     -0.005    -0.002

         Total                  -0.011       -0.011       -0.005      -0.038     -0.038    -0.017


      l =1.1, w =3                low steady-state markup

                                            DIT
                                             CIT                                 PEG
                 shocks        domestic      foreign        both      domestic   foreign    both

Var(Domestic Inflation)         -0.017       -0.017       -0.008      -0.061     -0.061    -0.027
   Var(Output Gap)              -0.002       -0.002       -0.001      -0.005     -0.005    -0.002
         Total                  -0.019       -0.019       -0.009      -0.065     -0.065    -0.030


     l =1.2, w =10                low elasticity of labor supply

                                            DIT
                                             CIT                                 PEG
                 shocks        domestic      foreign        both      domestic   foreign    both

Var(Domestic Inflation)         -0.015       -0.015       -0.007      -0.061     -0.061    -0.028
   Var(Output Gap)              -0.002       -0.002       -0.001      -0.005     -0.005    -0.002
         Total                  -0.017       -0.017       -0.008      -0.067     -0.067    -0.030


     l =1.1, w =10                low markup and elasticity of labor supply

                                            DIT
                                             CIT                                 PEG
                 shocks        domestic      foreign        both      domestic   foreign    both

Var(Domestic Inflation)         -0.027       -0.027       -0.012      -0.112     -0.112    -0.051
   Var(Output Gap)              -0.002       -0.002       -0.001      -0.005     -0.005    -0.002
         Total                  -0.029       -0.029       -0.013      -0.118     -0.118    -0.053

     Note: entries are percentage units of steady-state consumption
