                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION:
                      ALLOCATIVE EFFICIENCY OR ANIMAL SPIRITS?


                                            Anusha Chari
                                           Peter Blair Henry


                                          Working Paper 8908
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8908


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2002




Henry gratefully acknowledges the financial support of an NSF CAREER award and the Stanford Institute
of Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). We thank Steve Buser, Paul Romer, Antoinette Schoar and René
Stulz for helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants at the AEA, Michigan and Stanford. All
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative Efficiency or Animal Spirits?
Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 8908
April 2002
JEL No. E2, F3, F4, G31



                                              ABSTRACT


        In the year that capital-poor countries open their stock markets to foreign investors, the growth
rate of their typical firm’s capital stock exceeds its pre-liberalization mean by 4.1 percentage points. In
each of the next three years the average growth rate of the capital stock for the 369 firms in the sample
exceeds its pre-liberalization mean by 6.1 percentage points. However, there is no evidence that
differences in the liberalization-induced changes in the cost of capital or investment opportunities drive
the cross-sectional variation in the post-liberalization investment increases.




Anusha Chari                                             Peter Blair Henry
University of Michigan Business School                   Stanford University
701 Tappan Street                                        Graduate School of Business
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234                                 Stanford, CA 94305-5015
achari@umich.edu                                         and NBER
                                                         pbhenry@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

        There are two broad views of capital account liberalization. The first view —

“Allocative Efficiency” — argues that removing restrictions on international capital

movements permits financial resources to flow from capital-abundant countries, where

expected returns are low, to capital-scarce countries, where expected returns are high.

The flow of resources into the capital-scarce countries reduces their cost of capital,

increases investment, and raises output (Fischer, 1998; Stulz, 1999). The second view —

“Animal Spirits” — regards Allocative Efficiency as fanciful. Animal Spirits proponents

argue that liberalization does not result in a more efficient allocation of capital, because

international capital flows have little or no connection to real economic activity.

Specifically, capital account liberalization has no effect on investment, output, or any

other real variable with nontrivial welfare implications (Bhagwhati, 1998; Rodrik, 1998;

Stiglitz 2000a, b, c).

        This paper confronts the two opposing views of capital account liberalization with

facts. In the late 1980s and early 1990s a number of capital-poor countries permitted

foreigners to purchase shares in their domestic stock markets. Opening the stock market

to foreign investors constitutes a discrete change in the degree of capital account

openness. This allows us to examine empirically whether the behavior of prices and

quantities of capital during liberalization episodes are more consistent with Allocative

Efficiency or Animal Spirits.

        Allocative Efficiency makes two testable predictions about the time series

behavior of prices and quantities of capital during stock market liberalization episodes.

First, the flow of resources into a liberalizing country reduces its cost of capital and




                                                                                          1
drives up Tobin’s q—the asset market value of installed capital goods relative to their

replacement cost. The second implication follows from the first. Profit-maximizing

firms will respond to the increase in q by installing more capital. Once the asset market

value of capital goods and their replacement cost are equalized once again, investment

will slow to a rate that is sufficient to maintain this equality. In other words, if the

Allocative Efficiency view is correct, we should observe a temporary increase in Tobin’s

q and investment during liberalization episodes. On the other hand, if Animal Spirits

prevail, then there is no reason to expect an empirical link from liberalization to prices

and quantities of capital.

       Allocative Efficiency also makes predictions about the cross-sectional behavior of

investment following liberalization. Opening the stock market to foreign investors alters

the set of systematic risks for the representative investor, because liberalization switches

the relevant benchmark for pricing individual stocks from the local market index to a

world stock market index. Consequently, stock prices should move to restore equality of

risk-adjusted returns when liberalizations occur. Prices should rise in sectors where

systematic risk falls and fall in sectors where systematic risk rises. Under Allocative

Efficiency, the reallocation of physical capital following liberalization is the dual of the

stock price revaluation process. We should observe relatively more investment by firms

whose systematic risk falls and relatively less by those whose systematic risk rises.

       Time series and cross-sectional estimations on data from 1980 to 1994 for 369

firms in India, Jordan, Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand provide a direct test of whether

Allocative Efficiency or Animal Spirits better describes the behavior of Tobin’s q and

investment during liberalization episodes. The time series results are more consistent




                                                                                          2
with Allocative Efficiency than with Animal Spirits; the typical firm experiences a

significant increase in both Tobin’s q and investment around liberalization. The cross-

sectional results are more consistent with Animal Spirits than with Allocative Efficiency;

there is no evidence that diversification motives drive the reallocation of physical

investment following liberalization. Taken together, the results suggest that neither view

provides a completely accurate description. Liberalizing capital markets may ensure that

capital moves from low- to high-return countries, but liberalization alone may not

guarantee the efficient reallocation of capital across firms within a given country.

       Evidence from previous work that uses aggregate time series data supports

Allocative Efficiency. Stock market liberalizations are associated with higher stock

prices and increased investment in the entire economy (Bekaert and Harvey, 2000; Henry

2000a, b). In contrast, evidence from aggregate cross-sectional data supports Animal

Spirits—there is no significant relationship between countries’ investment-to-GDP ratios

and the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) measure of their capital account openness

(Rodrik, 1998).

       Both sets of previous evidence are difficult to interpret. Interpreting the time

series evidence is difficult, because it is not clear that an economy-wide investment boom

can be attributed to a policy change that affects directly only those firms that are traded

on the stock market. In contrast, this paper uses investment data for only those firms that

are listed on the stock market. Since stock market liberalization directly affects the

shadow value of capital for listed firms, these data provide a tighter link to the theory

than aggregate investment data.




                                                                                         3
         The cross-sectional evidence is also difficult to interpret, because it does not

provide a direct test of Allocative Efficiency. Examining the correlation between average

investment and openness tells us whether investment rates are permanently higher in

countries with capital accounts that are more open. Allocative Efficiency, however,

predicts that only a temporary increase in investment will occur when a capital-poor

country removes restrictions on capital inflows. This paper examines whether discrete

capital account liberalization episodes lead to a temporary increase in the growth rate of

the capital stock, as predicted by the theory.

         One drawback of the experiment is the difficulty of isolating the effects of stock

market liberalization from those of contemporaneous reforms.         Liberalizations often

coincide with other policy changes that might affect Tobin’s q and investment. Another

disadvantage is that the experiment is narrow. Stock market liberalizations constitute

only one specific type of capital account liberalization. Ultimately, one would like a

more complete understanding of whether the evidence surrounding the broader capital

account liberalization process is more or less consistent with the theory. Nevertheless,

focusing on a narrow experiment allows for a relatively clean test of the two opposing

views.



2. Data and Descriptive Findings

         The primary source of data is the International Finance Corporation’s Corporate

Finance Database.      Singh et al. (1992) and Booth et al. (2001) provide complete

descriptions of the International Finance Corporation (IFC, 1999) database. The data

discussion here provides only those details relevant to this paper. Between 1980 and




                                                                                         4
1994, the IFC collected annual financial statements for a maximum of the 100 largest

publicly traded, non-financial firms in eleven developing countries: Argentina, Brazil,

India, Jordan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Thailand, Turkey, and Zimbabwe. The

IFC’s collection criteria were that quality data were available for a reasonably large

sample of firms and that developing countries from each continent were represented. For

several countries, the early years of the sample did not contain data of sufficiently high

quality. For these countries, the sample begins after 1980. For some of the smaller

countries, fewer than 100 firms are traded or meet the data availability criteria, which

resulted in smaller samples.

       In order for a country to be included in our sample, the IFC must provide balance

sheet and income statement data before and after the year in which a country liberalized

its stock market. This before-and-after criterion, in combination with the short length of

the time series in some cases, reduces the number of feasible countries to the following

set of five: India, Jordan, Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand. Despite its modest size —

there are a total of 369 firms — the sample available from the IFC database is better

suited to addressing the question of whether liberalization affects firms’ investment

decisions than competing databases such as Worldscope and Global Vantage. This is

because the median stock market liberalization date in the sample is 1988. Worldscope

and Global Vantage contain virtually no company data before 1988.

       Table 1 summarizes the essential characteristics of the countries and firms in the

sample. Column 1 provides the name of the country; Column 2 lists the year in which the

stock market was liberalized; Column 3 gives the number of firms in each country.

Column 4 lists the ratio of stock market capitalization of the firms in the IFC sample to




                                                                                        5
the total stock market capitalization of all publicly traded firms in the country. The stock

market capitalization of the 369 firms in our sample constitutes 40 percent of total stock

market capitalization. This figure indicates that the firms in the IFC Database comprise a

significant fraction of all publicly traded companies in these countries.



2A. Construction of Firm-level Capital Stocks and Tobin’s q

           The IFC Corporate Finance Database reports the nominal value of property, plant,

and equipment on an annual basis.                These annual values are divided by the local

consumer price index to create an index of each firm’s real capital stock. For each firm

in the sample, Tobin’s q is the ratio of the market value of that firm’s securities to the

replacement cost of its tangible assets. The replacement cost of tangible assets is the

book value of net fixed assets (property, plant and equipment). The market value of each

firm’s securities is the sum of the market value of equity — its stock market

capitalization — and the book value of its current and long-term liabilities. We use book

values of debt because the IFC database does not contain information on market values.

           In the absence of directly observable market values of debt, the standard approach

converts book values of debt to market values in two steps (Blanchard, Rhee, and

Summers 1993). First, the book value of short-term debt is assumed to be the same as its

market value. The second step converts the book value of long-term debt to market value

by capitalizing net interest payments using the yield on Moody’s corporate A bond.1

This conversion method cannot be applied directly to this study, because data on

corporate bond rates are not available for the relevant time period. Estimating the market



1
    Equation (1) on page 357 of Von Furstenberg (1977) is used for conversion assuming a ten-year maturity.


                                                                                                          6
value of debt would require further assumptions about unobservable corporate bond rates.

Rather than adopting a cure worse than the ailment, we follow the alternative convention

of using book values of debt as proxies for market values.

       Another potential concern is that the construction of Tobin’s q measures average,

not marginal q. While it is marginal q, the ratio of the increment of market valuation to

the cost of the associated investment, that matters, the same factors which raise or lower

marginal q will raise or lower average q. Thus one would also expect investment to vary

with the level of average q.



2B. Do Tobin’s q and Investment Respond to Liberalization?

       Allocative Efficiency predicts that liberalization will raise the market value of

capital. Removing restrictions on capital inflows permits financial resources to move

from capital-abundant countries, where expected returns are low, to capital-scarce

countries, where expected returns are high. The flow of resources into the liberalizing

country reduces the average cost of capital and drives up Tobin’s q.

       If this view has any empirical bite, we should observe an increase in the typical

firm’s level of Tobin’s q relative to its pre-liberalization mean when the stock market is

liberalized. Table 2 verifies this prediction. The average level of Tobin’s q across all

369 firms before liberalization is 3.84.      The average level of Tobin’s q in the

liberalization year is 5.61, approximately 40 percent higher than the pre-liberalization

mean. Turning to individual countries, the average level of Tobin’s q in the year of

liberalization exceeds the pre-liberalization mean in every country except Malaysia.




                                                                                        7
       The numbers in Table 2 suggest that q increases with liberalization, but they need

to be interpreted with caution. The level of Tobin’s q may not be directly comparable

across countries, because of differences in accounting practices. For example, firms in

India, Malaysia, and Jordan value assets using the practice of fair-market valuation in

accordance with North American Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). In

contrast, Korea and Thailand rely on strict historic-cost accounting as in Germany and

Japan (Booth et al., 2001).

       In light of these differences, growth rates of q provide more compatible cross-

country measures. Figure 1 shows that the average deviation of the growth rate of

Tobin’s q from its pre-liberalization mean is 18 percentage points on impact (year [0]),

11 percentage points in the first year after liberalization (year [+1]), and 8 percentage

points in the second year after liberalization (year [+2]). The cumulative deviation over

years [0, +2] is 37 percentage points.

       Under Allocative Efficiency, profit-maximizing firms should respond to the

increase in Tobin’s q by installing more capital. Once the asset market value of capital

goods and their replacement cost are equalized again, investment should slow to a rate

that is sufficient to maintain this equality. To examine this implication of the theory,

Figure 2 plots the average deviation of the growth rate of the real capital stock from its

pre-liberalization mean for all 369 firms.     Figure 2 suggests a lagged response of

investment to stock market liberalization. On impact, the growth rate of the capital stock

increases sharply and remains above its pre-liberalization mean for each of the three

subsequent years. Taken together, Figures 1 and 2 suggest that, on average, liberalization




                                                                                        8
drives up the relative price of capital, and firms respond to this relative price increase by

installing more capital.



3. Time Series Evidence: Are the Increases in Tobin’s q and Investment Robust?

         While roughly consistent with Allocative Efficiency, Figures 1 and 2 must be

interpreted with caution. They simply describe the behavior of the raw data on Tobin’s q

and investment without controlling for firm, country, and world-specific factors that may

drive q and investment independently of any stock market liberalization policies. This

section of the paper wrestles empirically with these issues.



3A. Tobin’s q

         We begin by estimating a benchmark regression for the pooled group of 369

firms.    The regression examines whether, in each of the three years immediately

following stock market liberalization, the growth rate of Tobin’s q differs significantly

from its pre-liberalization growth rate:

∆ (ln q)ijt = α + Lib[0] j + Lib[+1] j + Lib[+2] j + Lib[+3] j + FIRM i + ε ijt          (1)

The left-hand-side variable is the growth rate of Tobin’s q for firm i in country j in year

t . Lib[0] j is a variable that equals one in the year that country j liberalizes its stock

market. Lib[+1] j , Lib[+2] j , and Lib[+3] j take on the value 1 in the first, second and

third years after liberalization, respectively. FIRM is a set of firm-specific dummy

variables, which means that the intercept term, α , measures the average change in the

growth rate of Tobin’s q after removing firm-specific fixed effects.




                                                                                           9
        The error term in Equation (1) requires further discussion. All firms in a given

country share the same liberalization date in addition to other country-specific factors.

Therefore, the standard assumption that the error term for the growth rate of Tobin’s q is

random and uncorrelated across firms may no longer obtain. Three steps are taken to

address this issue. First, the variance-covariance matrix used to calculate the standard

errors was adjusted to account for clustering. Second, the estimation procedure also

corrects for potential heteroscedasticity across firms. Third, estimates of Equation (1)

that include country-specific fixed effects are also presented.

        Table 3, Panel A presents the results. The first row presents the benchmark

specification, which controls for firm-fixed effects. Moving across columns shows the

estimate for each year relative to liberalization. For example, the entry under column [0]

in the row labeled “Firm-fixed Effects” shows that in the year the stock market is

liberalized, the growth rate of Tobin’s q exceeds its pre-liberalization mean by 18.2

percentage points.     The adjacent column, [+1], shows that in the year immediately

following liberalization, the growth rate of q exceeds its pre-liberalization mean by 13.2

percentage points. In year [+2], this number is 8.6 percentage points. All three estimates

are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

        In year [+3] the growth rate of q falls significantly below its pre-liberalization

mean. The negative and significant growth rate of q following an initial rise is consistent

with the theory. Liberalization drives up the relative price of capital, and firms respond

by increasing their capital stock with a lag. Once investment starts rising, q begins

falling back toward pre-liberalization levels.          Shortness of the time series prevents

estimation of the response of q to liberalization beyond year [+3].




                                                                                          10
       Row 2 of Panel A presents estimates that control for country-specific

characteristics other than liberalization that might be driving the results. The estimates

are almost identical to those that use firm-fixed effects. The growth rate of q exceeds the

pre-liberalization mean by 18.3 percentage points in year [0], 13.3 percentage points in

year [+1], and 8.7 percentage points in year [+2]. As in the firm-specific estimates, the

growth rate of q falls significantly below its pre-liberalization mean in year [+3].

       If liberalizations coincide with high points in the world business cycle, then

Tobin’s q might increase independently of any change in capital account policy. There

are two possible approaches to this problem: indirect and direct. The indirect approach

would use year-specific dummy variables to control for movements in the world business

cycle. The potential for multicollinearity of the year dummies with the liberalization

variable makes this indirect approach unadvisable. Therefore, we attempt to control

directly for movements in the world business cycle by including the contemporaneous

growth rate of OECD industrial production, the three-month real US Treasury bill rate,

and the 10-year real US government bond rate as right-hand-side variables.

       Row 3 presents these estimates. Accounting for fluctuations in the world business

cycle reduces slightly the point estimates. The growth rate of Tobin’s q is now 15.4

percentage points above the pre-liberalization mean in year [0] as compared to 18.2 in

Row 1 and 9.7 percentage points above the pre-liberalization mean in year [+1] as

compared to 13.2 in Row 1. The point estimate in year [+2] is no longer statistically

significant. The negative point estimate in year [+3] is stronger than without business

cycle controls. Row 4 re-estimates the country-fixed effects model, but this time includes

controls for fluctuations in the world business cycle. These results are almost identical to




                                                                                         11
those in Row 3. Estimates using various leads and lags of all three business cycle

controls were also tried but did not yield significantly different results. Regardless of the

specification, the point estimates for the growth rate of q in years [0] and [+1] are

positive and statistically significant.



3B. Investment

        The following panel regression evaluates the response of the growth rate of the

average firm’s capital stock to liberalization:

∆ (ln K )ijt = α + Lib[0] + Lib[+1] + Lib[+2] + Lib[+3] + FIRM i + ε ijt                 (2)

This specification is identical to Equation (1) except that instead of Tobin’s q, the left-

hand-side variable is now the growth rate of the capital stock.

        Table 3, Panel B presents the results. There is a strong relationship between

liberalization and the growth rate of the capital stock. Row 1, which presents the firm-

fixed effects estimates, indicates a strong lagged response of the capital stock to

liberalization. The growth rate of the capital stock is 5.5 percentage points above the pre-

liberalization mean in year [+1], 6.9 percentage points above the mean in year [+2], and

3.9 percentage points above the mean in year [+3]. The estimates from the country-fixed

effects specification in Row 2 are almost identical to the firm-fixed effects specification

in Row 1. The estimates in Rows 3 and 4 contain proxies for the world business cycle.

The only significant change relative to the estimates in Rows 1 and 2 is that the year [0]

estimates are now statistically significant.

        It is useful to think about the economic significance of the estimated effect of

liberalization on investment. The average growth rate of the capital stock across all 369



                                                                                          12
firms in the pre-liberalization period is 10 percent per year. Now make the following

assumptions: the production function for all firms is Cobb-Douglas, there is no

technological progress, the size of the labor force is constant, and capital’s share in output

is one-third. With this set of assumptions the pre-liberalization growth rate of output for

the average firm equals one-third times 10 percent, or 3.3 percent per year.

       The estimates in Row 4 of Table 3 show that the growth rate of the capital stock

exceeds the pre-liberalization mean by 4.7 percentage points in year [0], 4.7 percentage

points in year [+1], 8.2 percentage points in year [+2], and 6.9 percentage points in year

[+3]. To get a rough sense of how much faster the average firm will grow as a result of

liberalization multiply each of these coefficient estimates by a third, and add the resulting

number to 3.3 percent. Doing so suggests that instead of growing at 3.3 percent per year,

the average firm will grow by 4.9 percent in year [0], 4.9 percent in year [+1], 6 percent

in year [+2], and 5.6 percent in year [+3]. Rough as they may be, these are large numbers

with non-trivial welfare implications when one considers that the firms in this sample

constitute roughly 40 percent of the total market capitalization of publicly traded firms in

these countries.



4. Cross-Sectional Evidence: Does Risk Sharing Drive the Reallocation of Capital?

       Allocative Efficiency also makes predictions about the cross-sectional behavior of

investment following stock market liberalizations.         Liberalization alters the set of

systematic risks for the representative investor, because the relevant benchmark for

pricing individual stocks switches from the local stock market index to a world index.

Stock prices should rise in sectors where systematic risk — and therefore the cost of




                                                                                           13
capital — falls. The stock price data are consistent with this prediction (Chari and Henry

2001). But optimal smoothing of production risk in an open-capital-market world also

requires the reallocation of physical capital in accordance with changes in systematic

risk. All else equal, we should observe relatively more investment by firms whose

systematic risk falls and relatively less investment by those whose systematic risk rises.

       To investigate these predictions, define the variable DIFCOV as follows: The

covariance of a firm’s stock return with the local market index minus the covariance of

that firm’s stock return with the world stock market index. Allocative Efficiency predicts

that the capital stocks of high DIFCOV firms will grow more quickly than those of the

low DIFCOV firms following liberalization. We move towards testing this prediction by

constructing two measures of DIFCOV for each firm in the sample. For firm i in country

j, DIFCOV1 is calculated as follows. First we calculate the historical covariance of firm

i's annual stock return with the annual aggregate market return for country j. Second, we

calculate the covariance of firm i's annual stock return with the annual return on the

Morgan Stanley World Capital Market Index (MSCI).              DIFCOV1 equals the first

covariance minus the second. We calculate DIFCOV2 by following the same steps, but

instead of using stock returns to calculate covariances, we use growth rates of real

earnings.

       We test the prediction that capital will be reallocated towards sectors that provide

the greatest diversification benefits following liberalization by regressing the cumulative

deviation of the percentage change in the capital stock from its pre-liberalization mean

over various horizons on DIFCOV1 and DIFCOV2, a proxy for the change in expected

earnings growth, and country-fixed effects.




                                                                                             14
ˆ
KDEVijt = α + β1DIFCOV 1i + β 2 DIFCOV 2i + ∆Earnings + Country j + ε ijt               (3)

           ˆ
The symbol KDEVijt denotes the following. For country j, it is the growth rate of firm i's


capital stock at time t minus the average growth rate of firm i’s capital stock in the pre-

liberalization period. The country-fixed effects remove the liberalization shock that is

common to all firms: a countrywide fall in the cost of capital.

       The data do not support the prediction that capital is reallocated across firms in

accordance with optimal risk sharing. The estimates in Rows 1 and 2 of Table 4 show

that the cumulative change in the capital stock over the period [0, +3] is not significantly

related to either measure of diversification. The coefficients on DIFCOV1, the measure

based on returns covariances, and DIFCOV2, the measure based on firm level earnings

covariances, are insignificant in all specifications. Moving across columns, equation (3)

was also estimated using cumulative capital stock growth over the following horizons: [0,

+2], [0, +1], [+1, +2]. The point estimates on DIFCOV1 and DIFCOV2 are statistically

insignificant in each of these specifications.



4A. Is the Reallocation of Capital Related to Changes in Tobin’s q

       A fall in the cost of capital stemming from risk sharing is just one of the two

channels through which liberalization may affect investment. Liberalization may also

change firms’ expected future profitability. Movements in Tobin’s q capture changes in

both the cost of capital and expected future profitability. Therefore, as an additional test

of Allocative Efficiency we examine whether post-liberalization changes in the capital

stock are related to the liberalization-induced changes in Tobin’s q. All else equal, firms




                                                                                         15
that experience the largest increases in q should also experience the largest increases in

investment.

       We examine this prediction as follows. For each firm, we regress the cumulative

deviation of the growth rate of the capital stock from its pre-liberalization mean, over

various horizons, on the on-impact deviation of the growth rate of q from its pre-

liberalization mean. Row 3 of Table 4 shows that the result is the same for all event

windows. The on-impact deviation of the growth rate of Tobin’s q has no explanatory

power for post liberalization changes in the capital stock. As a final test of the theory we

replace the on-impact change in q with the on-impact change in the stock price. The

results, presented in Row 4, are the same. The cross-sectional changes in the price of

capital have no explanatory power for the cross-sectional changes in quantities of capital.



5. Discussion

       It is important to understand whether physical capital is efficiently reallocated

when barriers to capital movements are removed.              Previous work shows that

liberalization induces stock price revaluations (Henry, 2000a). These revaluations have

two components. The first is common to all firms: a fall in the risk-free rate as the

country moves from financial autarky to financial integration with the rest of the world.

The second is specific to any given firm. Prices rise for firms whose systematic risk falls

and fall for firms whose systematic risk rises (Chari and Henry, 2001).

       These revaluations signal to managers that they can increase shareholder welfare

by investing in physical capital (Blanchard et al. 1993; Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny,

1990; Wurgler, 2000). On average, investment should increase for all firms in the




                                                                                         16
economy because the risk free rate has fallen. This is the time series implication of

liberalization for the reallocation of capital across countries. We should also observe

relatively more investment by firms whose systematic risk falls and relatively less

investment by those firms whose systematic risk rises.           This is the cross-sectional

implication of liberalization for the reallocation of capital within countries.

         The time series results are more consistent with Allocative Efficiency than with

Animal Spirits. The typical firm in our sample experiences a significant increase in both

Tobin’s q and investment around liberalization. The cross-sectional results are more

consistent with Animal Spirits than with Allocative Efficiency. The reallocation of

physical investment following liberalization bears no significant correlation to changes in

systematic risk or investment opportunities.

         Taken together, these results suggest that neither view provides a complete

description of the adjustment process. Liberalizing capital markets appears to facilitate

an efficient transfer of capital from low to high-return countries. But capital is fungible,

so there is no guarantee that the inflow of real resources will be allocated efficiently

across firms.     However, if the magnitude of the firm-specific component of the

revaluation is small, then its impact on resource allocation may also be small. Therefore,

an alternative interpretation of our results is that the firm-specific fall in the cost of

capital pales in comparison to the fall in the average cost of capital for all publicly traded

firms.

         Yet another alternative interpretation is that the absence of empirical support for

the cross-sectional predictions stems not from Animal Spirits, but a lack of empirical

power. Data availability restricts the empirical analysis to only three years following the




                                                                                           17
liberalizations, but the reallocation of capital across firms may take several years to

complete. This explanation appears at odds with the adjustments to the aggregate capital

stock that take place within the three-year window. Investment responds to liberalization,

but it does so in a somewhat indiscriminate manner.

        This paper provides a first step towards understanding whether physical

investment is efficiently reallocated when barriers to capital movements are removed.

Future work should try to determine the factors that drive the cross-sectional distribution

of new capital across firms within a given country. There are models of investment in the

corporate finance literature that generate predictions about the cross-sectional

determinants of firm-level investment, which could be applied to capital account

liberalization. For example, it could be the case that firms in industries that are more

dependent on external finance show the largest increase in investment (Rajan and

Zingales, 1998). Yet other explanations could be related to the political economy of

liberalization.   Firms that receive preferential government treatment may be better

positioned to raise stock market financing than other firms (Johnson and Mitton, 2001).

Preferential treatment may in turn determine which firms are made investible. The

available data cannot resolve these issues. Nevertheless, they do bring us a step closer to

understanding whether removing barriers to international capital flows promotes efficient

resource allocation. Future research may bring us yet nearer.




                                                                                        18
References

Bekaert and Harvey (2000). “ Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets”
       Journal of Finance, 55, 565-613.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (1998). “The Capital Myth” Foreign Affairs, May/June pp. 7-12.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Rhee, C., and Lawrence Summers (1993). “The Stock Market,
      Profit, and Investment” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp. 115-36

Booth, Laurence, Varouj Aivazian, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic
       (2001). Capital Structures in Developing Countries, The Journal of Finance, Vol.
       56, pp. 87-130

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry (2001). Stock Market Liberalizations and the
       Repricing of Systematic Risk, NBER Working Paper No. 8265

Fischer, Stanley (1998). Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF
       Princeton Essays in International Finance 207, 1-10.

Henry, Peter Blair. (2000a). “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and
       Emerging Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 2, pp. 529-64.

Henry, Peter Blair. (2000b). “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment
       Booms?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58, Nos. 1-2, pp. 301-334.

International Finance Corporation. (1999). The IFC Indexes: Methodology, Definitions,
        and Practices. Washington, D.C.

Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton (2001). Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence
      From Malaysia, MIT Working Paper.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1990). “The Stock Market and
      Investment: Is the Market a Sideshow?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
      pp. 157-215.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu. (2000). “The Information Content of
      Stock Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price
      Movements?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58, pp. 215-260

Obstfeld, Maurice (1994). “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification and Growth,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 5, pp. 1310-1329.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1998) Financial Development and Growth
       American Economic Review




                                                                                      19
Rodrik, Dani (1998). Who needs capital account convertibility? Princeton Essays in
       International Finance 207, 55-65.

Singh, Ajit, Javed Hamid, Bahram Salimi, and Y. Nakano (1992). Corporate Financial
       Structures in Developing Countries, Technical paper #1, International Finance
       Corporation, Washington, D.C.

Stiglitz, Joseph (2000a). “What I Learned at the World Economic Crisis” The New
        Republic, April 17, pp. 56-60.

Stiglitz, Joseph (2000b). “Sound the Alarm: Economist Rips Washington’s Market
        Bolsheviks” Barron’s, April 17, pp. 32-34.

Stiglitz, Joseph (2000c) “Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and
        Instability” World Development, June, Vol. 28, No.6, pp. 1075-1086

Stulz, René M. (1999). "International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets" in Martin
        Feldstein, ed. International Capital Flows. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Von Furstenberg, G. (1977). “Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation Matter in
      The Aggregate?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 347-407.

Wurgler, Jeffrey (2000). “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, Vol. 58, pp. 187-214




                                                                                         20
Table 1 Summary Statistics, 369 Firms, 5 Countries.

 Country                   Liberalization              Number of Firms                   Market Capitalization of
                           Year                        in Sample                         Firms as a Fraction of Total
                                                                                         Market Capitalization


 Full Sample               NA                          369                               0.40

 India                     1992                        99                                0.25

 Jordan                    1987                        35                                0.14

 Korea                     1987                        89                                0.38

 Malaysia                  1987                        85                                0.45

 Thailand                  1988                        61                                0.66

Notes: Column 2 contains the liberalization date for each country in our sample. Column 3 gives the number of firms in each
country. Column 4 presents the fraction of total market capitalization that the firms in our sample represent as a fraction of
Total Market Capitalization in the respective countries. The total market capitalization represents the value of all publicly
traded companies on the domestic exchange in the liberalization year.
Table 2: Tobin’s q Rises When Liberalizations Occur.

 Country                   Average q before         Average q in
                           Liberalization           Liberalization Year


 Full Sample               3.84                     5.61

 India                     4.33                     7.86

 Jordan                    1.14                     1.25

 Korea                     3.33                     5.25

 Malaysia                  8.53                     6.1

 Thailand                  3.88                     7.60

Notes: Column 2 represents the values of average q in the pre-liberalization
window. Column 3 gives the value of average q in the liberalization year.
Average q is the average, across all firms in each country, of the ratio of the
market value of assets relative to their replacement cost.




                                                                                  22
Table 3, Panel A: The Post-Liberalization Increases in Tobin’s Q are Robust.

                                  Year [0]                  Year [+1]                Year [+2]                     Year [+3]                 Sum Years [0, +3]


 Firm-Fixed                         0.182***                  0.132***                  0.086***                      -0.074***                0.097***
 Effects                           (0.024)                   (0.028)                   (0.028)                        (0.028)                 (0.018)

 Country-Fixed                      0.183***                  0.133***                  0.087***                      -0.074***                0.098***
 Effects                           (0.023)                   (0.027)                   (0.027)                        (0.027)                 (0.018)

 Firm and                           0.154***                  0.097***                  0.028                         -0.173***                0.131***
 Business Cycle                    (0.030)                   (0.034)                   (0.035)                        (0.045)                 (0.024)

 Country and                        0.151***                  0.099***                  0.029                         -0.174***                0.130***
 Business Cycle                    (0.029)                   (0.032)                   (0.034)                        (0.043)                 (0.024)

 Notes: Table 3, panel A presents results for alternative specifications of the benchmark regression specification, which is given by the following equation:
 ∆ (ln q )ijt = α + Lib[0] j + Lib[+1] j + Lib[+2] j + Lib[+3] j + Firmi + ε ijt . Columns 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 present the coefficient estimates for the liberalization year
 and years 1,2 and 3 post-liberalization, respectively. Column 5 presents the cumulative coefficient estimate for the four years taken together. The left-
 hand side variable is the first difference of the log of q. Row 1 presents the coefficient estimates for the regression specification that controls for firm
 fixed effects. Row 2 presents the coefficient estimates for the regression specification that controls for country-fixed effects. Row 3 incorporates controls
 for both firm-fixed effects and world business cycle effects: the contemporaneous growth rate of OECD industrial production, the three-month real US
 Treasury bill rate, and the 10-year real US government bond rate. All specifications control for clustering in the error structure. The symbols (***), (**)
 and (*) represent significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                             23
Table 3, Panel B: The Post-Liberalization Increases in Investment are Robust.

                               Year [0]               Year [+1]                Year [+2]                      Year [+3]                    Sum Years [0, +3]


 Firm-Fixed                     0.018                   0.055***                  0.069***                      0.039**                      0.041***
 Effects                       (0.017)                 (0.020)                   (0.020)                       (0.020)                      (0.013)

 Country-                       0.023                   0.062***                  0.077***                      0.047**                      0.048
 Fixed Effects                 (0.018)                 (0.021)                   (0.021)                       (0.021)                      (0.013)


 Firm and                       0.041*                  0.044*                    0.077***                      0.063**                      0.049***
 Bcycle                        (0.021)                 (0.024)                   (0.025)                       (0.032)                      (0.017)

 Country and                    0.047**                 0.047*                    0.082***                      0.069**                      0.054***
 Bcycle                        (0.022)                 (0.025)                   (0.026)                       (0.033)                      (0.018)

Notes: Table 3, panel B presents results for alternative specifications of the benchmark regression, which is given by the following equation:
∆ (ln K )ijt = α + Lib[0] + Lib[+1] + Lib[+2] + Lib[+3] + Firmi + ε ijt . Columns 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 present the coefficient estimates for the liberalization year and years
1,2 and 3 post-liberalization, respectively. Column 6 presents the cumulative coefficient estimate for the four years taken together. The left-hand-side variable is
the first difference of the log of the capital stock (investment). Row 1 presents the coefficient estimates for the regression specification that controls for firm-
fixed effects. Row 2 presents the coefficient estimates for the regression specification that controls for country-fixed effects. Row 3 incorporates controls for
both firm-fixed effects and world business cycle effects: the contemporaneous growth rate of OECD industrial production, the three-month real US Treasury bill
rate, and the 10-year real US government bond rate. All specifications control for clustering in the error structure. The symbols (***), (**) and (*) represent
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                       24
Table 4: Allocative Efficiency Variables Do Not Explain the Cross
Sectional Variation in the Post-Liberalization Increases in Investment.

                     KDEV [0, +3]           KDEV[0, +1]           KDEV [0, +2]          KDEV [+1, +2]


 DIFCOV1             0.001                  0.08                  0.17                  0.42
                     (0.99)                 (0.61)                (0.8)                 (0.56)

 DIFCOV2             -0.02                  0.001                 -0.007                -0.016
                     (0.03)                 (0.02)                (0.02)                (0.016)

 QDEV[0]             -0.09                  -0.07                 -0.06                 -0.002
                     (0.09)                 (0.05)                (0.07)                (0.050)

 PDEV[0]             0.02                   0.02                  0.04                  0.05
                     (0.09)                 (0.06)                (0.08)                (0.05)

Notes: The second column presents regression results for the deviation of cumulative investment from its
pre-liberalization mean in the (0,1) window post liberalization. Column 3 presents regression results for
the (0,1,2) window post liberalization. Column 4 presents regression results for the (0,1,2,3) window post-
liberalization. Column 5 presents regression results for the (1,2) window post liberalization. QDEV is the
deviation of the change in Tobin’s q on impact in the liberalization year relative to the average change in q
pre-liberalization. dlnp (lib) is the change stock price upon impact in the liberalization year. Difcov1 and
Difcov2 are the two measures of the difference in covariance based on returns and earnings. Standard
errors in parentheses. All specifications control for country fixed effects.




                                                                                                                25
                       Figure 1: Tobin's q and Stock Market Liberalization

 0.2




0.15




 0.1




0.05                                                                                 qhatdev




   0




-0.05




 -0.1
        -5   -4   -3           -2             -1              0     1        2   3
                                Year Relative to Liberalization
                  Figure 2: Capital Stock Growth and Stock Market Liberalization

0.06


0.05


0.04


0.03


0.02


0.01                                                                                       khatdev


   0


-0.01


-0.02


-0.03


-0.04
        -5   -4     -3          -2             -1              0     1             2   3
                                 Year Relative to Liberalization
