NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MINIMUM STANDARDS AND INSURANCE REGULATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE MEDIGAP MARKET

Amy Finkelstein

Working Paper 8917
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8917

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002

I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Nancy Beaulieu, David Cutler, Peter Diamond, Sue
Dynarski, Jon Gruber, Jerry Hausman, Melissa Schettini Kearney, Brigitte Madrian, Ben Olken, Jim Poterba,
Andrew Sweeting, Sarah Reber, Tom Rice, and participants in seminars at Brookings, BU, Chicago GSB,
Harvard, MIT, Yale, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Minimum Standards and Insurance Regulation: Evidence from the Medigap Market
Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 8917
May 2002
JEL No. I18, I11, H51

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the consequences of imposing binding minimum standards on the market
for voluntary private health insurance for the elderly. Theoretically, the effect of these standards on
insurance coverage and on welfare is ambiguous. I find robust evidence of a substantial decline in
insurance associated with the minimum standards. The central estimates suggest that the standards are
associated with an 8 percentage point (25 percent) decrease in the proportion of the population with
coverage in the affected market; I find no evidence of substitution to other, unregulated sources of
insurance coverage. Additional evidence suggests that the minimum standards are also associated with
reduced coverage of non-mandated benefits among the insured. The empirical results are most consistent
with a model of the effect of minimum standards on insurance markets with adverse selection, and
suggest that adverse selection exacerbates the potential for unintended negative consequences of
minimum standards. The final section of the paper considers the welfare implications of the changes in
risk bearing associated with the minimum standards. The results suggest that the imposition of these
standards was, even under relatively conservative assumptions, welfare reducing on net.

Amy Finkelstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
afinkels@nber.org

“We may tell the society to jump out of the market frying pan, but we have no basis for predicting
whether it will land in the fire or a luxurious bed”
– George Stigler, The Citizen and the State: Essays on Regulation, 1975.
1. Introduction
Government intervention in insurance markets is both pervasive and varied. It runs the gamut
from direct government provision of insurance through such programs as Social Security and
Medicare, to government regulation of private insurance markets such as those for health and
automobile insurance. An increasingly common form of private insurance market regulation is
the imposition of minimum standards. These have been introduced in a range of insurance
markets, including homeowner’s and automobile insurance. Minimum standards have also been
applied or proposed in several different health insurance markets, from state requirements that
mental health benefits be included in employer-provided health insurance packages to Federal
proposals for a “Patients’ Bill of Rights” that would impose minimum standards on HMOs.1
In a perfect information, perfect competition model of insurance markets, there is no
economic rationale for minimum standards, or indeed any government intervention. However, if
these assumptions do not hold, government intervention may be efficiency-enhancing. For
example, if consumers underestimate the probability of various risks, their voluntary insurance
purchases will be sub-optimally low. Similarly, adverse selection can destroy the market for
insurance completely or, short of that, result in sub-optimal amounts of insurance for certain risk
classes. Minimum standards potentially counteract such tendencies for insufficient insurance
coverage by setting a floor on the amount of insurance purchased by the insured.
As the Stigler quotation above suggests, however, the desire to solve potential private market
failures must be balanced against the potential for unintended, negative consequences of
minimum standards. A primary concern is that minimum standards will cause people to exit the

1

Minimum standards are also a common form of intervention in markets other than insurance markets.
These include, for example, minimum staff-child ratios in child care settings, and minimum safety
standards in housing construction.

1

market for the regulated insurance product. These people may either substitute toward
unregulated forms of insurance or drop coverage altogether. An additional concern is that
minimum standards may affect the equilibrium provision of non-mandated insurance benefits in
the regulated insurance market.
The effect of the minimum standards on both the proportion of the population with insurance
coverage and coverage of non-mandated benefit among the insured is theoretically ambiguous.
Knowledge of the sign and magnitude of the response to minimum standards is therefore critical
to evaluating the merits of this form of regulation. It can also shed light on the nature of the
equilibrium – and particularly on the existence of potential market failures – in the unregulated
market. Despite this, there is virtually no empirical evidence on the effect of minimum standards
in insurance markets.2
In this paper, therefore, I examine the consequences of imposing large, binding minimum
standards in the voluntary, private supplementary health insurance market for the elderly. Such
insurance is commonly known as “Medigap” or “Medicare supplement insurance”. These
insurance policies cover some portion of the considerable medical costs not covered by Medicare,
the public health insurance program for the elderly in the United States. In the late 1970s and
early 1980s, almost all states followed a federal “recommendation” to impose minimum standards
on the non-group Medigap market. The regulations specified certain gaps in Medicare coverage
that any non-group Medigap policy must cover. They did not require that individuals purchase
these policies, nor did they regulate their price. The coverage of other gaps was left to the market.
This paper has two main aims. First, I examine the empirical consequences of these minimum
standards for insurance coverage. I also consider the welfare implications of the changes in risk
bearing associated with these changes in insurance coverage. Second, I use the evidence of the
effects of the minimum standards on the insurance market to distinguish among different models

2

of the unregulated market equilibrium. Such an analysis provides a first step toward thinking
about the likely consequences of alternative possible policies to address market failures in
insurance markets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section two, I provide background on the
Medigap market and the specific nature of the minimum standards imposed. Section three
discusses a variety of theoretical mechanisms by which minimum standards may affect – in either
direction – the proportion of the population with private insurance coverage and the amount of
coverage for non-mandated benefits among those who retain insurance.
Section four presents the central empirical finding. I present robust evidence of a large
“quality-quantity” tradeoff. The imposition of minimum standards is associated with a long-run
decline in coverage in the regulated market (non-group Medigap policies) of 8 percentage points
(25 percent). I find no evidence of substitution to the other potential sources of supplementary
insurance coverage.
I then explore which models of the unregulated insurance market are consistent with the
estimated effects of the minimum standards. Although I cannot definitively test the alternative
theories, I draw on additional data to shed light on their relative merits. Section five presents
evidence that suggests that the minimum standards are associated with substantial declines in
non-mandated benefit coverage and in premiums among the insured in the regulated market. The
magnitude of these effects appears inconsistent with a model of perfect markets and full
information.
Section six explores other possible explanations for these estimated effects of the minimum
standards. I find the most support for a model of the effect of minimum standards on insurance
markets with adverse selection. This model suggests that adverse selection – which may provide
an economic rationale for government intervention –exacerbates the potential for unintended,
2

An exception is Gruber (1994) who finds no evidence of an effect of state-mandated benefits for
employer-provided health insurance on insurance coverage. He notes, however, that the mandates were not

3

negative effects of the minimum standards. These results therefore highlight the importance of
considering how alternative forms of intervention might themselves interact with the market
failure that they are designed to address.
The empirical results point to substantial declines in insurance coverage – on both the
extensive and the intensive margin – associated with the imposition of binding minimum
standards. Yet the mandated minimum benefits themselves provide considerable additional
insurance for most individuals with non-group coverage. In section seven, I present estimates of
the net changes in risk bearing associated with the minimum standards. I find that, even under
relatively conservative assumptions, the minimum standards appear to be, on net, welfare
reducing.
The last section concludes.
2. Minimum standards in the Medigap market.
2.1 The Medigap market
Virtually universal among the elderly in the United States, Medicare provides only partial
health insurance coverage. In 1977, just before the minimum standards regulation, Medicare paid
just under half of all health care expenses of the elderly. It is not surprising, therefore, that about
two-thirds of Medicare beneficiaries had private insurance to supplement Medicare (Cafferata
1984). This Medigap insurance was obtained, in roughly equal proportions, from group and nongroup sources.3 The average annual premium for a non-group policy in 1977 was $568 in 1999
dollars.4

binding, and that this may explain the absence of an effect.
3
Author’s calculation based on data from the National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) described in
section four. Throughout this paper, I refer to health insurance purchased through a current or former
employer or union as “group” insurance. I use the term “non-group” insurance to refer to non-employment
related health insurance. This is purchased either directly through a private company or through a nonemployment related association such as the AARP. Non-group policies are sold on an individual basis.
Group policies may include spousal dependents.
4
Author’s calculation based on data described in section five. Throughout this paper, dollar figures are
reported in 1999 dollars – adjusted using the CPI-U – unless otherwise noted.

4

The non-group market, to which the minimum standards applied, was highly concentrated. In
1984, Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans accounted for three-quarters of non-group Medigap
premiums. Three companies accounted for over 50 percent of the remaining non-group
premiums. (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1986).
Medigap covers some of the “gaps” in Medicare. Medicare consists of two different
programs. Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance Program) covers some non-physician inpatient
hospital care expenses, and some care in skilled nursing facilities or home health care. Medicare
Part B (Supplementary Medical Insurance Program) primarily pays physician fees for covered
services.
Gaps in Medicare coverage fall into three main categories. First, there are cost-sharing
provisions for the health services that Medicare covers. These include separate annual deductibles
and copayments for expenses covered by Part A and by Part B. The 20% physician (part B)
copayment is uncapped. The hospital (Part A) copayment increases with the length of the hospital
stay. 5 As a result, the cost sharing provisions leave the elderly with substantial exposure to
medical expenditure risk. Second, there are certain health services that Medicare covers only
partially and/or with severe restrictions, such as care in a skilled nursing facility or home health
care. Third, there are health services that Medicare does not cover at all, such as outpatient
prescription drugs and hospital stays beyond 150 days.
Two factors make the Medigap market a particularly attractive setting for studying the
consequences of minimum standards in insurance markets. First, before the states adopted
minimum standards, the non-group Medigap market was essentially unregulated (Van Ellet
(1979), McCall, Rice and Hall (1983)). Most insurance markets have been heavily regulated for a
long time, making it very difficult to isolate the consequences of one particular type of regulation.
Second, the market failures that provide potential economic rationales for minimum standards

5

may well be present in the Medigap market. Consumer misinformation, not only about medical
risks but also about insurance needs, may be a problem for many Medigap consumers who must
decide whether and how to supplement a public health insurance plan that they may not fully
understand. Indeed, this was a major motivation for the minimum standards (see e.g. Merritt and
Potemken 1982). Adverse selection – another potential rationale for minimum standards – is also
present in the Medigap market (Ettner 1997).
2.2 Minimum Standards: The Baucus Amendments
Starting in the late 1970s, a small number of states introduced minimum standards for nongroup Medigap policies. In 1978, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)
issued a set of model regulations for such minimum standards. The 1980 Federal Baucus
amendments provided “encouragement” to the states to adopt these model regulations.6 Shortly
thereafter, the remaining 42 states and the District of Columbia enacted minimum standards for
non-group Medigap policies. Table 1 reports the first full year that the regulations were in effect
in each state.7
The minimum standards applied only to non-group policies. They did not apply to policies
purchased from a current or former employer or union (“group policies”). Policies that were
converted from group policies to non-group policies, and renewals of existing non-group policies,
were also not covered by the minimum standards.8
The minimum standards limited exclusions for pre-existing conditions to 6 months and
specified a minimum set of benefits that policies must cover. Specifically, they required full
coverage of the Part A copayments for hospital days covered by Medicare, and coverage of 90
5

After the annual deductible, Medicare Part A fully covers all hospital inpatient expenses for 60 days, after
which there is a copayment for hospital days 61-90, and another, higher copayment for hospital days 91150. Beyond 150 days, Medicare coverage of hospital stays ceases.
6
Since insurance regulation is the prerogative of the states, the federal regulations were technically
voluntary. Merritt and Potemken (1982) and McCall et al. (1983) describe the institutional structure
established by the Baucus amendments to encourage states to adopt these regulations.
7
Most states simply adopted the minimum standards in the model regulations. However, as indicated in
Table 1, eight states adopted regulations that restricted the allowable policy space even further. I find no
evidence of a differential effect of the more stringent regulations.

6

percent of the cost of hospital stays beyond 150 days, at which point Medicare coverage ceases,
for at least an additional 365 days. They also mandated full coverage of the Part B physician
copayment, subject to a maximum deductible of $200 and a maximum benefit of no less than
$5,000 (in nominal dollars). Finally, the policy had to cover the annual deductibles in both Part A
and Part B for the first three pints of blood used, but not the general Part A and Part B
deductibles. Appendix A provides more detail on the gaps in Medicare coverage and on the
specific requirements of the minimum standards.
Two concerns motivated the passage of the Baucus amendments. First, policy-makers were
worried that the elderly were unable to make informed choices about their insurance coverage; in
particular, it was feared that they overestimated the amount of coverage provided through
Medicare (see e.g. Merritt and Potemken 1982, DeNovo and Shearer, 1978, U.S. Senate, 1978).
The minimum benefit standards described above were designed to address these concerns. In
addition, concern about fraud and abuse practiced by a very small segment of the industry
motivated several other provisions of the Baucus amendments, such as allowing the purchaser a
30 day “free look” period during which the policy could be returned, and requiring the prominent
display of cancellation and termination clauses. In a similar vein, the legislation established loss
ratio targets for Medigap policies that required the insurance company to return on average at
least 75% of premiums collected from association policies and 60% of premiums collected from
individual policies. In contrast to the minimum benefit standards, these policies affected only a
few “rogue” companies and did not affect the vast majority of buyers in this highly-concentrated
market. (McCall et al., 1983, Merritt and Potemken 1982, U.S. House of Representatives 1978).
In the empirical analysis, I therefore attribute estimated effects of the reforms to the minimum
benefit standards.
2.3 The “bite” of the minimum standards

8

All non-group Medigap policies are sold on an annual basis.

7

Data from the 1977 National Medical Care Expenditure Survey (NMCES) indicate that, prior
to the enactment of the regulations, less than 7 percent of non-group policies in effect would have
met the minimum standards that are measurable in these data. Ten years later, the 1987 National
Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES) indicates the requirements were strongly enforced: 94
percent of individuals who had policies that were subject to the minimum standards met the
measurable requirements.9 The most binding requirement was for coverage for 365 days beyond
the first 150 hospital days – only 11 percent of non-group policies in 1977 would have met this
requirement – followed by the requirement for full coverage of the Part B physician copayment,
which only 52 percent of policies would have satisfied. In contrast, 70 percent covered the Part A
copayments for hospital days 91-150, and 87 percent covered the Part A copayments for hospital
days 61-90.
The potential out-of-pocket liability insured by the mandated benefits was substantial. The
mandated coverage of the Part A hospital copayments provided insurance against rare but
potentially catastrophic financial risks associated with long hospital stays.10 Moreover, mandated
coverage of the 20 percent Part B copayment for physician charges insured an uncapped and
potentially large exposed risk. I calculate that, on average, the amount of additional insurance
required to upgrade a pre-reform plan to comply with the minimum standards was about one-fifth
of the total amount of insurance in the pre-reform plan. 11
3. Minimum standards in a voluntary private insurance market

9

These estimates are based on information on compliance with all of the minimum standards except those
regarding pre-existing conditions or coverage of the Part A and Part B blood deductibles. The data are
described in more detail in section five.
10
Data from a 20% sample of Medicare beneficiaries in 1984 indicate that only 0.1% of the elderly had
hospital stays beyond 150 days. A stay of 365 days beyond the 150 days partially covered by Medicare
would have cost an individual without private insurance $170,638 (assuming a hospital charge of $467.5
per day (American Hospital Association, 1978)).
11
I compare risk premiums across insurance arrangements to quantify the difference in the amount of
insurance. The data and method behind this type of calculation are described in more detail in section
seven. The estimate reported here assumes a constant relative risk aversion utility function and a coefficient
of relative risk aversion of 3.

8

This section describes the likely effects of the minimum standards under alternative models
of the unregulated Medigap market, and discusses ways to distinguish empirically among the
models. To begin, consider a 65-year-old, newly eligible for Medicare, who is deciding whether
and how much supplementary health insurance to purchase, as shown in Figure 1. The budget
constraint is given by the line AB. Individuals who place a high value on insurance will purchase
more comprehensive policies such as E, while those who value insurance less will choose a point
such as D. Now suppose that the government imposes a minimum standard on the supplementary
market. It does not require purchase of the supple mentary insurance, but it mandates that any
purchase must be of at least the amount m. The individuals’ budget set is now restricted to the
point A and the solid line CB.
Consider first the baseline case of perfect competition, constant returns to scale, and perfect
information. Under these assumptions, the regulation does not affect the relative price of health
insurance. As a result, individuals whose insurance purchases already satisfy the minimum
standards (i.e. they either purchase no insurance at point A or they purchase more than m, such as
at point E) will experience no change in their consumption decisions. An individual who
purchases less than m (for example, at point D), however, must now compare his utility from
purchasing no insurance to his maximal utility from purchasing a policy that complies with the
minimum standards. Assuming strictly convex preferences, if the individual chooses to purchase
insurance, the optimal compliant policy is exactly the minimum required amount of insurance. As
drawn, the individual now prefers purchasing no insurance (point A) to the optimal compliant
policy (point C). Figure 1 thus illustrates how minimum standards can produce declines in the
proportion of individuals with private insurance coverage and declines in welfare.
If we relax the baseline assumptions to allow for consumer misinformation or irrationality –
one of the major political motivations for the legislation – we might expect to see larger declines
in Medigap coverage associated with the minimum standards. For if consumers mistakenly
believe that Medicare covers some or all of the mandated benefits, they will underestimate the

9

benefits from complying with the minimum standards. Consumers may also be more likely to
drop non-mandated benefits in response to the minimum standards if they view the minimum
benefit package as the recommendation of the government, or the default option. 12 The presence
of consumer misinformation suggests that the decline in Medigap coverage should be particularly
acute among the less-educated, since they are likely to be the most misinformed about the gaps in
Medicare coverage.
An important abstraction in Figure 1 is that it assumes that supplementary health insurance
varies on only one dimension: quantity. In practice, Medigap policies are multi-dimensional.
Policies that would not have met the minimum standards tended to cover a variety of nonmandated benefits. For example, in 1977, 98 percent of policies that would not have met the
minimum standards covered the (non-mandated) Part A hospital deductible, and over one-fifth
covered outpatient prescription drugs (also not mandated).13
We can therefore enrich the analysis to think of a three-good world: mandated insurance
benefits, non-mandated insurance benefits, and all other goods. Under the same assumptions as
above (perfect competition, constant returns to scale, and perfect information), individuals whose
insurance policies already satisfy the minimum standards will not change their purchase of the
non-mandated benefits. However, the model generates ambiguous changes in non-mandated
benefits for individuals whose policies did not satisfy the minimum standards and who upgrade
their policies to comply. The sign and magnitude of any changes in non-mandated benefits
depends on both the income effects of the price increase associated with complying with the
minimum standards and on whether the mandated and non-mandated benefits are complements or
substitutes.
Another important abstraction in Figure 1 is that it ignores potential supply-side effects of the
minimum standards. If we relax the assumptions of perfect competition, constant returns to scale
12

Madrian and Shea (2001) show that default contribution rates and fund allocation have substantial effects
on decisions about 401(k) savings.

10

and symmetric information, a variety of supply side mechanisms can produce additional effects of
the minimum standards on insurance coverage; these effects operate through the effect of the
minimum standards on the pricing of insurance. On the one hand, the minimum standards may be
associated with increased costs or markups, thus raising prices. Markups could increase if there is
substantial insurance company exit in response to the minimum standards, or if these standards,
by restricting the product space, facilitate collusion among the existing companies. Per-policy
costs could increase if there are substantial joint costs in producing insurance policies; the
minimum standards, by requiring that non-compliant policies be discontinued, could raise the
share of joint costs born by the remaining compliant policies. These supply-side mechanisms can
be examined directly by looking at changes in industry structure and in prices, and indirectly by
looking at the effects of the reform on existing policyholders who were not subject to the
minimum standards.
On the other hand, relaxing the assumption of perfect competition can produce mechanisms
through which the introduction of minimum standards results in an increase in both the
proportion of the population purchasing the regulated product and the provision of non-mandated
benefits among the insured. For example, the Ronnen (1991) oligopoly model with differentiated
products produces such results because the minimum standards enhance price competition by
reducing the space over which firms can try to differentiate their products; in this model, the
minimum standards are welfare enhancing.
Finally, we can relax the assumption of symmetric information. Consider a simple adverse
selection model such as that of Akerlof (1970). In this setting, minimum standards can be welfare
improving if the mandated minimum benefits are valued by each member of the insured
population at or above his own actuarially-fair price, but cannot be purchased at this price in the
unregulated market. By bundling the purchase of any non-mandated benefits with the mandated
benefits, the minimum standards now make the mandated benefits available at the insured13

Author’s calculations based on 1977 NMCES.
11

population average pooling price, and can thus produce increases in insurance coverage and in
welfare.14 Even if some of the insured do not value the mandated benefits at the insuredpopulation average pooling price, they may still choose to upgrade their policies to comply with
the minimum standards if their consumer surplus from the non-mandated benefits is sufficiently
high. Of course, some lower risk individuals – if they have sufficiently low consumer surplus
from the non-mandated benefits and value the mandated benefits at less than the insuredpopulation average pooling price – may choose to drop the non-mandated benefits rather than
upgrade their policy to comply with the minimum standards. As a result, the Medigap market
could unravel, producing substantial – perhaps complete – declines in insurance coverage and
reducing the scope for welfare gains.
The next section presents the main empirical analysis: the effect of minimum standards on the
proportion of the population with insurance coverage. I then explore which of these theoretical
models are consistent with the empirical evidence.
4. Effect of Minimum Standards on Proportion with Private Insurance Coverage
4.1 Data and Empirical Strategy
I use repeated cross-sections from the National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) to examine
the effect of the minimum standards on the probability of being covered by non-group Medigap.
The NHIS is an annual U.S. household survey. Supplementary questions on individuals’ source of
private health insurance (i.e. group or non-group), if any, were asked in the 1976, 1978, 1980,
1982, 1983, 1984, and 1986 NHIS. The earliest data therefore pre-date the introduction of the
minimum standards in all but one of the states. The major drawback to the NHIS is that these
data contain no information on health insurance premiums or on the benefits covered by the
insurance. In the next section, I will turn to an alternative data source to examine the effect of the
minimum standards on these other dimensions.
14

This is analogous to Akerlof’s (1970) description of how a population-wide mandate for insurance
coverage can be welfare improving if each individual values the insurance at or above his actuarially fair

12

For the main analysis, I restrict the sample to individuals aged 65-68 who are covered by
Medicare.15 I look only at these “young” old because these are the people who are most likely to
be buying Medigap policies after the regulations went into effect. In additional analyses described
below, I examine the effect on older age groups.
The binary dependent variable COVERAGE indicates whether the individual has non-group
private health insurance, defined as insurance that was not “obtained through an employer or
union.” Individuals who do not have private health insurance or whose insurance was “obtained
through an employer or union” are coded as not having non-group private health insurance.16 The
main analysis pertains to non-group coverage rates since the regulations applied to this market.
Further analysis described below indicates that coverage rates in the group market were not
affected by the reform.
I exploit the substantial variation detailed in Table 1 in the timing of different states’ adoption
of the minimum standards to identify their effect on coverage rates in the non-group market. The
empirical strategy compares non-group coverage rates after the reform has been imposed to nongroup coverage rates prior to its imposition, while controlling for other possible confounding
changes. The basic estimating equation is:
COVERAGE ijt = α + STATEj + YEARt + Xijt β+ λADOPTjt + ε ijt

(1)

STATE and YEAR are fixed effects that control respectively for any fixed differences across
states in coverage rates and for any yearly changes in coverage rates that are common across
states. X is a vector of covariates. It controls for observable compositional changes in the sample
along dimensions that may be related to the propensity to hold non-group coverage. It consists of

price but cannot purchase insurance at this price in the unregulated market.
15
I would like to further restrict the sample to those not on Medicaid and those without military health
insurance. Unfortunately, data on these types of coverage are not available until the 1982 survey. Estimates
of the effect of the reform using only data from 1982 and subsequent years do not differ from the estimates
obtained using the whole sample and are not sensitive to whether those with Medicaid and military health
insurance are excluded from the sample.
16
4% of the sample has both group and non-group coverage. For these individuals, COVERAGE is coded
as 1 since the individual has non-group coverage. In results not reported here, I found that the estimated
effect of the reform is not sensitive to how such individuals were coded.

13

a series of dummies for gender, race (white or non-white), education (less than high school, high
school graduate, some college, college graduate and higher), marital status (married or not), and
self-reported health status (excellent, very good or good versus fair or poor).17 It also includes a
linear control for age. ADOPTjt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the individual in state j and
year t is subject to the minimum standards regulation, and 0 otherwise. λ, the key parameter of
interest, thus measures the estimated change in non-group insurance coverage rates associated
with the implementation of the reform.
To examine the dynamics in the timing of the impact of the minimum standards, I enrich the
basic specification to allow for separate short-term and long-term effects of the reform as follows:
COVERAGE ijt = α + STATEj + YEARt + Xijt β+ λ1 ADOPTjt,1 + λ2 ADOPTjt,2 + ε ijt

(2)

ADOPTjt,1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if it is the first or second year after adoption of the
minimum standards in state j. 18 ADOPTjt,2 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if it is three or more
years after adoption of the minimum standards in state j.
The identifying assumption in equations (1) and (2) is that, absent the reform, states would
have had similar trends in Medigap coverage. I conduct a partial test of this identifying
assumption by examining whether there are significant changes in coverage rates in the periods
prior to the reform. I therefore estimate the following:
COVERAGE ijt = α + STATEj + YEARt + Xijt β+ λ-2 ADOPTjt,-2 + λ-1 ADOPTjt,-1 +
λ1 ADOPTjt,1 + λ2 ADOPTjt,2 + ε ijt

(3)

ADOPTjt,-1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if it is two or three years prior to adoption and
ADOPTjt,-2 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if it is 4 or more years prior to adoption. The
omitted reference category is the year of adoption and the year prior to adoption (period 0).19

17

I group health status this way because until 1982 the individual is given a choice of reporting their health
status as “excellent”, “good”, “fair” or “poor.” In 1982 and in subsequent years, the individual also has the
option of reporting “very good”.
18
Because the data are, for the most part, biannual, I do not look at potential year-to-year differences in the
effect of the reform.

14

4.2. Results
Table 2 presents the results of estimating equations (1) and (2) by OLS. 20 Columns (1) and
(2) present the results of estimating equation (1) without and with covariates respectively. They
indicate that the reform is associated with a 5.1 to 5.3 percentage point decrease in coverage. This
effect is statistically significant at the 1 percent level and is not sensitive in magnitude or
significance to the inclusion of covariates.
Column (3) examines the dynamics of the impact of the reform, using the specification in
equation (2). The effect of the reform persists after it has been in place for 3 or more years, and
indeed increases slightly. The reform is associated with a 4.9 percentage point reduction in
coverage after 1 to 2 years and an 8.0 percentage point reduction after 3 or more years. Both of
these estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level; they are also statistically
significantly different from each other at the 10 percent level. 21 The one-to-two-year phase-in
may be due to a lag in enforcement or to the dynamics of adjustment to a new equilibrium. 22
I examine whether the effect of the reform differs across observable characteristics of the
individuals such as educational attainment, marital status, gender, race or health status.23 The only
substantive or statistical differences – in either levels or proportions – are by race. The estimated
19

The percentage of observations in each category ranges from 38 percent in ADOPT2 to 12 percent in
ADOPT-1 .
20
All of the standard error estimates in section four allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix in the error
structure within each state, as recommended by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2002). The results are
not sensitive to allowing an arbitrary covariance matrix in each state-year cell instead. The OLS estimates
are also adjusted for heteroscedasticity in the linear probability model.
21
The long run effects of the reform appear to be fully captured by allowing for differential effects of the
reform in the first and second year compared to all later years. In results not reported here, I re-estimate
equation (2) with separate indicator variables for the first and second year, the third and fourth year, the
fifth and sixth year, and seven or more years that the reform has been in effect. All of these indicator
variables are statistically significant at the 1 percent level, and their coefficients respectively are –5.0, -7.2,
-11.0 and –8.1
22
The fact that – with a sample of individuals aged 65 to 68 – more individuals may be buying policies
under the new regulations as time passes does not appear to account for the larger long-run effect. In a
sample of 65-year-olds, the long-run effect of the reform is still statistically significantly larger than the
short-run effect.
23
For health status I use both self-reported health status and a measure of activity limitation status. Because
the activity limitation status measure changes in 1982, I do not include it as a covariate in the main
analysis. When examining the differential effects of the reform by activity limitation status, I examine both
the whole sample and the sub-sample from 1982 and later for which the measure is consistent.

15

short- and long-run effects of the reform for whites (who make up approximately 90 percent of
the sample) are smaller (–0.045 and –0.070 respectively) than for non-whites (–0.084 and –0.171
respectively). All of these estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level and the
estimated long-run effect of the reform is statistically significantly smaller for whites than for
non-whites at the 5 percent level. 24 The larger impact of the reform on coverage rates for nonwhites is consistent with the fact that prior to the reform, non-whites tended to have substantially
less coverage of non-mandated benefits than whites.25
Finally, I examine whether declines in non-group Medigap coverage associated with the
minimum standards represent a net decline in insurance coverage or whether there is substitution
toward alternative sources of supplementary insurance: public Medicaid and private group
insurance.26 Table 3 reports the results of estimating equation (2) using first an indicator for group
coverage and then an indicator for Medicaid coverage for the dependent variable.27 I find no
evidence of substitution to either source of coverage associated with the minimum benefit
standards. The Medicaid results are robust to restricting the sample to those in the lowest
education category (who presumably are mostly likely to be eligible for Medic aid). This lack of
substitution is not surprising given that group coverage and Medicaid tend to be both more
comprehensive and cheaper than non-group coverage. The non-group market, presumably,
consists of individuals without access to group insurance or Medicaid. 28
4.3 Specification checks

24

Since non-whites are less likely to have non-group coverage prior to the reform than whites (18
percentage points versus 34 percentage points), the proportional effects of the reform are even larger for
non-whites than for whites
25
Author’s calculation based on 1977 NMCES.
26
Prior to the minimum standards, just under 10 percent of the sample had Medicaid coverage. Group
coverage rates were similar to non-group coverage rates.
27
I can only measure Medicaid coverage starting in 1982; the analysis of the effect of the minimum
standards on Medicaid coverage is therefore restricted to data in 1982 and later years. The results for nongroup coverage reported above are robust to a similar restriction.
28
Of course in the long-run, employers might have greater incentives to provide group health insurance
coverage to those over age 65 as non-group coverage declines following the imposition of minimum
standards. However, this is more likely to affect younger employees rather than those over age 65, most of
whom are retired, for whom the firm has little incentive to offer more attractive compensation packages.

16

I perform several specification checks to test the robustness of the results in Table 2 and to
investigate the validity of the identifying assumption. 29 Appendix Table B1 indicates that the
results are not sensitive to estimating equations (1) and (2) by probit, instead of by OLS. In
results not reported here, I also find that the results are not sensitive to the particular age range for
the “young” old chosen; the results are robust to using a sample of individuals aged 65 to 67 or 65
to 69 instead of the baseline sample of individuals aged 65 to 68.
Table 4 reports results from several additional specification checks. The first column
indicates that the results are robust to adding state-specific linear time trends to the basic
specification in equation (2). The second and third columns show the results of estimating
equation (3) without and with state-specific linear trends respectively. There is no evidence in
either specification of changes in non-group coverage in periods prior to the reform relative to
period 0 (the year of the reform and the year prior to the reform). This serves as partial
confirmation of the identifying assumption that absent the introduction of the legislation, states
would have had similar trends in Medigap coverage. It also suggests that the reforms were not
adopted in response to pre-existing trends in non-group coverage rates.
The composition of states used to estimate the coefficient on any given ADOPTjt,k varies with
k. For example, since the earliest year of data is 1976, the coefficient on ADOPTjt,-1 (two or three
years before adoption), is identified only by individuals in states where the regulation’s first full
year in effect was 1978 or later. This could contaminate my results if the effect of the reform
varies across states, or if the pre-period trends differ across states in ways not fully captured by a
state-specific linear trend. To test for this, I re-estimate the model on two different balanced
panels of states. In column (4), I re-estimate equation (3) using states in which regulations were
first in effect in 1979 or later. In column (5), I re-estimate equation (2) using states in which

29

The specification checks for Table 3 are not reported here, but are similarly supportive.

17

regulations were first in effect in 1981 or earlier.30 The results are not sensitive to these
restrictions. The results in columns (4) and (5) are also not sensitive to the inclusion of statespecific linear time trends (not reported).
4.4 The magnitude of the effect of the reform
Prior to the introduction of the minimum standards, 33 percent of the sample had non-group
coverage. The estimates therefore indicate that the imposition of the minimum standards is
associated with a 15 percent decline in non-group coverage in the first two years after
implementation and a long-run reduction in coverage of almost 25 percent.
These estimates are within the broad range of findings that would be consistent with a fullinformation demand-side response to the minimum standards. Using detailed information on
medical expenditures and sources of payment from the 1977 NMCES, I estimate that, ignoring
moral hazard and adverse selection effects, the mandated Baucus benefits would have raised the
expected payments (and hence an actuarially fair premium) for these policies by $168, or 30
percent. If the marginal utility of complying with the mandate is zero, this predicted premium
increase represents a 30 percent net tax on the purchase of non-group insurance. Under this
assumption, the 25 percent decline in non-group insurance coverage is consistent with estimates
of the price elasticity of demand for health insurance, which lie in the range of –0.5 to –1 (Cutler
1996).31 Of course, the marginal utility from the mandated insurance is likely to be positive,
suggesting that the effect of the reform would be lower than the 15 to 30 percent decline in
coverage predicted from a 30 percent net tax. On the other hand, accounting for administrative
loads, insurance company profits and adverse selection suggests that the premium increase

30

There is not sufficient variation in the timing of adoption in this sample to look separately at effects in
various pre-periods, as in equation (3).
31
Most estimates of the price elasticity of demand for health insurance are based on the demand response
for comprehensive health insurance. The available evidence of the price elasticity of demand for
supplementary health insurance suggests that it is in the low end of the range of estimated elasticities for
comprehensive health insurance (Finkelstein, forthcoming).

18

associated with complying with the mandated minimum benefits would likely be larger than the
30 percent calculated above.32
5. Effect of Minimum Standards on Coverage of Non-Mandated Benefits and Premiums
The previous section established that the minimum standards were associated with a
large, robust, and statistically significant decline in the proportion of individuals with insurance
coverage. While the magnitude of the decline is within the broad range of estimates that would be
consistent with a full-information, demand-side response, the there are also a variety of additional
mechanisms, discussed in section three, by which minimum standards could produce this result.
To explore the evidence for these other mechanisms, I begin in this section by considering
evidence of the effect of the minimum standards on other margins: coverage of non-mandated
benefits and premiums.
5.1 Data and Empirical Strategy
For this analysis, I turn to a new data source: the 1977 National Medical Care Expenditure
Survey (NMCES) and its companion survey, the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey
(NMES). These data have the unique advantage of detailed data both on the benefits covered by
an individual’s Medigap policy and on the premiums for these policies.33 However, the long time
period between these two cross-sections, which spans the adoption of the minimum standards in
almost all states, makes the results of this section necessarily more speculative than those in the
previous section. I use individuals with group Medigap insurance to try to control for other
changes in the demand or supply of various Medigap benefits that may have occurred in the nongroup market during this 10-year period.

32

For example, I calculate in the 1977 NMCES that the load on non-group Medigap policies, as measured
by the excess of premiums over claims as a percentage of claims, is 60 percent. If this load is proportional
to claims, then the expected premium increase associated with the mandated benefits would rise from 30
percent to approximately 50 percent.
33
Benefit information is obtained by contacting each individual’s source of insurance for policy details and
then coding up these details. This is considerably more reliable than self-reported benefit information.

19

I limit the sample to Medicare recipients aged 65 to 71 who are policyholders of private
health insurance and are not covered by Medicaid. The age cut is chosen in keeping with the
results of the previous section, in which I found that individuals aged 65 to 68 were affected by
the reform. 34 I exclude individuals who are covered as dependents because dependents have the
same benefits as policyholders and this would involve double counting. 35 I also limit the sample
to those who are retired, defined as individuals who are not in the labor force.36 Finally, since the
data are at the policyholder level, I exclude anyone who has both non-group insurance and group
insurance (approximately 7 percent of the sample) because in such cases I cannot tell from which
market a given benefit comes.
The empirical strategy is to compare changes in benefit coverage rates or in log premiums
between 1977 and 1987 for privately insured individuals affected by the reform (i.e. those with
non-group coverage) to changes for a control group of privately insured individuals who were not
affected by the reform (i.e. those with group coverage).37 The basic estimating equation is:
Y = ß1 AFTER*NON-GROUP + ß2 AFTER + ß3 NON-GROUP+ Xß 4 + e

(4)

The dependent variable is either the log of premiums or a binary indicator of whether the
individual’s health insurance coverage includes a given benefit. The 1977 and 1987 data report
the total annual premium per policyholder; since my sample is limited to individuals with only

34

These data do not contain information on state of residence. But anyone who is 71 or younger in 1987
was no older than 68 in 1984 (the last year that was the first full year for regulation to be in effect in any
state) and therefore is in the age group that I found was affected by the reform in the previous analysis.
35
Non-group Medigap policies are sold on an individual basis while group Medigap policies may include
spousal dependents. The results in this section are not sensitive to including individuals who are dependents
on group Medigap policies in the sample.
36
I make this restriction because federal legislation introduced in 1982 required that employers offer the
same health insurance packages to employed workers under and over age 65. This is not a severe restriction
as most individuals over 65 are retired. The results in section four are not sensitive to this restriction.
37
By 1977, four states had already introduced the minimum standards, three in 1976. To the extent that the
effect of these reforms was already partly felt by 1977, the empirical strategy will underestimate the effect
of the reform on non-mandated benefit coverage. An alternative empirical strategy would be to use
individuals in these early states as a control group. Unfortunately, state identifiers are not available for the
1977 NMCES.

20

one policy and without dependents, the premium reflects the per policy premium. 38 The data also
include measures of coverage for six different non-mandated benefits. Two benefits – coverage of
the hospital (Part A) and physician (Part B) deductible – cover the remaining cost-sharing
provisions in Medicare beyond those included in the mandated minimum package. The other four
benefits cover home health care, care in a skilled nursing home, inpatient psychiatric care and
out-patient prescription drugs.
NON-GROUP is an indicator variable that is 1 if the individual has a Medigap policy through
the non-group market and 0 if the individual has a Medigap policy through the group market.
AFTER is an indicator variable for the year 1987. X is a matrix of covariates, similar to that used
in section four, that controls for observed compositional changes that may be related to the
propensity to hold various non-mandated benefits.39 The key variable of interest – AFTER*NONGROUP – measures changes in benefit coverage between 1977 and 1987 among those with nongroup Medigap relative to changes in benefit coverage over the same period for individuals with
group Medigap.
Table 5 presents mean premiums and mean coverage rates for the six benefits in the nongroup and the group market in 1977 and in 1987. Premiums rose in real terms in both markets
between 1977 and 1987, reflecting in part the increasing real cost of medical care. Between 1977
and 1987, benefit coverage rates in the non-group market are decreasing for all benefits except for
care in a skilled nursing home. In the group market, benefit coverage rates are decreasing for the
two deductibles but increasing for the other four benefits.
The changes over time in benefit coverage in the group market raise concerns about its
appropriateness as a control for the changes in benefit coverage that would have occurred in the

38

The premium is defined as the total premium; for the group market it therefore includes employer and
employee contributions.
39
It consists of dummies for gender, region of the country, whether the individual lives in an SMSA, race
(white or non-white), marital status, education (less than high school, high school degree, some college,
college degree or higher) and self-reported health status relative to others’ their age. Age is also included
linearly.

21

non-group market absent the reforms. A primary concern is that increased adverse selection
pressures over this period from the large increase in the mean and variance of medical
expenditures might differentially affect benefit coverage in the group and non-group market.
However, increases in adverse selection pressures should produce declines in benefits subject to
severe adverse selection pressures, such as prescription drug coverage, which experienced an
increase in coverage in the group market, and are less to produce declines in deductible coverage,
which is where the group market experienced large declines.
More generally, other factors that might differentially affect these two markets – such as
reductions in employer-provided retiree benefits – would tend to produce a uniform trend in
benefit coverage in the group market, rather than the observed pattern of declines in some
benefits and increases in others. I can also address the concern that the large increases in wage
inequality during the period studied may have affected insurance demand differently for
individuals in the group market, who tend to be of somewhat higher socio-economic status than
those in the non-group market.40 I allow the relationship between demographic covariates and
benefit coverage to change over time by estimating an enriched version of equation (4) in whic h I
interact all of the demographic covariates with AFTER. Tables 6 and 7 below show that the
results are not sensitive to this specification.
Finally, I use the NHIS data to examine whether insurance coverage rates are trending
similarly in the group and non-group markets in state-years prior to the introduction of the
reforms. This provides a weak test of the identifying assumption that absent the reform, benefit
coverage rates among the insured would have been on similar trends in the two markets. For each
year (1978, 1980, and 1982), I cannot reject the null hypothesis that the year fixed-effects are the
same in the treatment group and the control group. Nor can I reject the joint hypothesis that all
three year fixed effects are the same in the treatment group and the control group.
5.2 Results

22

Table 6 reports the difference-in-differences estimates of the change in benefit coverage
in the non-group market relative to the change in benefit coverage in the group market. Columns
(1) through (3) report the results without covariates, with covariates, and with interaction effects
between the covariates and AFTER; the estimates are not sensitive to the specification. Appendix
Table B2 indicates that the results are also not sensitive to estimation by probit rather than by
OLS.
The first two rows of Table 6 report the results for the hospital and physician deductibles. The
empirical strategy is, a priori, most convincing for these benefits for two reasons. First, the
deductibles are arguably the benefits for which the 10 year time lag in the data is least troubling.
It is harder to think of demand and supply shocks affecting deductible coverage than affecting
coverage of other benefits for which the underlying nature of the risk being insured may well be
changing over time. Second, the data in Table 5 indicate that the pre-treatment mean coverage
rates in the non-group and group market were most similar for these two benefits. The results
indicate that the minimum standards are associated with a large and statistically significant
decline in coverage for the physician deductible but no change in coverage for the hospital
deductible.
The last four rows of Table 6 indicate that the minimum standards are also associated with a
substantial and statistically significant decline in the coverage of outpatient prescription drug
benefits, inpatient psychiatric care, and home health care. The magnitude of the estimated
declines in non-mandated benefits are quite large, ranging from 20 to 40 percentage point
declines. There is weaker evidence of a decline in skilled nursing home care relative to the
control group. In results not reported here, I find no evidence of systematic differences, either
substantive or statistical, in the effect of minimum standards on non-mandated benefit coverage
by observable characteristics.

40

Author’s calculations based on 1977 NMCES.

23

To gauge the magnitude of the change in total expected insurance payments associated with
the minimum standards, I estimate the effect of the minimum standards on total insurance
premiums.41 Table 7 shows the results of re-estimating equation (4) using the log of the premium
as the dependent variable. The first three columns show the results respectively without
controlling for individual characteristics, with controlling for them, and interacting them with
AFTER. They indicate that the minimum standards are associated with an almost 50 percent
decline in premiums in the non-group market relative to the group market. This suggests that the
decline in expected payments from the decline in non-mandated benefits substantially outweighs
the increase in expected payments from the inclusion of newly-mandated benefits. When
additional controls are added for whether the policy covers each of the mandated and nonmandated benefits measurable in the data, column (4) indicates that the minimum standards are
associated with an estimated 25 percent decline in premiums. This significant decline in
premiums associated with the minimum standards – even after controlling for the benefit
composition of the policy – is consistent with their being unmeasured declines in non-mandated
benefits.42
Even the estimated declines in measured non-mandated benefits among the insured are too
large to be explained solely by demand-side mechanisms in a full information model of the
Medigap market.43 While substitution effects may help explain declines in coverage for the
physician deductible – which may be a substitute for coverage of the mandated physician
copayment – they cannot explain declines in benefits such as inpatient psychiatric care and

41

Assuming no changes in market structure, changes in premiums reflect changes in the expected payments
from the insurance policy.
42
Unmeasured declines in non-mandated benefits might include both declines in non-measurable, nonmandated benefits and declines in the comprehensiveness of coverage for measured non-mandated benefits
for which we only observe whether or not there is any coverage and not the amount of coverage.
43
Compositional changes associated with minimum standards in the pool of the privately insured might
potentially explain the large declines in non-mandated benefits. However, as noted in section four, the
minimum standards appear to be associated with larger declines in insurance coverage among individuals
with less coverage of non-mandated benefits; if anything, therefore, compositional changes in the pool of
the insured should have tended to produce an increase in coverage of non-mandated benefits among the
remaining insured.

24

prescription drug coverage which are more likely to be complements to the mandated coverage
for hospital stays and doctor visits. Furthermore, the income effect from the mandated benefits is
insufficient to explain the magnitude of the estimated decreases in non-mandated benefits. The
$168 actuarially fair increase in premiums that I estimate would be needed to upgrade policies to
comply with the minimum standards represents only 0.8% of median income among those with
non-group Medigap policies in the NMCES. Estimates of the income elasticity of demand for
medical care range from 0.2 to 1 (Newhouse 1992).44 Given average non-group premiums in
1977 of $568, even an income elasticity of demand of 1 would imply a decrease in demand for
health insurance benefits of less than $6. Yet the NMCES data suggest that the loss of the
physician deductible coverage, alone, would result on average in a loss of health benefits of over
five times this amount.
This suggests a role for factors other than a full-information demand response to the
minimum standards. In the next section, I consider the three other factors discussed in section
three that would tend to produce declines in insurance coverage from minimum standards:
consumer misinformation, supply-side effects, and asymmetric information. I find the most
evidence in support of a role for asymmetric information in explaining the impact of minimum
standards on the Medigap market.
6 Theoretical explanations for the estimated effect of these minimum standards
6.1 Consumer misinformation
It is difficult to generate precise, testable, predictions for how consumer misinformation or
limited rationality may affect the impact of minimum standards on insurance markets. As
discussed in section three, consumer misinformation might be expected to magnify demand-side
responses. Yet I find no strong empirical evidence in support of this explanation. In particular,
there is no evidence that the minimum standards are associated with differential declines by

44

Of course demand for medical care and demand for health insurance are not the same thing. But
presumably the income elasticities are roughly similar.

25

educational attainment in insurance coverage, on either the extensive or intensive margin, as
might be expected if people with less education are more likely to be misinformed. Furthermore,
the observed differential responses seem consistent with a rational response. For example, the
finding that non-whites – who tended to have less comprehensive coverage of non-mandated
benefits than whites – were more likely to drop coverage in response to the minimum standards is
consistent with a rational response: the minimum standard requirements are a greater proportional
tax on smaller policies.
6.2 Supply-side effects of the minimum standards
The large declines in insurance coverage associated with the minimum standards raise the
possibility that the minimum standards were associated with substantial changes in market
structure or market costs. Three pieces of evidence, however, suggest no large-scale changes of
this nature. First, while there are no available data on insurance company market shares from the
period under study, conversations with insurance regulators and insurance company executives
from that era do not suggest widespread company exit associated with the minimum standards.
Second, I can use data on individuals’ insurance premiums and payments from private health
insurance in the 1977 NMCES and 1987 NMES to compare loads on non-group and group
policies before and after the introduction of the minimum standards.45 I define the load in a
particular market as the excess of average premiums over average claims as a percentage of
average claims. These loads therefore reflect both the administrative costs of producing the
insurance policy as well as insurance company profits. The load on non-group policies fell
slightly between 1977 and 1987, from 60% to 53%. By contrast, it rose slightly in the group
market, from 42% to 47%. The decline in the load in the non-group market is not consistent with
increased industry concentration or costs associated with the minimum standards, which should
have been expected to produce increases in the load.

45

Throughout section six, analysis of the 1977 NMCES and 1987 NMES is based on the sample defined in
section five.

26

Third, I can use the existing policyholders – who are not directly subject to the regulations –
to look for evidence of changes in market structure or costs. Individuals who bought their policies
prior to the regulation could continue to renew their policies without having to make them
compliant with the minimum standards. However, supply-side effects that produce increases in
either markups or costs would be expected to affect the prices of these policies and hence produce
declines in insurance coverage among existing policyholders.46
To test this, I return to the NHIS data and re-estimate equations (1) through (3) on the subsample of individuals who are 70 or older when the regulations went into effect and on the subsample of individuals who are 70-74 when the regulations went into effect.47 There is no evidence
that the reform affected coverage for either of these older groups in either the short or long run;
the coefficients on the ADOPT variables are all small in magnitude and statistically insignificant.
This is consistent with the conventional wisdom that individuals tend to buy their Medigap
policies shortly after becoming eligible for Medicare and then renew them without change; the
older individuals would therefore not have become subject to the regulations. It is also not
suggestive of large supply-side changes in response to the minimum standards.
6.3 The effect of minimum standards in insurance markets with asymmetric information
As discussed in section three, in a market with adverse selection, minimum standards can
produce substantial declines in insurance coverage on both the intensive and extensive margin.
Moreover, such a model is consistent with declines in non-mandated benefits that are
substantially larger than demand-side responses based on income and substitution effects alone
could generate, since the minimum standards may produce an unraveling of the market for the

46

While individuals can renew their existing policies without becoming subject to the regulation, the price
of the policy is not guaranteed and can therefore be raised in response to supply-side changes.
47
For periods prior to the reform, the sample is limited to individuals 70 and over (or 70-74). For periods
after the implementation of the reform, the sample is limited to individuals who would have been at least 70
(or 70-74) when the reform was implemented. Because of concern that the estimates may be biased by the
aging of the sample within each state over time, I re-estimate equation (2) on the sub-sample of individuals
who are 82 or older in each year; these individuals are all at least 70 in 1974 (the first year that regulations
went into effect) in each year of data. The results are not sensitive to this alternative sample definition.

27

non-mandated benefits. We can generate additional testable predictions of the effect of minimum
standards in insurance markets with adverse selection by developing the model in more detail.
I adopt the standard framework in which competitive insurance markets respond to consumer
private information by trying to design policies that separate individuals according to their risk
type (Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), Wilson (1977)). In a separating equilibrium, high risk
individuals purchase full insurance coverage while incentive compatibility constrains low risk
individuals to purchase less than full insurance. In such a setting, sufficiently high minimum
standards may require the purchase of an amount of insurance above this incentive compatible
amount. As a result, the separating equilibrium, and hence the ability to provide high risk types
with comprehensive insurance in equilibrium, can be destroyed. In the Wilson (1977) model, if
the minimum standards destroy the separating equilibrium, both types will pool at an amount of
insurance above the minimum and less than the full insurance that high risk individuals were
previously receiving. For sufficiently large minimum standards, the result can be a complete
destruction of the market for policies with more insurance than the mandated minimum.
Appendix C develops the effects of minimum standards in the Wilson (1977) model in more
detail. 48
Three additional empirical regularities are consistent with this model. First, Table 6 indicates
that the minimum standards are associated with a large and statistically significant decline in
coverage for the Part B physician deductible but no change in coverage for the Part A hospital
deductible. Recall that, prior to the imposition of minimum standards, individuals were much
more likely to have coverage for both the Part A hospital copayments (70-90% depending on the
length of stay) and the Part A hospital deductible (99%) than for the analogous Part B physician
cost sharing provisions (50% and 85% respectively). In other words, individuals were more
likely to be constrained from buying full insurance for the physician cost-sharing provisions than

48

These effects also obtain with the Grossman (1979) equilibrium (Neudeck and Podczeck (1996)) but not
with the Miyazaki (1977) equilibrium (Encinosa, forthcoming).

28

for the hospital cost-sharing provisions. The Wilson model predicts a collapse in comprehensive
coverage if low risk individuals are constrained from buying such coverage in the unregulated
private market equilibrium. It is therefore consistent with the Wilson model that the imposition of
the requirements for coverage of the hospital and physician copayments should affect the market
for full coverage of the physician cost-sharing provisions – for which not everyone had full
coverage in the unregulated market – but not for the hospital cost-sharing provisions – for which
almost everyone had comprehensive coverage prior to the regulations.
Second, the stylized Wilson (1977) model predicts that mandated minimum benefits can
produce a switch from a separating equilibrium to a pooling equilibrium. A less knife-edge
version of this prediction is that we should see a decrease in the amount of dispersion in plan
types associated with the introduction of the minimum standards.49 The empirical evidence
supports this prediction. Obviously, the entire policy space, and hence policy dispersion, will
shrink mechanically when minimum standards are imposed. However, there is no mechanical
reason for any change in the dispersion of non-mandated benefits included in different plans. I
therefore define a plan based on which of the non-mandated benefits measurable in the data are
covered. This produces about 20 different plans purchased in a given year and market. Between
1977 and 1987, the NMCES and NMES data indicate that the Herfindahl measure of plan
concentration almost doubles in the non-group market (from 0.11 to 0.21) while remaining
constant in the group market (at 0.12).50 Figure 2 shows plan market share by plan rank (from
highest to lowest market share) in the non-group market prior to the introduction of the minimum
standards (1977), and after their introduction (1987). The empirical cumulative distribution
function of plan shares in the non-group market in 1987 lies everywhere above the 1977
empirical cumulative distribution function; there is no such clear ranking of the two periods in the
49

We can move away from the knife-edge predictions of the Wilson (1977) model by, for example,
allowing for consumer heterogeneity in risk aversion.

29

group market (not shown). Using McFadden’s (1989) test for first order stochastic dominance, I
am unable to reje ct the null hypothesis that the 1977 distribution of plan shares in the non-group
market first order stochastic dominates the 1987 distribution in the non-group market. I can reject
this null in the group market, however, at the 10 percent level.
Third, the Wilson (1977) model suggests that the market for comprehensive, full-insurance
plans can be completely destroyed by the minimum standards. This suggests that more
comprehensive policies become even more adversely-selected after the imposition of the
minimum standards. I test for this by examining whether premiums rise more between 1977 and
1987 on more comprehensive non-group policies relative to less comprehensive non-group
policies.51 The final column of Table 7 shows the results of re-estimating the model estimated in
column (4) with the addition of an interaction term between AFTER*NON-GROUP and the
number of non-mandated benefits in the policy (“BENEFITS”). BENEFITS ranges from 0 to 6
and averages 3.4. The regression also includes indicator variables for whether each measurable
mandated and non-mandated benefit is covered by the policy. As predicted, the interaction term
in column (4) is positive and significant, indicating that the minimum standards are associated
with larger premium rises (or, more accurately, smaller premium decreases) on more
comprehensive plans relative to less comprehensive plans in the non-group market relative to the
group market.
Thus several independent pieces of evidence are consistent with the impact of minimum
standards in a Wilson (1977) model of an insurance market with adverse selection. However, the
lack of a finding of a differential response to the minimum standards on either coverage margin
by health status – as measured either by self-reported health status or activity limitation status –
50

An increase in plan concentration does not necessarily indicate an increase in insurer market
concentration. Insurers tend to sell multiple plans and therefore the increased prevalence of some plans
does not necessarily favor certain firms.
51
The model predicts that marginal people (i.e. the lowest risk people in each plan type) will move from
more comprehensive to less comprehensive plans. Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) discuss the implications
of such a change for the relative pricing of insurance contracts. They note that since the distribution of

30

seems inconsistent with the Wilson model, which makes sharp predictions of differential
responses to the minimum standards based on private information about health status (see
Appendix C). More generally, observable characteristic s such as education may in fact proxy for
private information about health status since such characteristics are correlated with health but
were not widely used in pricing Medigap policies.52 Yet we observe no evidence of differential
effects of the reform by these characteristics. This may reflect the difficulty of empirically
distinguishing that portion of risk which is truly private information from that portion which the
insurance company can proxy for by pricing based on age and gender and selectively denying
coverage to certain types. It also raises the interesting question of why insurance companies
choose to price based on so little information, if in fact – as seems likely – other observable
characteristics are predictors of risk type. I regard this as a natural challenge for future work.
7. Welfare Implications
This final section considers the welfare implications of the estimated effects of the minimum
standards. The empirical results point to substantial declines in insurance coverage – on two
margins – associated with the minimum standards. Yet compliance with the minimum standards
themselves provides, on average, substantial additional insurance coverage. If markets function
perfectly and individuals make fully rational insurance purchase decisions, any changes in
insurance coverage associated with the minimum standards – whether increases or decreases –
represent welfare losses. Minimum standards may be welfare-enhancing, however, if the
unregulated insurance market results in sub-optimally low private insurance purchases.
As discussed at the outset, consumer misinformation or adverse selection may produce such
sub-optimal coverage rates. The former was a major political motivation for the regulations; the
latter is consistent with the preponderance of the empirical evidence presented above of the
medical spending is substantially right-skewed, it is likely that premiums on more comprehensive plans
will rise relative to those on less comprehensive plans.

31

effects of minimum standards. Both suggest the interpretation of insurance gains as welfare gains
and insurance losses as welfare losses.53 The net welfare effect of the minimum standards
depends on the relative magnitudes of the welfare gains and losses associated with the minimum
standards. I quantify these effects by simulating the risk distribution under alternative insurance
arrangements and evaluating the welfare changes associated with changes in risk exposure.
7.1 Changes in risk bearing associated with changes in insurance coverage
The estimates are based on the sample of 989 Medicare recipients in the 1977 NMCES who
are not on Medicaid and who have private, non-group insurance.54 The NMCES provides
individual-level data on health expenditures and sources of payment for several different health
expenditure categories. Figure 3 shows the distribution of out-of-pocket medical expenditures
under four different insurance arrangements. The solid black bars show this distribution for those
with non-group private health insurance coverage prior to the reforms. The other three bars
simulate the medical expenditure distribution under alternative insurance arrangements for these
individuals. The simulations are done by adjusting the portion of particular expenses paid out-ofpocket and those paid by private insurance to reflect the change in insurance coverage.55 All of

52

Conversations with people familiar with the Medigap market in the period studied indicate that most
pricing was done based solely on age; pricing based on gender, and – even more rarely – smoking status,
was also sometimes done.
53
If the government believes that individuals purchase insufficient insurance prior to the regulations, then
from the government perspective, increases in insurance represent welfare gains while decreases represent
welfare losses. Of course, from the individual perspective, since individuals believe they are optimizing and
the minimum standards do not change their information set, the regulations must be welfare reducing. The
welfare effects of insurance changes associated with the minimum standards in a model with adverse
selection are discussed in more detail in Appendix C.
54
None of these people has a hospital stay beyond 150 days. So that the welfare benefit from the mandated
coverage for such stays is not undervalued, I adjust the risk distribution in my sample to take account of the
fact that data from a 20% sample of Medicare beneficiaries in 1984 indicates that 0.1% of the elderly have
hospital stays in excess of 150 days.
55
An alternative approach to these simulations would be to estimate the changes in risk faced by different
types of individuals using the difference-in-differences empirical approach of section five. The difficulty
with this approach, however, is the estimation of the change in risk distribution associated with losing nongroup coverage. A comparison of the medical expenditure distribution of those with insurance in 1977 to
those with no insurance in 1987 conflates the effects of insurance coverage with compositional differences
in the medical expenditure risk faced by the pool of people with and without insurance; a comparison of
these differences in the 1977 NMCES data suggests that they are non-trivial.

32

these calculations assume that total medical expenditures are unaffected by the change in
insurance status.56
A comparison of the solid black bars with the adjacent speckled bars shows the increased risk
of out-of-pocket medical expenditures, particularly at the high end of the distribution, associated
with losing pre-reform coverage. The bars with horizontal lines indicate the medical expenditure
risk distribution when pre-reform plans are upgraded as necessary to comply with the minimum
standards; compared to the distribution under the pre-reform plans (sold black bars), out-ofpocket expenditures in the upgraded plans are lower at every expenditure decile. This comparison
provides an upper bound on the increase in insurance associated with the minimum standards for
those who maintained coverage since it ignores decreases in non-mandated benefits associated
with the minimum standards.
Unfortunately, the health expenditure categories in the NMCES are not detailed enough to
simulate the change in risk exposure associated with the declines in coverage for the nonmandated benefits estimated in section five. I can, however, simulate the distribution of medical
expenditure risk if all insurance except for the mandated minimum benefits is dropped. This is
shown by the gray bars, which provide a lower bound for the increase in insurance coverage
associated with the minimum standards for those who maintained coverage.
7.2 Computing the welfare implications of these changes in risk bearing
To calculate the magnitude of the welfare changes associated with the changes in risk bearing
shown in Figure 3 requires several additional assumptions.57 I assume that utility is a function of
non-health consumption (c) and a random variable m , which measures out-of-pocket medical
expenditure. I assume that the utility function takes the form u (c − m ) . Changes in private
insurance coverage affect the probability density function of out-of-pocket medical expenditures,
56

Moral hazard is unlikely to have as much effect on private insurance expenditures in the Medigap market
compared to other insurance markets since most of the moral hazard costs of Medigap are born by the
public Medicare program rather than by private insurers (Ettner 1997).

33

m

f (m) , and thus expected utility, which is given by

∫ u(c − m) f (m)dm . I assume a constant
0

relative risk aversion utility function and abstract from the possibility of state-dependent utility
functions.
The risk premium (π ) measures the maximum amount that a risk averse individual would be
willing to pay to completely insure against the random variable m . π is defined implicitly by:
m

∫

(5) u (c − π ) = u( c − m) f ( m)dm
0

For each individual in the data, I calculate the risk premium implicitly defined by equation
(5) under different insurance arrangements. For each insurance arrangement, I use the empirical
distribution of out-of-pocket medical expenditures summarized in Figure 3 for f (m) , and the
individual’s income for c .58
This calculation entails several important simplifying assumptions. First, it considers only
private welfare and ignores public welfare losses from the negative moral hazard externality that
the private policies exert on the public Medicare program. Second, it assumes that individuals are
identical with respect to health risks and preferences. In practice, the response to the minimum
standards will be related to how much individuals value their insurance coverage; this suggests
that a calculation based on identical individuals will overstate net welfare losses.59 Finally, the
calculation ignores the existence of de-facto partial insurance for long hospital stays and other

57

This calculation closely follows Feldstein and Gruber (1995). More details on the calculation can be
found there.
58
Following Feldstein and Gruber (1995), I adjust the different distributions of medical expenditure risk to
keep their mean constant. Any change in the mean risk should be captured in a change in premium and thus
is simply a transfer between the insurer and the insured.
59
How great an issue this is depends on the amount of dispersion in risk aversion in the population. Like
estimates of mean risk aversion, estimates of the dispersion vary considerably. For example, Halpern and
Hausman (1986) estimate a normal distribution for the coefficient of relative risk aversion and find a mean
of 3.5 and a standard deviation of 0.17. Barsky et al. (1997) estimate a log normal distribution and find a
mean risk tolerance of .24 with a standard deviation of 0.33.

34

very expensive medical events.60 Since coverage for long hospital stays was one of the mandated
benefits and was rarely held prior to the introduction of minimum standards, the welfare
calculation may overstate the welfare gains associated with the insurance provided by the
minimum standards and thus understate the net welfare losses associated with the minimum
standards.
Table 8 reports the average change in welfare across individuals associated with moving from
the pre-reform status quo to a new insurance status. This welfare change is represented by the risk
premium under the pre-reform insurance plans minus the risk premium under the new insurance
status. An increase in the risk premium reflects an increase in the individual’s exposed risk and is
therefore associated with a decrease in welfare. I report results for two coefficients of relative risk
aversion: 1 (i.e. log utility) and 3. The estimates of welfare changes increase (in absolute value)
as risk aversion increases.
The average welfare loss associated with losing pre-reform coverage ranges from $37 to $943
per person (column 1). The average welfare gain associated with upgrading pre-reform plans to
comply with the minimum standards, without altering the provision of non-mandated benefits,
ranges from $4 to $196 (column 2). The estimates presented in column 3 indicate that changing
from pre-reform insurance plans to insurance plans that cover only the mandated minimum
benefits results in an average welfare loss of $29 to $734.
To calculate the average net welfare change associated with the regulations, I average the
welfare changes associated with different types of insurance changes using the 25 percent longrun estimate for the proportion of the insured who lost coverage. Even under the conservative
assumption that there was no decrease in non-mandated benefits among those who retain
insurance coverage, this calculation (based on columns 1 and 2) suggests an average net welfare

60

This may be provided by states’ medically needy programs (which provide Medicaid to elderly
individuals who have high medical expenses relative to their income in a given year), by the provision of
uncompensated care to the indigent by some hospitals, and by the federal income tax system’s co-insurance
of large medical expenses.

35

loss ranging from $6 for a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 1 to $89 for a coefficient of
relative risk aversion of 3. 61 This loss represents 10 to 15 percent of the average welfare gains
associated with having the pre-reform coverage (i.e. the negative of the results in column 1).
Since approximately one-third of the 22 million Medicare beneficiaries in 1977 had private, nongroup coverage, this suggests an aggregate welfare loss of $40 million to $587 million associated
with imposing these minimum standards on the non-group market for private supplementary
health insurance for the elderly.
8. Conclusion
This paper has examined the consequences of imposing large, binding minimum standards on
a voluntary private health insurance market. Despite the widespread application of minimum
standards in insurance markets, their theoretical effects are ambiguous and little is known
empirically of their consequences. I find that the minimum standards are associated with a
substantial decline in insurance coverage. The central estimate suggests a 25% long-run decline in
insurance coverage in the regulated market associated with imposing minimum standards. There
is no evidence of substitution from the regulated market to alternative sources of insurance.
Additional evidence suggests that the minimum standards are associated with reduced coverage
for many of the non-mandated benefits among those who retain insurance.
A model of the effect of minimum standards in insurance markets with asymmetric
information appears to be the best candidate to explain these effects. This model, as well as the
concerns about consumer misinformation that were the political motivation for the regulation,
suggest that insurance gains associated with the minimum standards can be interpreted as welfare
gains, and insurance losses as welfare losses. Therefore, the welfare implication of these
minimum standards depends on how welfare gains associa ted with upgrading plans to comply
with the minimum standards compare to welfare losses for those who dropped coverage or
61

Under the liberal assumption that all of the non-mandated benefits were dropped, the estimated average

36

reduced coverage of non-mandated benefits. I estimate that, even under relatively conservative
assumptions, these minimum standards are associated with a net welfare loss.
These findings have important implications for government intervention in insurance
markets. In particular, they highlight the need to think carefully about the nature of the market
failure that motivates the intervention, and how it affects the impact of government intervention
in the private market. One of the key findings is that market failures that may motivate
government intervention can also magnify the scope of the unintended negative consequences of
this intervention. In this case, the insurance losses associated with imposing minimum standards
were exacerbated by the presence of asymmetric information.
More generally, the results of this paper suggest that a fruitful direction for further work
would be to consider – both theoretically and empirically – how alternative forms of government
intervention in insurance markets interact with the second-best equilibrium in the unregulated
market. For example, a natural alternative to minimum standards in the voluntary Medigap
market is for the government to extend the mandatory coverage requirements in the Medicare
program. The findings in this paper suggest that in evaluating the merits of mandatory coverage,
it is important to consider how the level of coverage provided by the public program may affect
the equilibrium in the private market for supplementary coverage, and in particular how it may
affect adverse selection pressures in that private market.

net welfare losses (based on columns 1 and 3) rise to $31 and $786 respectively.

37

References
Akerlof, George. 1970. “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality, Uncertainty and The Market
Mechanism”. Quarterly Journal of Economics (74): 488-500.
American Hospital Association. A.H.A. Guide to the Health Care Field. Chicago, IL, 1978.
Barsky, Robert B, F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics (112): 537-580.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” NBER Working Paper 8841.
Cafferata, Gail Lee. 1984. “Private Health Insurance Coverage of the Medicare Population.”
National Health Care Expenditures Study, Data Preview 18. DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 843362. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Cafferata, Gail Lee. 1985. “Private Health Insurance of the Medicare Population and the Baucus
Legislation.” Medical Care, 23(9):1086-96. September.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre. 2000. Econometric Models of Insurance under Asymmetric
Information. In Georges Dionne, ed. Handbook of Insurance Economics. London: Kluwer.
Cutler, David. 1996. “Comment” to “Fundamental Tax Reform and Employer-Provided Health
Insurance,” Jonathan Gruber and James Poterba, in Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax
Reform, H. Aaron and W. Gale (eds), Washington: Brookings Institution, pp.125-162.
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2000. The Anatomy of Health Insurance, in The
Handbook of Health Economics, Culyer AJ and Newhouse JP (eds).
DeNovo, Anne and Gail Shearer. 1978. Private Health Insurance to Supplement Medicare. Office
of Policy Planning, Federal Trade Commission.
Encinosa, William. Forthcoming. A comment on Neudeck and Podczeck’s “Adverse Selection
and Regulation in Health Insurance Markets.” Journal of Health Economics.
Ettner, Susan. 1997. Adverse selection and the purchase of Medigap insurance by the elderly.
Journal of Health Economics (16): 543-562.
Feldstein, Martin and Jonathan Gruber. 1995. A Major Risk Approach to Health Insurance
Reform. NBER Reprint No. 2151.
Finkelstein, Amy. Forthcoming. The effect of tax subsidies to employer-provided supplementary
health insurance: evidence from Canada. Journal of Public Economics.
Fox, Peter D., Thomas Rice and Lisa Alecxih. 1995. “Medigap Regulation: Lessons for Health
Care Reform.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law. Vol. 20, No. 1, Spring. pp 31-48

38

Grossman, H. 1979. Adverse selection, dissembling and competitive equilibrium, Bell Journal of
Economics, 10:336-343.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. State-mandated benefits and employer-provided health insurance.
Journal of Public Economics 55: 433-464.
Halpern, Janice and Jerry Hausman. 1986. Choice Under Uncertainty: A Model of Applications
for the Social Security Disability Insurance Program. Journal of Public Economics, 31: 131-161.
Madrian, Brigitte. 1994. The Effect of Health Insurance on Retirement. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1, pp.181-232.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. The Power of Suggestions: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics: (116) (4):1149-1187.
McCall, Nelda, Thomas Rice and Arden Hall. 1983. Medigap: Study of Comparative
Effectiveness of Various State Regulations: Final Report. SRI International. Menlo Park, CA.
McCormack, Lauren A., Peter D. Fox, Thomas Rice and Marcia Graham. 1996. “Medigap
Reform Legislation of 1990: Have the Objectives Been Met?” Health Care Financing Review,
Fall, Volume 18, Number 1. pp.157-174.
McFadden, Daniel. 1989. Testing for Stochastic Dominance. In Studies in the Economics of
Uncertainty, Thomas Fomby and Tae Kun Seo (eds), New York: Springer-Verlag, pp.113-134.
Merritt, Richard E. and Donna B. Potemken (eds). 1982. Medigap: issues and update. The
Intergovernmental Health Policy Project, George Washington University, Washington D.C. June.
Miyazaki, Hajime. 1977. The rate race and internal labor markets. Bell Journal of Economics 8
(Autumn), pp.394-418.
Neudeck, Werner and Konrad Podczeck. 1996. Adverse selection and regulation in health
insurance markets. Journal of Health Economics, (15): 387-408.
Newhouse, Joseph P. 1992. “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 6(3): 3 –21.
P.L. 96-265. Jun 9, 1980. “Voluntary Certification of Medicare Supplemental Health Insurance
Policies.” [a.k.a. The Baucus Amendments]
Rice, Thomas, Marcia Graham and Peter Fox. 1997. The Impact of Policy Standardization on the
Medigap Market. Inquiry 34: 106-116, Summer.
Ronnen, Uri. 1991. “Minimum quality standards, fixed costs, and competition.” RAND Journal of
Economics Vol 22, No. 4, pp. 490 – 504.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect
Information. Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November), pp.629-649.

39

Stigler, George. 1975. The Citizen and The State: Essays on Regulation. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1986. Medigap Insurance: Law Has Increased Protection
Against Substandard and Overpriced Policies. Pub. No. GAO/ HRD-87-8. Washington D.C.
U.S. General Account Office. 1991. Medigap Insurance: Better Consumer Protection Should
Result from 1990 Changes to Baucus Amendment. Pub. No. GAO/HRD-91-49. Washington D.C.
U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on Aging. 1978. Abuses in the Sale of Health
Insurance to the Elderly in Supplementation of Medicare: A National Scandal. Comm. Pub. No.
95-160. Washington DC
U.S. Senate, Special Committee on Aging. 1978. “Medi-Gap: Private Health Insurance
Supplements to Medicare.” Hearing before the Special Committee on Aging, United States
Senate, June 29, 1978. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.
Van Ellet, T. (ed). 1979. Medigap: State Responses to Problems with Health Insurance for the
Elderly. The Intergovernmental Health Policy Project, George Washington University,
Washington D.C. October 30.
Wilson, Charles. 1977. A model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information. Journal of
Economic Theory 16, pp.167-207.

40

Table 1: Implementation of Minimum Standards for Non-Group Medigap Policies
First Full Year of
Regulations in Effect

STATES

1974

CA*

Percentage of
National Health
Interview Survey
Sample 62
9.7

1977

IL, CT, MN*

8.1

1979

RI, PA, WI*

9.1

1980

MA**

2.5

1981

GA, OR, FL, NH, NV, VT, NE, WY*

10.9

1982

IA, SC, AK, AZ, CO, AL, ND, UT, NJ, AR,
VA*, WV*, NY*, WA, TN

27.0

1983

ME, HI, IN, KS, OK, OH, ID, MS, DE, KY,
TX, MT, MO, SD, NM, LA, NC, MD

28.5

1984

MI, DC

4.3

* Denotes regulation that established classes of policies each with their own minimum benefit
standards. In all of these cases, the least comprehensive category had minimum benefit standards
as strict or stricter than the Baucus requirements, and with the addition of other benefits came
other requirements.
** Denotes standardization. Three policies, specified in detail, were the only ones that could be
sold. The least comprehensive policy satisfied the Baucus criteria.
Sources: The above table was compiled based on information in Van Ellet (1979), Merritt and
Potemken (1982), McCall, Rice and Hall (1983), U.S. General Accounting Office (1986), and
conversations with state regulators in Massachusetts and Wisconsin.

62

This sample is described in detail in section four.

41

All Other
Goods

A
D

C
E

m

B

Supplementary
Health Insurance

Figure 1: The effect of minimum standards on the decision to purchase insurance

42

Table 2: Effect of Minimum Standards on Non-Group Coverage Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.051***
(0.014)

-0.053***
(0.014)

------

ADOPT1 (1 or 2 Years
After Adoption)

------

------

-0.049***
(0.010)

ADOPT2 (3 or More
Years After Adoption)

------

------

-0.080***
(0.022)

State Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

Year Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

------

0.016***
(0.003)

0.016***
(0.003)

------

-0.066***
(0.007)

-0.066***
(0.007)

------

-0.014
(0.010)

-0.014
(0.010)

------

0.025**
(0.011)

0.025**
(0.011)

------

0.012
(0.013)

0.012
(0.013)

------

-0.025
(0.017)

-0.026
(0.017)

------

0.150***
(0.015)

0.150***
(0.015)

------

0.025**
(0.010)

0.025**
(0.010)

Constant

0.425***
(0.011)

-0.757***
(0.190)

-0.754***
(0.191)

R2
N

0.031
17,649

0.048
17,317

0.048
17,317

ADOPT (After Adoption)

Age

Male

Married

High School Degree

Some College

College Degree of Higher

White

Health Status Excellent,
Very Good or Good

Notes: Coefficients in columns (1) and (2) are from OLS estimation of equation (1) using the 1976 through 1986 NHIS data.
Coefficients in column (3) are from OLS estimation of equation (2) on the same data. The dependent variable is whether an
individual has coverage in the non-group market. Sample is limited to those aged 65 to 68. Standard errors are in parentheses.
They are adjusted for the heteroscedasticity in the linear probability model and allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within
each state over time. *** denotes significance at the 1% level. ** denotes significance at the 5% level. * denotes significance at
the 10% level. The omitted education category is less than high school diploma. The omitted health category is “fair or poor.”

43

Table 3: Effect of Minimum Standards on Coverage by Alternative Sources of Supplementary Insurance
Group Coverage
Medicaid Coverage
Medicaid Coverage;
Sample limited to
individuals with less than
high school education
ADOPT1 (1 or 2 Years
0.012
0.009
0.017
After Adoption)
(0.015)
(0.012)
(0.022)
ADOPT2 (Three or More
Years After Adoption)

-0.001
(0.013)

0.021
(0.015)

0.031
(0.027)

R2
N

0.101
17,332

0.113
9,224

0.135
3,986

Notes: Coefficients are from OLS estimation of equation (2). Column headings give the dependent variable. The first column is
estimated using the 1976 through 1986 NHIS data. Since information on Medicaid coverage is available only in 1982 and later
years, the other two columns are estimated using the 1982 through 1986 NHIS data. Standard errors are in parentheses. They are
adjusted for the heteroscedasticity in the linear probability model and allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each state
over time. *** denotes significance at the 1% level. ** denotes significance at the 5% level. * denotes significance at the 10%
level. All regressions include a full set of covariates and state and year fixed effects. Sample is limited to those aged 65 to 68.

Table 4: Effect of Minimum Standards on Non-Group Coverage Rate: Specification Checks

ADOPT-2 (4 or More
Years Prior to
Adoption)
ADOPT-1 (Two or
Three Years Prior to
Adoption)
ADOPT1 (1 or 2
Years After
Adoption)
ADOPT2 (Three or
More Years After
Adoption)
State-specific Linear
Trends
R2
N

Full Sample

Full Sample

Full Sample

States with
Reforms First in
Effect 1979 or
Later

States with
Reforms First in
Effect 1981 or
Earlier

(1)
-------

(2)
0.011
(0.018)

(3)
-0.009
(0.045)

(4)
0.020
(0.029)

(5)
-------

------

0.0002
(0.014)

-0.006
(0.019)

0.007
(0.017)

------

-0.045**
(0.017)

-0.049***
(0.014)

-0.044**
(0.019)

-0.051**
(0.021)

-0.053*
(0.026)

-0.078**
(0.032)

-0.081***
(0.021)

-0.075**
(0.035)

-0.070
(0.043)

-0.081***
(0.023)

YES

NO

YES

NO

NO

0.052
17,317

0.048
17,317

0.052
17,317

0.050
14,329

0.038
6,950

Notes: Coefficients in columns (1) and (5) are from OLS estimation of equation (2) using the 1976 through 1986 NHIS data; the
ADOPT variables are interpreted relative to the entire period prior to adoption. Coefficients in column (2) through (4) are from
OLS estimation of equation (3) on the same data; the ADOPT variables are interpreted relative to period 0. The dependent
variable is whether an individual has coverage in the non-group market. Sample is limited to those aged 65 to 68. Standard errors
are in parentheses. They are adjusted for the heteroscedasticity in the linear probability model and allow for an arbitrary
covariance matrix within each state over time. *** denotes significance at the 1% level. ** denotes significance at the 5% level. *
denotes significance at the 10% level. All regressions include a full set of covariates and state and year fixed effects.

44

Table 5: Mean Benefit Coverage Rates and Premiums in Non-Group and Group Market
Non-Group Market
Group Market
Benefit Coverage
1977
1987
1977
1987
Premiums ($1999)
568
831
1,498
3,369
Hospital Deductible

0.99

0.91

0.95

0.87

Physician Deductible

0.85

0.39

0.91

0.72

Outpatient Prescription Drug

0.27

0.21

0.79

0.91

Care in Skilled Nursing Home

0.62

0.75

0.46

0.68

Inpatient Psychiatric Care

0.36

0.05

0.67

0.75

Home Health Care

0.19

0.05

0.28

0.53

Note: Data are from the 1977 NMCES and 1987 NMES. All means are weighted.

Table 6: Effect Of Minimum Standards on Non-Mandated Benefit Coverage
Benefit Coverage
Without Covariates
With Covariates
With Covariates and
with Interactions
between Covariates and
AFTER
(1)
(2)
(3)
Hospital Deductible
0.0007
0.004
-0.006
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.039)
[N=1,042]
[N=940]
[N=940]
Physician Deductible

-0.269***
(0.054)
[N=1,045]

-0.237***
(0.057)
[N=943]

-0.241***
(0.061)
[N=943]

Outpatient Prescription Drug

-0.177***
((0.051)
[N=1,130]

-0.198***
(0.054)
[N=1,015]

-0.186***
(0.059)
[N=1,015]

Care in Skilled Nursing Home

-0.091
(0.061)
[N=1,165]

-0.110*
(0.064)
[N=1,047]

-0.103
(0.066)
[N=1,047]

Inpatient Psychiatric Care

-0.389***
(0.055)
[N=1,165]

-0.389***
(0.058)
[N=1,047]

-0.359***
(0.059)
[N=1,047]

Home Health Care

-0.396***
(0.054)
[N=1,165]

-0.404***
(0.057)
[N=1,047]

-0.389***
(0.058)
[N=1,047]

Note: Data are from the 1977 NMCES and 1987 NMES. Table reports the estimated coefficient on AFTER*NONGROUP from estimation of equation (4) by OLS. Different rows correspond to different dependent variables.
Heteroscedasticity-adjusted standard errors are in parentheses. *** indicates significance at the 1% level; **
indicates significance at the 5% level; * indicates significance at the 10% level.
45

Table 7: Effect of the Minimum Standards on Log Premiums
(1)
-0.481***
(0.098)

(2)
-0.468***
(0.094)

(3)
-0.454***
(0.099)

(4)
-0.254**
(0.107)

(5)
-0.501***
(0.151)

AFTER

0.997***
(0.085)

0.982***
(0.081)

0.032(+)
(1.58)

-0.933(+)
(1.51)

-0.845(+)
(1.50)

NON-GROUP

-0.881***
(0.082)

-0.800***
(0.081)

-0.813
(0.086)

-0.574***
(0.094)

-0.580***
(0.094)

Controls for Individual
Characteristics

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

Interactions between Individual
Characteristics and AFTER

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

Controls for Each Benefit

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

AFTER*NONGROUP*BENEFITS

-----

-----

------

-----

0.105**
(0.053)

R2
N

0.491
1,165

0.534
1,047

0.545
1,047

0.551
937

0.553
937

AFTER*NON-GROUP

Note: Table reports the results from estimation of equation (4) by OLS, with the log of the premium as the dependent variable.
BENEFITS is a variable that measures the number of non-mandated benefits in the policy; it ranges from 0 to 6.
Heteroscedasticity-adjusted standard errors are in parentheses. *** indicates significance at the 1% level; ** indicates
significance at the 5% level; * indicates significance at the 10% level. Data are from the 1977 NMCES and 1987 NMES.

Figure 2: Market Share of Non-Group Plans

1.2
After Imposition of Minimum
Standards (1987)

Cumulative plan share

1

0.8
Prior to Imposition of
Minimum Standards (1977)
0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Plan Rank

(+)

This coefficient reflects the coefficient for the reference category, given all of the interactions of AFTER and
individual characteristics described in the text.
46

Figure 3: Distribution of Out of Pocket Medical Expenditures Under Different Insurance Arrangements

Mean out of Pocket Medical Expenditures (1999$)

4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Out of Pocket Medical Expenditure Decile
Pre-Reform Insurance Plans

No Private Insurance

Pre-Reform Plans, Upgraded to Meet Minimum Standards

Insurance Covering Mandated Benefits Only

9

10

Table 8: Welfare Change Associated with Insurance Plan Changes (1999 $)
Coefficient of
Relative Risk
Aversion
1
3

Losing pre-reform
coverage
(1)
-36.9
-943.0

Upgrading pre-reform
plans to comply with
requirements
(2)
+4.1
+195.5

Upgrading pre-reform plans to comply
with requirements but dropping all nonmandated benefits
(3)
-28.6
-733.7

Note: Table entries indicate the negative of the change in risk premium associated with a moving from the pre-reform insurance
status quo to a new insurance arrangement. Changes in risk premiums are reported in 1999 dollars.

47

Appendix A: Gaps in Medicare (1977-1987)
Bolded benefit gaps are those that the minimum standards required non-group policies to provide.
I.

Cost Sharing Provisions in Medicare
A. Part A (Hospital)
1. Annual Deductible. ($341 in 1977; $764 in 1987)
2. Copayment for hospital days 61-90 ($85 per day in 1977; $191 per day in 1987)
3. Copayment for lifetime reserve hospital days 91-150 ($170 per day in 1977; $382 per
day in 1987)63
4. Annual Deductible for first three pints of blood used in the hospital
B. Part B (Physician)
1. Annual Deductible ($165 in 1977; $110 in 1987)
2. 20% Copay for approved physician charges64
3. Annual Deductible for first three pints of blood used.

II

Services Covered Only Partially / With Restrictions By Medicare
1. Care in a Skilled Nursing Facility
2. Home Health Care Visits
3. Inpatient psychiatric care

III.

Services Not Covered By Medicare
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Outpatient prescription drugs
Dental care
Vision Care
Hearing Care
Preventive care: routine physical examinations, diagnostic tests and some immunizations
Care in custodial (not skilled) nursing homes
Hospital stays beyond the lifetime reserve of 150 days 65
Physician charges above the “reasonable” rate reimbursed by Medicare Part B.66

63

Beyond 90 days in the hospital, Medicare Part A provides a “lifetime reserve” of an additional 60 days that will be
covered (with copayments) only once in a person’s lifetime
64
The regulation requires that the Medigap policy cover the 20 percent Part B copay for approved physician
charges, subject to a maximum deductible of $200 and a maximum benefit of no less than $5,000 (in nominal
dollars).
65
The regulation requires that the Medigap policy pay 90% of coverage of stays above the lifetime reserve
maximum for a lifetime maximum of 365 additional days.
66
The “reasonable charge” is defined as the lowest of the doctor’s charge, the customary charge, or the prevailing
charge in the area.
48

Appendix B: Probit Estimates
Table B1: Probit Estimates of the Effect of the Minimum Standards on Non-Group Coverage Rates
ADOPT

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.052***
(0.015)

-0.055***
(0.015)

------

------

------

-0.050***
(0.013)

------

------

-0.081***
(0.021)

ADOPT1
ADOPT2

Notes: Coefficients are the estimated marginal effects from probit estimation, evaluated at the means of the independent
variables. Columns (1) and (2) report results from estimation of equation (1) without and with covariates respectively. Column
(3) reports results from estimation of equation (3) with covariates. See Table 2 for more details on the data and specification. ***
denotes significance at the 1% level. ** denotes significance at the 5% level. * denotes significance at the 10% level.

Table B2: Probit Estimates of Effect of Minimum Standards on Non-Mandated Benefit Coverage
Benefit Coverage
Difference-InDifference-inDifference-in-Differences
Differences Without
Differences with
with Covariates and
Covariates
Covariates
Interactions between
Covariates and AFTER
(1)
(2)
(3)
Hospital Deductible
-0.041
-0.044
-0.016
(0.035)
(0.036)
(0.019)
[N=1,042]
[N=889]
[N=889]
Physician Deductible

-0.192***
(0.075)
[N=1,045]

-0.163**
(0.079)
[N=943]

-0.172**
(0.082)
[N=943]

Outpatient Prescription
Drug

-0.275***
(0.071)
[N=1,130]

-0.302***
(0.077)
[N=1,015]

-0.284***
(0.082)
[N=1,015]

Care in Skilled Nursing
Home

-0.075
(0.064)
[N=1,165]

-0.093
(0.068)
[N=1,047]

-0.088
(0.071)
[N=1,047]

Inpatient Psychiatric
Care

-0.448***
(0.040)
[N=1,165]

-0.453***
(0.040)
[N=1,047]

-0.440***
(0.043)
[N=1,047]

Home Health Care

-0.297***
(0.029)
[N=1,165]

-0.293***
(0.029)
[N=1,047]

-0.277***
(0.030)
[N=1,047]

Note: Data are from the 1977 NMCES and 1987 NMES. Coefficients are the estimated marginal effects on AFTER*NONGROUP from probit estimation of equation (4), evaluated at the means of the independent variables. Different rows correspond
to different dependent variables. Heteroscedasticity-adjusted standard errors are in parentheses. *** indicates significance at the
1% level; ** indicates significance at the 5% level; * indicates significance at the 10% level.

49

Appendix C: Effect of Minimum Standards in the Wilson (1977) model.
The standard analysis of asymmetric information in insurance markets assumes perfectly competitive
markets and individuals who differ only in their (privately known) probability of an accident. The Wilson
(1977) “foresight” equilibrium is defined as follows:
Definition: A Wilson equilibrium is a set of policies such that when consumers choose contracts to
maximize expected utility, each policy earns non-negative profits individually and there is no other set of
policies outside of the equilibrium set which, if offered, would earn positive profits in the aggregate and
non-negative profits individually, after the unprofitable policies in the original set have been withdrawn.
The italicized portion represents the refinement of the Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) equilibrium
definition; the refinement guarantees existence and allows for the possibility of a pooling equilibrium.
Figure C1 illustrates the effects of imposing a minimum standard in a Wilson (1977) separating
equilibrium. The vertical and horizontal axes indicate, respectively, income in states with and without an
accident. The point E represents the individual’s endowment with no insurance. The 45 degree line
represents points of full insurance. Movements to the northeast indicate increasing utility. The line HE
(LE) represents the set of policies that earn zero expected profits when high (low) risk individuals buy
them. High risk individuals purchase policy α H and get full insurance at their actuarially fair price; low
risk individuals purchase policy α L , which is the maximum amount of insurance they can purchase at their
actuarially fair price while maintaining incentive compatibility for the high risk type. As drawn, the
equilibrium is separating rather than pooling because low risk individuals prefer their allocation α L to
their most-preferred outcome on the market odds line EF, which is given by γ.
The minimum standards then require that all individuals who purchase insurance must purchase at
least the minimum amount m, which exceeds the amount of insurance low risk types receive with α L.
Therefore, the low risk type must choose between purchasing either the minimum insurance amount m on
the high risk indifference curve through α H or his most preferred outcome on the market odds line, which
is given by γ. As drawn, low risk individuals prefer the latter and the result is a pooling equilibrium with
both types buying policy γ. There is no profitable deviation from γ which remains profitable after the
unprofitable contracts are withdrawn. By the single crossing property, there are policies above EF and
below EL which, if offered in addition to γ, would attract low risk types and not high risk types and thus
50

earn positive profits. However, once this is offered, policy γ -- which now attracts only the high risk types
– becomes unprofitable and would be withdrawn; high risk types would then purchase the remaining
policy, making it unprofitable. Thus sufficiently high minimum standards can result in the destruction of a
separating equilibrium and a resulting pooling equilibrium in which the market for very comprehensive
policies has been destroyed. 67
With the move from a separating equilibrium to a pooling equilibrium, low risk types who remain in
the market gain insurance and high risk types lose insurance. Low risk types are worse off, since by
definition they preferred the original separating equilibrium to any outcome on the pooling line. As a
result, some may choose to purchase no insurance rather than comply with the minimum standards. High
risk types are better off by revealed preference; they could have continued to purchase their policy in the
separating equilibrium. The model is therefore consistent with the empirical findings that the minimum
standards are associated with a decline in both the proportion of the population purchasing insurance and
the purchase of non-mandated insurance by those who retain insurance coverage.
Welfare analysis can be made conceptually simpler by recognizing that the change in the prices of
insurance associated with moving from a separating to a pooling equilibrium represents a transfer
between risk types and so – with a social welfare function that weights both types equally – is irrelevant
for welfare calculations.68 In the separating equilibrium, high risk types have optimal (full) insurance
while low risk types are constrained from buying their optimal (full) insurance. Therefore, from a social
welfare perspective, the loss in insurance by low risk types who drop coverage and high risk types who
drop some non-mandated coverage represents a welfare loss while the gain in insurance for low risk types
who upgrade their policies to comply with the minimum represents a welfare gain.

Indeed, if the minimum required insurance exceeds the amount γ that low risk types wish to buy at the market
odds price, the result is a pooling equilibrium at the minimum requirement and a complete destruction of the market
for any more comprehensive coverage.
68
The model makes stark predictions about the risk type of individuals who experience various changes, with low
risk individuals dropping coverage and high risk individuals dropping non-mandated benefits. Such selection effects
only impact social welfare analysis, however, if the different risk types – which reflect differences in expected
medical expenditure levels – have systematic differences in the variance in medical expenditure around its mean.
Estimates of the coefficient of variation on total medical expenditure for individuals age 65 and older in the 1977
NMCES indicate no systematic differences by health status.
67

51

