NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STOCHASTIC TECHNICAL PROGRESS, NEARLY SMOOTH TRENDS
AND DISTINCT BUSINESS CYCLES

Julio J. Rotemberg

Working Paper 8919
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8919

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002

I wish to thank Russell Cooper, Peter Ireland, John Leahy, N. Gregory Mankiw, Serena Nag and Martin Solá
for helpful suggestions and the Harvard Business School Division of Research for research support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Stochastic Technical Progress, Nearly Smooth Trends and Distinct Business Cycles
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 8919
May 2002
JEL No. E3, O4

ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether it is possible to entertain simultaneously two attractive views
about US GDP. The first is that long term growth in US GDP is attributable to an empirically plausible
specification of random technical progress. The second is that deviations of GDP from a fitted smooth
"trend" are mostly attributable to shocks that have only temporary effects, so that they are unrelated to the
shocks to technical progress that lead to long term growth. The paper shows that these two views are not
incompatible by constructing a model where stochastic technical progress (whose properties are
calibrated to fit some features of US data) has essentially no effect on suitably detrended time series of
GDP. The paper also studies variations in wedges between price and marginal cost that are capable of
giving rise to these transitory movements.

Julio J. Rotemberg
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Morgan Hall
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu

This paper investigates whether it is possible to entertain simultaneously two attractive
views about US GDP. The rst is that long term growth in US GDP is attributable to
an empirically plausible speci cation of random technical progress. The second is that
deviations of GDP from a tted smooth \trend" are mostly attributable to shocks that
have only temporary e ects, so that they are unrelated to the shocks to technical progress
that lead to long term growth. The paper shows that these two views are not incompatible by
constructing a model where technical progress has essentially no e ect on suitably detrended
time series of GDP.
To demonstrate this, I rst compute arti cial \trends" that capture how output responds
to an empirically plausible process for technical progress. I then construct arti cial GDP
series by summing these \trends" to a \cyclical" component of GDP that is due to disturbances whose e ect is only transitory. The key result of the paper is that the detrending
of these arti cial GDP series yields series that are very close to the \cyclical" series and
thus essentially independent of the shocks that cause long term growth. In particular, the
correlation of the detrended series and the \cyclical" series is about .94, while the correlation
of changes in the detrended series and the changes in GDP induced by technical progress is
only about .05.
The key implication of these ndings is that it may be possible to provide a reasonably
complete account of the \cyclical" uctuations one obtains by detrending GDP without giving an important role to the shocks that cause long term growth. This further implies that
it is possible for short term uctuations to be due principally due to movements towards
or inwards from the production possibility frontier. In other words, the separation between
growth and cycles is consistent with the idea that short run uctuations result mainly from
variations in the extent to which the economy operates eÆciently. Short run output reductions, in this view, would occur mainly when the social marginal cost of producing output
falls relative to the bene ts that would accrue if this output were produced. It is important
to stress, however, that growth and cycles can perfectly well be distinct even if both are
eÆcient so that nothing in this paper establishes that variations in eÆciency cause business
1

cycles.
The conclusion that shocks to technical progress can be uncorrelated with cyclical uctuations appears di erent in spirit from one of the important conclusions of the real business
cycle (RBC) literature. Since Prescott (1986), that literature has stressed that persistent
changes in technological opportunities can have important business cycle e ects. Indeed,
Prescott (1986) shows that a stochastic process for technical progress with attractive empirical properties leads to uctuations around a tted trend whose variance is about the same as
the variance of actual uctuations around an identically constructed trend. This literature
has thus argued that temporary departures of output from trend may mostly be due to the
forces that also lead to long term growth. By contrast, this paper seeks to establish that it
is equally possible for the forces that lead to long term growth to be essentially independent
of those that lead to short term uctuations around a stochastic trend. It might be asked
how both of these statements can be true simultaneously, particularly because the model of
individual behavior that I employ is quite similar to that of Prescott (1986). The reason
such contrasting statements are possible is that the stochastic process followed by technical
progress in Prescott (1986) is quite di erent from the one I consider here.
Prescott (1986) lets technological opportunities follow a rst order autoregression that is
close to a random walk. He chooses this speci cation because it corresponds closely to the
time series properties of the Solow residual. As has been pointed numerous times, however,
forces other than technical progress a ect short term changes in the Solow residual. In particular, short run changes in aggregate demand or labor supply can a ect Solow residuals
if, either alone or in combination, there are departures from marginal cost pricing, there
are variations in labor e ort that lead to mismeasurement of the labor input or there are
increasing returns to scale. A second kind of problem with using a random walk for technical
progress is that it leads to counterfactual predictions for the short-term evolution of macroeconomic variables (see for example, Cogley and Nason 1995 and Rotemberg and Woodford
1996).
Here I consider a very di erent kind of process for technical progress, one that is inspired
2

by Mans eld (1968) because it lets innovations di use slowly through the economy. The idea
is that the typical shock that ultimately leads to a large increase in technical opportunities
initially has only a negligible e ect on these opportunities. This shock is thus followed by a
protracted period where the innovation is re ned and adopted.
It is important to stress that technological discoveries that di use slowly through the
economy can still have short run consequences. In particular, the discovery of a technical
innovations that is expected to raise the long run level of output creates wealth e ects even
if it has no impact on the current ability to produce output. As stressed by Manuelli (2000),
the resulting increase in wealth tends to increase both the consumption of goods and the
consumption of leisure, and the latter depresses current output.1 The question, then, is
whether these wealth e ects have quantitatively important e ects on short run changes in
aggregate activity.
The size of these e ect obviously depends on the stochastic process governing the way
technology di uses through the economy. The process I use in this paper is designed to ensure
that the long-term movements in GDP induced by stochastic technical progress have some
common features with the trend component of GDP obtained using the technique described
in Rotemberg (2000). In e ect, I force the process of technological di usion to have two
properties in common with these data. First, a positive shock to technical progress leads to
a protracted period of ever increasing GDP growth, with the maximum growth of GDP taking
place about 60 quarters after the shock. Second, I ensure that the standard deviation of the
innovation in the long-term level of GDP caused by shocks to technical progress equals .011.
This equals the corresponding standard deviation obtained from the tted trend described

Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998) consider a di erent mechanism through which technical discoveries
are capable of depressing current output. The take total labor supply as exogenous but suppose that these
discoveries only a ect the production process if the number of workers devoted to R&D is increased so that
the discovery is implemented. The result is that discoveries lower the physical output of goods as workers
are moved from production to R&D. Whether the value of goods and services measured by GDP would fall
as a result of such a shift then depends on intricacies of national income accounting.
Another di erence between Helpman and Trajtenberg (1998) and the approach pursued here is that they
have in mind a very large aggregate shock. They thus do not calibrate the size of this shock on the basis of
time series evidence on the innovations in the long run level of GDP.
1

3

above.2 Obviously, neither of these requirements imposes any constraints on the short-term
impact of shocks to technical progress.
The short run e ects of long run progress also depends on one's model of the economy,
including the values of its parameters. I carry out this study in the context of two relatively
standard equilibrium models. The rst model I consider is the familiar one-sector growth
model which has been studied extensively in the real business cycle literature. This model is
worth considering rst because it is well known that it induces large short-term movements
in output for the stochastic processes governing technical progress that are usually assumed
in macroeconomics. By contrast, for the stochastic process I consider here, these short run
movements are much smaller.
The second model I consider is a two-sector model where only labor is needed to produce
capital goods but capital and labor are productive in the consumption goods sector. I then
suppose, as do Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu man (1988), that technical progress takes the
form of increasing the eÆciency of capital goods. They show that, for certain parameters
of the process governing these technological changes, random technical progress can lead
to important short-term movements in output. Once again, these movements are much
smaller for the stochastic process I consider here. Moreover, the size of these short run
movements can be rendered essentially negligible by varying the parameter governing the
costs of adjusting investment.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses the models while Section 2
calibrates their parameters. Section 3, then shows that equilibrium output is fairly smooth
when only slowly di using technical progress a ects output. What this means is that the
wealth e ects that accompany the shocks to technical progress are relatively small after all.
The size of these e ects is small both because the standard deviation of long run GDP is
only .011 and because, given the way technological progress cumulates, the instantaneous
e ect of any given shock on GDP is considerably smaller than the long run e ect.
This standard deviation is larger but not much larger than the value of .007 that Rotemberg and
Woodford (1996) estimated for the standard deviation of the innovation in long run output using a VAR
containing GDP growth, linearly detrended hours worked and the ratio of consumption to GDP.
2

4

Given that the wealth e ects are modest, it seems reasonable to seek to remove the e ects
of smooth technical progress by removing a smooth trend, and I do this in Section 4. There,
I construct composite series that are the sum of a series that behaves in a "cyclical" way
and series obtained from computing equilibrium reactions to smooth technical progress. I
rationalize the behavior of the cyclical series with variations over time in eÆciency wedges,
though other rationalizations would yield the same results. The reason is that, in this section,
I focus only on the extent to which the di erence between the composite series and a smooth
trend captures the movements of the cyclical series.
Not surprisingly, these detrended series are more accurate when the parameters of the
model are such that GDP reacts more smoothly to stochastic technical progress. However,
this e ect is very small for the parameters I consider. On the other hand, Section 5 shows
that the parameters that give the smoothest response of GDP also have a less desirable
e ect. In particular, they imply that extremely volatile eÆciency wedges are needed to
explain cyclical uctuations. Section 6 concludes.

1 The Models
I let the representative agent at t maximize a utility function of the form:
1 h
i
X
j log(C ) V (H )
Et
(1)
t+j
t+j
j =0
where Ct represents consumption at t, Ht represents hours of work at t and V is an increasing
convex function. To simplify, I assume that there is a unit mass of consumers so that C and
H represent both the per capita and the aggregate levels of consumption and hours.
I suppose that the real wage Wt equals a markup Lt times the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption. In other words,
Wt
=
Lt V 0 (Ht ):
(2)
Ct
This equation says that the increase in utility obtained by consuming the proceeds of working
an extra hour equal Lt times the utility costs of the extra hour of work. When labor is
competitively supplies L = 1 but labor market distortions can raise L above this level.
5

Where the models di er is in their production structure. In the one-sector model I
consider, output of individual rm i, Yti is given by
Yti = B (zt Hti) (Kti )1



(3)

where zt is an index of technological di usion at time t, B , and  are parameters while Hti
and Kti are the amounts of labor and capital used by rm i at t. I include the xed cost  to
ensure that rms earn no pro ts, at least on average, even when their price is above marginal
cost. I thus suppose that  is zero when I consider the perfectly competitive version of the
model.
Let Rt be the price in terms of consumption goods that rms must pay at t to rent one
unit of capital for use during t. Firms then set
!

(1

Kti 1
Bzt
zt Hti
!
zt Hti
)B K i
t

=

Gt Wt

(4)

=

Gt Rt

(5)

where Gt is the markup of price over marginal cost in the case where rms take Wt and Rt
as given. With perfect competition this is identically equal to one. Below, I also consider
situations where competition is imperfect and the wedge Gt varies over time.
I simplify the analysis by supposing that purchasers see all the goods produced by the
di erent producers as perfect substitutes.3 This means that, supposing all rms end up using
the same inputs and there are Nt rms, aggregate output Yt is
Yt = B (zt Ht ) Kt1

Nt :

(6)

With identical individual output levels, (4) and (5) also hold when the individual values Kti
and Hti are replaced by the aggregates Kt and Ht. Given the perfect substitutes assumption,
pro ts in terms of consumption goods are
h
i
B (z H i ) (K i )1
 W H i R K i = B (z H i) (K i)1 1 1 :
t t

t

t t

t t

t t

t

Gt
This is by no means essential, as shown in Rotemberg and Woodford (1991). They consider the case
where substitutability is imperfect and this ts better with the lack of perfect competition that rationalizes
the wedge .
3

6

If free entry ensures that pro ts are zero, this equation together with (3) implies that
individual rm's output Yti equals =(t 1). Using (3) and (6) this implies that the number
of rms and aggregate output equal, respectively
Nt
Yt

= (Gt 1)Yt=
= BG (zt Ht) Kt1
t

:

(7)
(8)

Equation (8) obviously holds also under perfect competition even though individual rm
output and the number of rms are indeterminate in this case.
If a unit of output is bought at t and invested, productive capital at t + 1 increases by
one unit. Because capital depreciates at the rate Æ, (1 Æ) additional units of output also
become available at t +1. Thus capital at t +1, Kt+1, is given by the standard accumulation
equation
Kt+1 = (1 Æ )Kt + Yt Ct
(9)
I consider the possibility that certain nancial promises are easy to enforce and that anyone
can credibly issue them. In particular, I suppose that individuals can promise to acquire
capital at t and disburse at t +1 the proceeds from both the rental of capital and the selling
of the depreciated capital. This means that
1 = E [R + 1 Æ]:
(10)
Ct

t

t+1

Ct+1

If the right hand side exceeded the left hand side, anyone could make a pro t by obtaining
one unit of consumption from a consumer and promising him a repayment of slightly less
than [Rt+1 + 1 Æ] in period t + 1. Consumers would happily accept this deal as these
contracts are credible. By contrast, if the right hand side were smaller than the left hand
side, the entities o ering such contracts would lose money and exit from this activity. Since
positive amounts of capital are always used in production, (10) must hold as an equality in
equilibrium.
I also consider the possibility that there are imperfections in the market governing these
7

contracts. As in Cooper and Ejarque (1994), I generalize (10) so that
1 = 1 E [R + 1 Æ]:
t

Ft

Ct

t+1

Ct+1

(11)

An increase in the wedge F implies that the payo s from investing in a unit of capital
must rise relative to the utility costs of foregoing a unit of consumption today. This can
be interpreted as saying that the capital market is becoming more imperfect or that intermediation is becoming less eÆcient. In speci c models of nancial market imperfections, as
in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), this wedge depends on other economic variables
including the net worth of entrepreneurs. Here I take a less speci c approach and simply let
F vary exogenously.
>From these equations, I derive three equilibrium conditions in Ct =zt, Kt =zt and Ht. The
rst of these conditions follows from combining (4) (as it applies to aggregate factors) and
(2),
 1
Ct
Kt
L
G
0
1
t t V (Ht )Ht
=
:
(12)
zt
zt
The product LtGt is what Gali, Gertler Lopez-Salido (2002) call the gap.
The second equilibrium condition is obtained by combining (5) when it is applied to
aggregate factors and (10)
1 = 1 E 1 " (1 )B  zt Ht  + 1 Æ# :
(13)
Ct

Ft

t

Gt+1

Ct+1

Kt

The third and last equilibrium condition is not invariant to whether one is considering the
case with free entry or whether one is temporarily holding the number of rms xed. With
a given number of rms Nt , using (6) in (9),
Kt+1 zt+1
zt+1 zt

= (1

Æ)

 1
Ct
Kt
+
BHt
zt
zt

Kt
zt

Nt :

(14)

If, instead, one considers the case of free entry, (8) implies that
Kt+1 zt+1
zt+1 zt

= (1

Æ)

 1
Ct B
Kt
+
H
:
t
G
zt t
zt

Kt
zt

8

(15)

These equations di er only in that increases in hours and capital have a larger e ect on output
(and thus on either consumption or capital accumulation) if the number of rms does not
increase in the way that it would with free entry (where the size of rms is constant).
As in King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988), I study the dynamics of this model by linearizing
these equations around a steady state with a constant value of zt+1 =zt and constant markups
L , G and F . For such a constant growth rate of technical opportunities, equations (12),
(13) and (15) can be solved for steady state values of Ct=zt , Kt =zt and Ht. Since Kt =zt is
constant at such a steady state, so is Kt =zt 1 . Because it is more convenient to work with
the state variable Kt=zt 1 which is independent of current shocks, I denote the logarithmic
deviations of Ct=zt 1 , Kt =zt 1 , Ht and zt =zt 1 from their steady state values by c~t , k~t, h~ t and
~t respectively. When I consider the e ects of random technical progress, I keep markups
constant. Di erentiating these three equations, one obtains
c~t + (1
+  )h~ t = (1 )k~t + ~t
(16)
K ~
(k + ~ ) (1 Æ)K k~ + C c~ = (1 )k~ + (h~ + ~ )
(17)
Y

t+1

F

t

Y

t

Y

t

t

t

t

~
~
(18)
(1 Æ) (~ct+1 c~t + ~t) = (ht+1 kt+1 + ~t+1 )
represent the steady state ratios of capital and consumption to output
respectively, is the steady state value of zt+1 =zt , and  is the inverse Frisch elasticity of
labor supply V 00H=V 0. The steady state version of (15) implies a connection between K=Y
and the other parameters. In particular, it implies that K=Y = 1 C=Y
+Æ .
These three equations can be used to compute the equilibrium paths of c~t , h~ t and k~t for
given expectations about the evolution of ~ . It is worth noting that these three equations
are independent of the average value of the markup G. The reasons is that, with free entry,
the model is e ectively one of constant returns because a proportional increase in labor and
capital is accompanied by a proportional increase in the number of rms so that output rises
proportionately as well.
This can be seen in (8), which can also be used to compute the extent to which output
growth di ers from its steady state value as a function of the variables computed above.
F
where K=Y and C=Y

9

Using this equation to compute Yt=Yt 1 and di erentiating, the log di erence between output
growth at t and its steady state value, which I denote by y_t is
y_ t =

(h~ t h~ t 1 + ~t) + (1

)(k~t k~t 1 + ~t 1):

(19)

I now consider uctuations that are caused by changes over time in L, G and F .
I denote I denote the logarithmic deviation of these wedges relative to their steady state
values by ~Lt, ~Gt and ~Ft respectively. Because these uctuations occur over relatively short
intervals, I imagine that entry does not adjust so that the number of rms is xed at the
level which makes pro ts zero for the steady state level of the markup. Di erentiating (12),
(13) and (14),
~Lt + ~Gt + c~t + (1
+  )h~ t = (1 )k~t
(20)
K~
(1 Æ)K k~ + C c~ = Y + N  (1 )k~ + h~ 
kt+1
(21)
t
t
t
Y
Y
Y t
Y
F

F
G
~
~
(22)
(1 Æ) (~ct+1 c~t + ~t ) = (ht+1 kt+1) ~t+1:
At the steady state with free entry where I evaluate the coeÆcients of these equations, (7)
implies that (Y + N )=Y equals the steady state value of G. For this reason, di erentiating
(6) near the steady state implies that y~t , the deviations of the level of output from its steady
state path induced by markup variations, satisfy

F

y~t = G[ h~ t + (1

)k~t]:

(23)

Equations (20), (21), (22) and (23) can be used to compute the expected paths of k~t,
c~t , h~ t and y~t for given current and expected future values of the ~t 's. It is worth noting
that, because the behavior of the economy can be approximated by these linear equations
near a steady state, these calculations also give the extent to which capital, consumption,
hours and output di er, as a result of expectations of nonzero ~'s, from the paths induced
by expectations of z.
Because neither y~t nor the ~t's are predetermined, these calculations can also be carried
out in reverse so that one can compute the expected evolution of the three eÆciency wedges
10

from expectations about the evolution of aggregate variables. If one knows only the expected
evolution of y~t, di erent expected paths for the three eÆciency wedges are possible, though
they imply di erent movements for the other variables. Since this paper is only concerned
with aggregate output, I set ~Lt and ~Ft equal to zero and then use (20), (21), (22) and (23)
to solve for the paths of current and expected future values of k~t , h~ t , c~t and ~Gt that are
consistent with particular values for current and expected future values of y~t. Suppose in
particular that y~t follows a known stochastic process, which might be described by
H (L)~yt = yt

(24)

where H (L) is a polynomial in the lag operator L whose rst term is equal to one. Then,
(20), (21), (22) and (23) can be solved for the responses of k~, c~, y~ as well as ~G to yt .
This can be interpreted this as giving the way markups react to shocks in the real
economy. However, a more appealing interpretation is that this gives the moving average
representation of the process for markups that generates endogenously the stochastic process
for output given in (24). In particular, the instantaneous \response" of the markup to yt is
really the size of the initial markup shock that is moving the economy away from the steady
state and causing the change in output equal to yt .4
It is worth noting that this logic applies also to the connection between the path of
expected output growth due to technical progress y_ and the expected path of ~. Equations
(16), (17), (18) and (19) can just as easily be read as giving y_ as a function of the ~ (for a
given level of the state variable k~t) as the reverse. Thus, one could postulate a stochastic
process for y_ and obtain the stochastic process for ~ that rationalizes this evolution of y_
under the assumption that ~ is exogenous.
The second model I consider is a two-sector model in which technological progress a ects
only the production of investment goods. The two-sector model I consider is very similar to
that of Beaudry and Portier (2000). One key di erence is that unlike them but in common

This \backwards" method of inferring shocks from the behavior of endogenous variables is used extensively in Rotemberg and Woodford (1997)
4

11

with Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu man (1988), I assume that technical progress a ects
only the quality of the investment goods produced in the economy.5
I suppose labor is mobile so both sectors pay the same wage. Total hours worked, Ht, are
now the sum of the labor used in the investment goods sector, HtI , and the labor used in the
consumption goods sector. Individual rms engaged in the production of consumption goods
have the production function given by (3) except that the technological progress parameter
zt is a constant that I set equal to one. Total production of consumption goods is thus given
by
Ct = B (Ht HtI ) Kt1
Nt 
(25)
where Kt is the total e ective capital stock and Nt is the number of rms producing consumption goods. With free entry, the same reasoning that leads to (8) yields
Ct =

B
(H
Ct t

HtI ) Kt1 :

(26)

Capital goods are produced exclusively with labor and, because they continue to depreciate at the rate Æ, their level at t + 1 satis es
Kt+1

(1

Æ )Kt = zt g (HtI )

(27)

so that technical progress a ects this production function directly. For future reference, this
can also be written as
z K
Kt+1
(1
Æ ) t 1 t = g (HtI ):
(28)
zt
zt zt 1
I continue to let Wt and Rt represent the wage and rental rate of capital in terms of
consumption goods so that (2) continues to hold. Similarly, (4) and (5) continue to hold
for rms producing consumption goods (with zt equal to one). With symmetric rms, the
aggregate versions of these equations are now
!

1
Kt
B
= Ct Wt
(29)
Ht HtI
!
Ht HtI
(1 )B K
= Ct Rt:
(30)
t
5 Beaudry and Portier (2000) suppose instead that it has an unpredictable e ect on the future quantity
of consumption goods that can be produced with a given labor and capital input.

12

where Ct is the markup in the consumer goods sector.
Combining (2), (25) and (29), we now have
[B (Ht

HtI

)

N ]V 0 (H )L C

K1

t

t

t

t t

=

!1
Kt
B
:
Ht HtI

(31)

In the free entry case, given the equality of (25) and (26) this simpli es to6
V 0 (Ht )(Ht

HtI )Lt = :

(32)

Let PtI be the price of investment goods in terms of consumption goods at time t while
It is the markup of this price relative to the marginal cost of producing investment goods.
Then, using (27),
zt PtI g 0 (HtI ) = It Wt :
(33)
An important case I consider is, once again, the case in which there is a well functioning
set of contracts in which agents borrow PtI from individuals with the purpose of buying a
unit of capital at time t. In these contracts, the individuals who advance these funds are
paid at t + 1 the proceeds from renting this unit as well as those that result from selling the
depreciated capital. For individuals to be indi erent with respect to small changes in the
volume of these transactions, it must be the case that
PtI
Ct

= Et C [Rt+1 + (1
t+1

Æ )PtI+1 ]:

A somewhat more general alternative speci cation involves supposing that the individuals
who advance funds at t to buy one unit of capital receive only 1=Ft of the proceeds from
this capital. It then follows that
PtI
= 1 E [R + (1 Æ)P I ]:
(34)
Ct

Ft

t

Ct+1

t+1

t+1

Using (2), (25), (30) and (33), this becomes
Lt It V 0 (Ht )
(1 ) Ct+1 + Nt+1  + E (1 Æ) Lt+1It+1 V 0 (Ht+1)
=
E
t F C
t
zt g 0 (HtI )
t t+1 Kt+1
Ct+1
Ft
zt+1 g 0 (HtI+1 )

This relationship says that, for given L , total hours can only increase when hours used to produce
consumption goods actually fall. Only then can real wages rise relative to consumption so that labor supply
is increased. With a xed number of rms and variable markups, on the other hand, it is possible for H I
and H H I to rise at the same time even without changes in L .
6

13

or

zt Lt+1 It+1 V 0 (Ht+1 )
)
zt Ct+1 + Nt+1  Ft Lt It V 0 (Ht )
= g0(H I )
Et (1 Æ )
: (35)
Et C
t+1 Kt+1
Ct+1
zt+1
g 0 (HtI+1 )
t
The assumption of free entry simpli es considerably the left hand side of this expression
because it implies that C +1C++1N +1 equals Ct .
It is now possible to derive the steady state values for Kt=zt 1 , Ht and HtI for a constant
value of zt =zt 1 and constant values for the markups C , I and F from the three equations
(28), (32) and (35). Supposing that, at such a steady state, F equals one the right hand side
of (35) is equal to I V 0[ (1 Æ)]=(g0 ) where V 0 and g0 are evaluated at the steady state
values of Ht and HtI respectively. Using this fact, and letting h~ It represent the logarithmic
deviation of HtI from its steady state value, di erentiation of these three equations under
free entry holding the three markups constant gives
1 Æ [k~ ~ ] + g0H I + Æ 1 h~ I
k~ =
(36)

(1

t

t

t

t+1

t



+

1

t



h~ t =

g

t

H I =H ~ I
1 H I =H ht

(37)
1 H I =H
h
i
(1 Æ) h h~ + eI h~ I ~ i
Ih
I
~
~
k~t+1 =

h
+
e
(38)
t+1
t
+1
t
t+1
t
(1 Æ)
(1 Æ)
where eI = g00H I =g0. These equations can be used to obtain the paths of k~t , h~ t and h~ It as
a function of the current and expected future values of ~.
I now turn to the computation of the log deviation of real output growth relative to the
steady state on the basis of the evolution of these variables. The value of output in terms of
consumption goods at t, which I label Yt equals Ct + PtI It where It equals Kt+1 (1 Æ)Kt .
A Divisia index of real output growth at t is thus
Ct dCt PtI It dIt
+ Y I
Yt Ct
t
t

where dCt and dIt represent the instantaneous changes over time in C and I respectively.
In a steady state with constant markups and a constant rate of growth of z, the ratios C=Y
and P I I=Y are constant. This can be seen by noting that (27) implies that, at such a steady
14

state, K and I grow at the rate because H I is constant. The constancy of H then, together
with (26) and (29) imply that C and W grow at the rate (1 ) . As a result, (33) implies
that P I falls at the rate . This, in turn, implies that P I I rises at the rate (1 ) which
is the same as the rate of increase of C .
The constancy of the ratios C=Y and P I I=Y imply that di erentiating (26) and (27),
the log deviation of output growth from its steady state value, y_t, equals
y_ t

=


Ch
h~ h~
(H I =H )(h~ It
Y 1 H I =H t t 1
0 I

h
i
1 YC ~t + g Hg h~ It h~ It 1 :



h~ It 1 )

+ (1

i
)(k~t k~t 1 + ~t 1 ) +

(39)

As before, equations (36), (37), (38) and (39) can just as easily be used to obtain the
paths of outputs and inputs on the basis of an expected path of ~ as they can be used to
obtain the evolution of ~ that rationalizes a particular expected path for output.
When I consider the e ect of changing markups I ignore entry and x the number of
rms at the free entry level that ensures that C + N =C equals C . I denote the logarithmic
deviations of Lt, It , Ct and Ft from their steady state values by ~Lt, ~It , ~Ct and ~Ft
respectively. Di erentiating (28), (31) and (35) at the steady state values of HtI , Ht and
Kt =zt 1 , one obtains
1 Æ k~ + g0H I + Æ 1 h~ I
k~t+1 =
(40)
t
t
g

1 + (C 1) h~ + ~L + ~C + (1 )(C 1)k~ = [1 + (C 1)] H I =H h~ I (41)
+
t
1 H I =H t t t
1 H I =H t
n

C 1 h
H I =H ~ I io
~
~
(1
)
k
+
h
t
+1
t
+1
C
I =H
I =H ht+1 [

1
H
1
H
h
i
h
i
Æ ) ~Lt+1 + ~It+1 +  h~ t+1 + eI h~ It+1
~Ft + ~Lt + ~It +  h~ t + eI h~ It :

k~t+1 + ~Ct+1 +

(1

(1

Æ )] =

(42)

This allows one to solve for the e ect of markup deviations on the paths of k~t, h~ t and h~ It .
The log deviation of the level of real output from its steady state level, y~t is simply the percent
by which Ct + P I It departs from the steady state value of Yt where P I represents the price
of investment goods along the steady state path. This can be obtained by di erentiating
15

(25) (evaluated at the steady state path for Nt ) and (27). This yields
y~t = C


Ch
h~
Y 1 H I =H t


(H I =H )h~ It ) + (1

i



)k~t + 1

C  g0H I ~ I
h:
Y g t

(43)

Equations (40), (41), (42) and (43) can be used to solve for the expected path of k~,
h~ I , h~ and y~ as a function of the expected paths of ~Lt , ~I , ~C and ~F . This means that
a particular stochastic process for y~ of the form (24) can be rationalized by a number of
di erent stochastic processes for the four markup deviations.

2 Calibration
There are two quite di erent types of parameters that play a role in the models I simulate.
The rst type are the behavioral parameters that act as coeÆcients in the linearizations
discussed in the previous section. The second are the parameters that govern the evolution
of ~t and the ~'s.
For the one-sector model, I set Lt = Ft = 1 and choose behavioral parameters which
are within the range considered in the real business cycle literature (see King, Plosser and
Rebelo (1988) and King and Rebelo (1999)). They are listed on Table 1.
Table 1
Parameters for the One-Sector Model
C/Y G
.99 1 .7 .03 .01 .7 1,1.4
The reason I neglect changes in L and F is that they do not contribute to the analysis. It
should be clear, however, that changes in L have similar e ects on output than changes in
G . By using suitable variations in L while setting G = 1 I would have obtained identical
results.
In the case of the two-sector model, there are some additional parameters. The rst of
these is the value of g0H I =g. The steady state version of (33) implies that g0H I =gI equals
the labor share in the sector that produces investment goods W H I =P I zg. I suppose this


Æ

16

share is the same as the corresponding share in the consumption good sector, namely .7.7
The equality of the two labor shares implies that the ratio of the labor used in producing
investment goods to the labor used in producing consumption goods is equal to the ratio of
the revenues of the two industries. This implies in turn that (H H I )=H equals the ratio
of consumption spending to the value of output, which I keep equal to .7.
The last parameter that plays a role in the two-sector model is eI = g00H I =g0. The
existence of diminishing returns in the investment goods sector ensures this is positive.
Moreover, because W=zg0 is the marginal cost of producing an additional unit of capital
goods, eI is the elasticity of this marginal cost with respect to a percent increase in H I .
I experiment with various values for this parameter. One appealing aspect of considering
values that are large in absolute value is that this implies that there are large costs of making
investment volatile. Thus a high absolute value for this parameter plays a role similar to the
assumption of adjustment costs for capital. They both imply that higher rates of growth of
the capital stock are associated with higher marginal costs of increasing the capital stock by
one unit.
While the behavioral parameters that I consider are relatively standard, my assumptions
about the evolution of z are not. What I seek is a stochastic process for z such that a
positive technological disturbance has, at rst, only a very small e ect on the availability
of productive opportunities. The availability of opportunities then experiences increasingly
faster growth for some time, before settling back to its normal growth rate. The idea is
that even those inventions that have huge eventual e ects on output have only modest
instantaneous e ects on the technology that is \in use".
The parameters I pick to capture this process are designed to t some aspects of the long
run movements in US GDP. In particular, I choose a stochastic process for z that ensures
that output satis es some of properties of the trend in output growth that one obtains by
detrending US GDP using the method of Rotemberg (2000). Figure 1 shows the evolution
That the labor share in the consumption goods sector equals follows from the fact that (4) implies
that this labor share equals (Y + N )=Y . This equals because Y + N =Y equals .
7

17

of the growth rate of this trend from 1947:1 to 1998:1. From a statistical point of view, this
growth rate seems well described by an AR(5). In particular, a regression explaining trend
growth with ve lags of trend growth yields the following
y_ ta

= 4:11y_ta 1 6:59y_ta 2 + 5:1y_ta 3 1:86y_ta 4 + 0:24y_ta 5
(:07)
(:27) (:41) (:27) (:07) S:E: = 8:84e 8

(44)

where y_ta is the rate of growth of trend GDP at t and the constant is imprecisely estimated and
insigni cantly di erent from zero. Further lags are not statistically signi cant when added
to this regression. As a result of rounding, the reported estimates in the above regression
add up exactly to 1.0. In the absence of rounding, these estimates add up something just
short of 1.0 so that the estimated process is stationary. It is thus possible to describe this
process in a revealing way by displaying the moving average coeÆcients which describe how
(trend) output growth responds to a unit impulse that takes place in the rst period.8
This response in displayed in Figure 2. This gure shows that the growth rate rises
steadily from the rst period and reaches a maximum of 1915 after 63 quarters. The growth
rate then falls back towards its steady state value, though it overshoots it as the convergence
to the steady state involves damped oscillations. Since the growth rate converges, a shock
of this type only has an e ect on the long run level of output. The long run e ect of a unit
impulse is 1.25e5.
While this long run e ect seems huge, it is important to remember that the standard
deviation of the residuals in (44) is only 8.84e-8. This means that these residuals induce a
standard deviation of the innovation in the level of long run output that equals (1.25e5)(8.84e8) or .011. This is larger but not much larger than the value of .007 that Rotemberg and
Woodford (1996) estimated for the standard deviation of the innovation in long run output
Interestingly, the rst di erence of the HP trend of GDP also ts an AR(5) fairly well. Its residual is
quite a bit larger, however. Its standard error equals 4e-6. Moreover, the moving average representation of
this tted process involves much stronger short run e ects. The main reason I do not use the HP trend is
that trend growth of GDP obtained by this method is strongly correlated with the HP cycle. It would thus
not be reasonable to combine arti cial trends that mimic the properties of the HP trend to cyclical series
that are independent of these constructed trends.
8

18

using a VAR containing GDP growth, linearly detrended hours worked and the ratio of
consumption to GDP.
Given the process for output growth in (44), it is also possible to construct stochastic
processes for ~ that rationalize this process in each of the models I consider. I carry out
these calculations in order to see whether the processes for ~ that are computed in this way
seem reasonable on
grounds. As I show below, they quite often are not.
Instead, I mostly focus on a process for z that generates long run movements in output
that are broadly consistent with these facts. In particular, I use a process such that output growth rises after a positive innovation and reaches its maximum level after about 60
quarters. At the same time, I choose the standard deviation of the shocks to z in such a
way that the standard deviation of the corresponding innovation in the permanent level of
output equals .011.
The actual process for ~t I use is given by
a priori

(1

1 L)(1 2 L)(1 3 L)~t = zt

(45)

where L is the lag operator, the 's represent three roots and zt is an i.i.d. variable with
standard deviation z . I suppose that 1 and 2 are complex conjugates with modulus equal
to .985 and angle of :02. The use of these complex conjugates ensures that shocks which
raise z's growth rate are followed by ever larger increases in this growth rate for some time.
I set the value of 3 equal to .5.
The purpose of including the wedges L, C , F and I is to consider variables whose
movements have only short term e ects on GDP. For this purpose I could also have included
exogenous short-run variations in productivity. In any event, the analysis above has shown
that one can use variations in the wedges I considered to rationalize any stationary process
for output. I thus consider variations in these variables that justify the temporary movements
of output that emerge from the trend/cycle decomposition in Rotemberg (2000). Denoting
my measure of temporary deviations of output from trend by y^ta, using quarterly data from
1947:1 to 1998:1, and ignoring the constant, this series appears to be well-described the
19

following autoregression:
y^ta

= :89^yta 1 + :34(^yta 1 y^ta 2) + :15(^yta 2 y^ta 3) + at
(:025) (:068)
(:070)
R2 = :89

(46)

Subsequent lags are statistically insigni cant. Once again, an appealing way to describe
this involves displaying the way ya responds to a unit impulse. This is shown in Figure
3. After increasing by one unit, such a shock leads to further small increases in output in
the next two quarters. After this, cyclical output returns fairly rapidly to its mean value.
Indeed, after 15 quarters the e ect of the shock is almost entirely dissipated. This strong
reversion towards the mean is re ected in the relatively low coeÆcient on lagged output in
the above equation as well as in the positive coeÆcients on lagged output growth (which
ensure that when output starts falling the level of output is pulled further back towards the
mean).
In the one-sector model, I allow for only one wedge between price and social marginal
cost so the stochastic process for this wedge can be recovered uniquely from (46). In the
two-sector model, by contrast, I set Lt = 1 and let the other wedges vary (though I could
have obtained identical results by allowing L to vary and xing, for example, C ). I do
this because I am interested in analyze the e ects of some key parameters on the markup
variations that are needed to rationalize actual business cycles. In particular, variations in eI ,
which a ect the extent to which output growth responds smoothly to zt , have implications
for the type of markup variations that are needed to rationalize business cycles. To make
this conceptual point, I let C , I and F be proportional to one another so that
~Ct

=
~Ft =

 C ~It
 F ~It

and I experiment with several values for  C and  F .
20

3 Impulse responses from a shock to

z

In this section, I ignore variations in the ~'s and concentrate on the e ects of changes in
z . I rst consider the one-sector model in the case where technical progress evolves as in
(45). Figure 4 shows the reaction of output growth to a unit impulse in zt . As required, the
process (45) does ensure that peak output growth occurs about 60 quarters after the shock.9
Figure 4 also shows that a one percent increase in z initially lowers output by 60%.
Output continues to decline for a while longer before it starts rising. I found initial output
declines of this sort in every model I simulated in which the process for technical progress
involved a gradual rise in z while also ensuring that peak output growth takes place about
60 quarters after the initial shock.
The mechanism for this nding is easy to understand, and is quite similar to that in
Manuelli (2000). Large future increases in technical progress create strong current wealth
e ects. They thus lead the representative agent to increase his current consumption as well
as his current leisure. This means, in particular, that it is rational to consume some of the
existing capital stock immediately. These additional aspects of the responses to the increase
in z can be seen in Figures 5 and 6. These show the response of hours as well as that of
Ct =zt 1 . Hours stay below the steady state for some time, while consumption relative to z
rst rises and then falls. Consumption itself does not fall, however, as z rises rapidly over
time. The wealth e ects thus ensure that a shock to technical progress starts what might be
termed a recession. Interestingly, the idea that eventual technical progress initially causes
output declines is found to have some empirical support in Gali (1999).10
One obtains an alternative view of the importance of wealth e ects in this model if one
constructs the process for ~ that rationalizes the output growth process given by (44). This
process is depicted in Figure 7. It shows that z grows abruptly in the rst period. Its growth

While the peak of growth in the gure appears to be much smaller than the peak response in Figure 2,
this mostly re ects the fact that a shock that initially raises z by one percent has a very di erent e ect on
the long run value of z in the two cases. It raises the long run value of z by about 125,000 in the case of
Figure 2 while it raises by about 3200 in Figure 4.
10 Rather di erent evidence of contractionary e ects of technical progress is found in Shea (1998). However,
this evidence hinges critically on heterogeneity across sectors, which is obviously absent in my model.
9

21

then falls to more moderate levels only to rise again and have a local maximum after about
60 quarters. The one-quarter rise at the beginning is larger than this local maximum in ~.
This process is intuitively unappealing. If technology in use were able to grow as abruptly
as indicated in the gure, the delayed reactions shown in the gure would be diÆcult to
rationalize.
Moreover, the process depicted in Figure 7 still leads to large wealth e ects and thus
large initial declines in hours worked. To see this, Figure 8 depicts the employment response
to an z shock which has the moving average representation given in Figure 7. This shows
that employment declines abruptly and stays low for some time, just as it did in response to
shocks to (45) in Figure 5. Indeed, since the cumulative output response to a shock to (44)
is about 40 times larger than that to a shock to (45), the two responses of employment are
quite comparable. This means that the process in Figure 7 avoids initial declines in output
not by reducing wealth e ects but only by including an abrupt exogenous force that would
otherwise abruptly raise output on impact.
I now turn to the two-sector model. This model has the feature that, rather realistically,
it prevents agents from consuming their capital. This makes it harder for them to increase
their consumption when z rst rises and thus has the potential for reducing the fall in the
value of work that was observed in the one-sector model. The initial responses in this model
turn out to depend critically on the parameter governing the curvature of the production
function for investment goods g00H I =g0. If one makes this parameter equal to the curvature
of the production function for consumer goods, it equals (1 ) or .3. For this parameter
value, a one percent rise in z still leads to substantial instantaneous output declines in the
two-sector model.
The reason is that, while it is impossible to consume capital it is still rational for agents
to postpone investment until z has risen further. This means that agents still let capital fall
through depreciation. It also means that the labor input devoted to investment goods falls
for some time. The absolute reduction in output when z rises by one percent is smaller than
in the one-sector model, but so is the ultimate increase in output growth when the rise in z
22

is fastest. The reason, of course, is that the increase in z now has a smaller e ect since it
only a ects a fraction of production.
A revealing way to compare the one and two-sector model's output responses, is to hit
the two models with z 's of di erent sizes where these sizes are chosen so that the initial
reduction in output growth is the same. This is done in Figure 9. In the case of the twosector model, the responses are di erent for C = I =  = 1 and C = I =  = 1:4 so the
gure shows both responses (I set the average F equal to 1 in both cases). The Figure shows
that, for this given output reduction, subsequent output growth is largest in the one-sector
model. Moreover, in the two-sector model, subsequent output growth is lower when  = 1:4
than under perfect competition.
This last e ect is due to the fact that while my assumptions regarding free entry imply
that the consumption sector e ectively operates with constant returns to scale even when
 = 1:4, this is not true of the investment goods sector. This sector has higher returns to
scale the higher is . This means that the reductions in H I , which result from both the
wealth e ect and the fact that future H I is much more productive than current H I , lead to
much larger reductions in output when  = 1:4.
But, even when  = 1, the combination of strong incentives to postpone investment and
the fact that the increase in z a ects a smaller fraction of the economy in the two-sector
model, suÆce to imply that the initial decline in output looms large relative to that of the
one-sector model in the case where eI = :3. Matters are di erent when eI is increased. To
show this, I consider a somewhat extreme case in which eI = 60. Figure 10 plots the resulting
responses of output to a shock to z for both the cases when  is equal to 1 and 1.4 (the
responses are essentially superimposed). Output still declines on impact but this e ect is
negligible, particularly as the cumulative output response from the shock equals about 1650,
which is roughly half the output response in the one-sector model.
The initial reductions in output are small because the initial reductions in H I are themselves small so that the degree of returns to scale in the investment goods sector is not
important. The reason, in turn, for the fall in H I to be small when eI = 60 is that the
23

increased curvature of g implies that the marginal product of labor rises very quickly in this
sector as workers are withdrawn from it. The result is that output changes are fairly smooth.
This means that one also obtains reasonable results with eI = 60 if one uses the process
for trend output growth (44) to infer the stochastic process of ~ that gives rise to the
uctuations in y_ . In particular, Figure 11 shows the evolution of ~ that is needed after a
shock of one percent to (44) to rationalize this output response. The growth in z in the rst
period is only 5 times larger than the growth in the second period and both are substantially
smaller than the growth of z in subsequent quarters.
I now study whether the di erences in the impulse responses I have considered so far are
re ected in the smoothness of growth rates of GDP induced by random draws of z when ~
follows the process in (45). For each speci cation, the e ect of the history of z shocks on y_
can be written as
N
X
y_ t =  zt 
(47)
 =1
where the theoretical value of N is generally in nite and  gives the response of output
growth  periods after the shock. The values of  obviously depends on the speci cation.
Using the 's that I derived earlier for my ve speci cations while truncating N at 500,
I construct draws of y_ of length 205 (which corresponds roughly to the length of available
quarterly GDP series in the U.S.) by using a random number generator to obtain realizations
of zt . I then add a linear trend with a coeÆcient that ensures that the rate of growth of
this constructed series equals .0079, which is the rate of growth of y_ta.11 I denote these
constructed series by y_ z .
I construct 500 series of y_ z for each speci cation. These speci cations include the onesector model as well as the two-sector model with eI equal to both .3 and 60. I also consider
separately the cases where the average markup in the consumption and investment goods
sectors equal 1 and 1.4. For each of the resulting y_ z series, I compute a simple measure of
smoothness. This measure is simply the mean of (y_tz y_tz 1)2 . I compute this mean for each
As discussed in Rotemberg (2000), these added linear trends end up fully incorporated into the estimated
trends. Thus, the only function of these added trends is to make the low frequency behavior of the constructed
y_ series be similar to that of y_ a
11

24

realization of y_ i and the rst line of Table 2 shows the results of averaging this mean across
all realizations.
Table 2
The Smoothness of the Constructed trends
One-sector
Two-sector
I
I
e = :3;  = 1 e = :3;  = 1:4 eI = 60;  = 1 eI = 60;  = 1:4
Squared second 7.97e-8
10.3e-8
23.4e-8
5.39e-10
5.68e-10
di erence
For purposes of comparison, the mean of (y_tz y_tz 1)2 would be zero if the series were
a linear trend. On the other hand, the mean of the squared second di erence of US GDP
from 1947:1 to 1998:1 is 1.47e-4. Thus, the constructed series are substantially smoother
than actual GDP, particularly when eI equals 60. As can be expected given the di erences
in impulse responses shown in Figure 9, the least smooth series is obtained in the two-sector
model with  = 1:4 and eI = :3. But even for this series, this indicator of smoothness is
nearly 1000 times smaller than for US GDP.

4 Distinguishing Nearly Smooth Trends from Business
Cycles
Because technical progress leads to fairly smooth changes in GDP, it seems natural to ask
whether removing a smooth trend allows one to accurately measure the \business cycle" when
actual output consists of the sum of yz and a cyclical series. The method of Rotemberg (2000)
seems particularly appropriate for this purpose because it ensures that the trend and the
cycle do not move together over short periods of time. This orthogonality seems essential if
one is supposed to extract a cycle which is known to be orthogonal to the disturbances that
cause long run growth. At the same time, the method seeks to make the trend smooth while
also preventing its \cycles", the deviations from trend, from being too long. It should be
clear why smooth trends are desirable in the current context. The avoidance of cycles that
are too long is important as well. Otherwise, one can always make the trend a straight line
i.e,

25

(which is maximally smooth) at the cost of incorporating changes in trend growth induced
by technical progress into the measured cycle.
The cyclical series I construct have the same stochastic process as (46). Thus, I invert
this process so that the cycle at t, ytc can be written as
ytc =

n
X

 =1

 ct



(48)

where ct is an i.i.d random variable with the same variance as at , namely, 9e-5. I generate
samples (of length 205) of ytc by setting n = 50 and using a random number generator to
produce observations of ct. As explained above, the variations in ytc could be due to variations
in markups and indeed, one can recover the necessary variations in markups if one knows
that variations in certain markups are the only cause of ytc.
The series I analyze are then given by
a

priori

ytm = ytz + ytc

I do not consider the ve speci cations I considered earlier. Rather I consider only the
one-sector model, and three speci cations of the two-sector model with  = 1:4. In these
three speci cations, eI equals .3, 5 and 60 respectively. For the case with eI = 5, obviously,
the response of y_ to z is intermediate in smoothness between the case where eI = :3 and
the case where it equals 60.
In this section, I thus neglect the speci cations with  = 1. A reason to do this is that
if the variability of cyclical output is due to symmetric variations in the 's around their
steady state values, it is unappealing to suppose that  falls below one. It thus makes sense
to start out with values of  above one. Of course, the requirement that  be greater than
one is consistent with the average value of  being only negligibly higher than one as long
as the uctuations in  are small. However, this raises the question of whether only small
uctuations in  are needed to rationalize the size of actual cyclical uctuations in GDP. I
return to this question below.
My approach consists, once again, of drawing 500 histories of z and c, each of which
yields 205 observations on ytm. I then compute several indicators of the ease with which the
26

component of output due to z, ytz can be decomposed empirically from the component due to
markup variations ytc. Before doing so, it is worth discussing brie y the connection between
the properties of ytm and U.S. GDP. The two series, obviously do not have identical statistical
properties since the initial reaction to z shocks in the equilibrium models is generally quite
di erent from the initial reaction of GDP to a shock to equation (44). Still, it is worth
knowing whether the ym series are radically di erent from the logarithm of GDP. For this
purpose, Figure 12 displays the log of the periodogram of the log of US GDP from 1947:1
to 1998:1. For comparison with this, I also computed the periodogram for 500 realizations
of ym by setting eI = 5 (the results for other values of eI are very similar). The smooth
curve in the center of the displayed lines of Figure 12) contains the log of the mean values
(frequency by frequency) of these power spectra. The two lines at the top and bottom are
the log of the maximum and minimum realized values of power at each frequency from these
500 observations. Because these lines are quite close to one another, one can conclude that
the realized histories of yz bear some broad similarity to the history of US GDP.
The indicators of the ease with which ym can be decomposed are displayed in Table 3.
Most of my focus is on the results of detrending the composite series with the method of
Rotemberg (2000), though I also computed some statistics with the HP lter for comparison.
Except where otherwise indicated, the indicators in Table 3 are obtained by ignoring the rst
and last 16 observations. The reason is that it is diÆcult to estimate smooth trends near
the boundaries of the sample.
The rst indicator I consider is the mean square error of the estimated trends relative to
the generated values of ytz . The rst two rows show that, indeed, these MSE's are lower when
the boundary observations are eliminated. This is also true when the HP lter is used to
estimate the trend. Overall, the method of Rotemberg (2000) is more accurate than the HP
lter. When observations at the boundary are ignored, its MSE is about two times smaller.
At the same time, the method of Rotemberg (2000) generates estimates whose error is
not negligible relative to the variance of the cycle. The cycle variance from (46) is 8.08e-4
so that, ignoring the boundaries, the MSE equals about 15% of the variance of the signal yc.
27

Not surprisingly, those speci cations that generate a less smooth trend yz generate higher
MSE's, though the di erences are fairly small. When the trends are computed ignoring the
boundaries, the least smooth trend has a MSE that is only about 6% higher than that of
the smoothest trend.
The MSE is not ideal for understanding whether detrending recovers a useful measure
of the cycle, because it is a ected by the mean error. This mean error can be particularly
important when the boundaries are ignored because the detrended series are then not at
all guaranteed to have a mean of zero. I thus consider several other properties of the error
in measuring yz (or yc) which are particularly relevant if one wants to use detrended series
to study the properties of business cycles. To study these properties, I denote by y^c the
estimated cycle, the di erence between ym and the estimated trend in ym. I then compute
several statistics that illuminate the extent to which y^c and yc move together.
I rst consider the correlation between y^c and yc. This correlation is equal to about .94
for all speci cations so the series largely move together regardless of the trend speci cation.
To describe other properties of these co-movements, I consider regressions of y^ on yc and viceversa. The average R2 of these regressions is close to the square of the average correlation
of the two series, though the two are not identical because the correlation changes from
realization to realization. The average R2 is somewhat larger when the trend series are
smoother, but the di erences across trend speci cations are very small.
The average regression coeÆcient in the regression of y^c on yc equals around .87. The
fact that this is below 1 implies that the di erence between y^c and yc is negatively correlated
with yc. By contrast, the average regression coeÆcient of yc on y^c is very close to 1, so this
error almost uncorrelated with y^c.12 This means that the best forecast of yc based on y^c is
essentially equal to y^c itself, so this can be used directly as a measure of the cycle.
Since the correlation of y^c and yc is so high while, at the same time, yz is uncorrelated
with yc, the in uence of the trend on the detrended series must be small. To obtain a more
i.e,

Note that the product of the two coeÆcients in Table 3 is close but not identical to the displayed R2
of the regression of y^c on yc . For a single regression, the two would be identical but here I am computing
means of the coeÆcients and the R2 's of 500 regressions.
12

28

direct estimate of this in uence, it is attractive to look at rst di erences because the level
of yz is nonstationary. I thus consider regressions of the change in y^c, ^yc on changes in
the cycle yc and the trend yz . The R2 of the rst of these regressions rises slightly as
smoother trends are considered but these di erences are tiny. Even in the case of the one
sector model, this R2 is so high that the correlation between ^yc and yc is almost equal
to .999.
Similarly, the coeÆcient in this regression is estimated to be essentially equal to 1. Thus,
the changes in y^c are essentially all due to changes in yc. Since these changes are independent
of changes in yz , one can use a regression of ^yc on yz to obtain an estimate of the variance
of ^yc that is accounted for by the contemporaneous change in the trend yz . This estimate
is given by the R2 displayed in table 3 just above the properties of tted trend growth. Not
surprisingly given the results in the regression of ^yc on yc, these R2's are minuscule. As
one would expect, they fall when the constructed trend is smoother, though, in any case, it
seems fair to say that the e ect of changes in technical progress on the estimated cycle are
negligible.
While the focus of this paper is on the extent to which detrended series can be independent
of technical progress, the question of whether tted trends capture the e ects of technical
progress is also of interest. To study this question, I study the connection between changes in
tted trends, which I denote by ^yz and changes induced by technical progress yz . The R2's
of these regressions are substantially lower than those connecting tted and actual cycles.
Still, they are quite a bit larger in the case where eI = 60 than in the one sector model so
that smooth trends do a better job of tting the e ect of technical progress when these e ects
are smoother. Similarly, there is a tendency for the estimated coeÆcients of the regressions
of yz on ^yz and vice-versa to have coeÆcients closer to 1 when eI = 60. However, both
these R2's and these coeÆcients suggest that the variations in the rate of growth of output
induced by technical progress are only imperfectly captured by smooth trends. It remains
an open question whether this t can be improved signi cantly with better estimators or
whether estimating the changes in GDP growth rates induced by smooth technical progress
29

is intrinsically diÆcult.
At the bottom of table 3, I give two statistics that clarify why the MSE is higher when
the series are detrended using the HP lter. In this case, the R2 of the regression of y^c
on yc is smaller so that these series are less closely related to one another. Moreover, the
coeÆcient in this regression is smaller as well, implying that the series detrended by the HP
lter move substantially less than one-for-one with yc.

5 The Smoothness of the e ects of z and the variability of markups
The detrended series y^c are good estimates of yc in all the models I have considered. The
models di er, however, in the extent to which eÆciency wedges must vary to justify any
particular movement in yc. If one makes the trend smoother by increasing eI , this makes
rms less willing to vary employment in the investment goods sector. This means that certain
changes in markups now have smaller e ects on investment, so that larger markup changes are
needed to ensure that investment (and even output) varies by the proper amount. I illustrate
this in this section by considering the case where L is constant. It is then important that
variations in G, C and I be small enough so that markups of price over marginal cost fall
only rarely below one.13
To study this question, I compute impulse responses of markups with respect to the
shocks at in (46). In e ect, I am computing the way these markups vary as output evolves
in the way described in Figure 3. The initial reaction of markups is, in e ect, the size
of the initial markup variations that is needed for GDP to rise by one percent under the
assumption that subsequent markups will also vary in the way indicated by the impulse
response function. As discussed earlier, these impulse responses are obtained by solving
(20), (21), (22) and (23) in the case of the one-sector model while (40), (41), (42) and (43)

One might be even more strict and require that they never fall below one. This would require that one
depart from the linear framework that I consider here. On the other hand, it is worth noting that rms who
wish to maintain a reputation for being reliable suppliers might well be willing to sell items for less than
marginal cost on occasion.
13

30

must be solved in the two-sector model.
Figure 13 reports two such impulse responses. The rst corresponds to the responses in
the one-sector model while the second involves the two-sector model with eI = :3. Average
markups charged by rms producing goods and services are assumed to equal 1.4 in both
cases. Also, in two-sector model the markups in the consumption and investment goods
sector are assumed to move in tandem so that  C equals 1. Lastly, F is assumed to be xed
and equal to one in both cases.
The resulting markup variations are quite similar in both cases and are nearly mirror
images of the variations in yc displayed in Figure 3. In some ways the most disappointing
aspect of the Figure is that the two dynamic responses are so similar. One might have
expected the dynamic elements of the model, including the intertemporal substitution of
consumption and labor supply to have larger qualitative e ects. Instead, the period in
which output is rising after the shock corresponds to a period where markups are falling
whereas the later monotonic convergence of output to the steady state is accompanied by a
similar convergence of markups.
Table 4 shows that, in the one sector model, the standard deviation of markup uctuations
 is somewhat larger than the standard deviation of movements in cyclical output, which
equals .028. Not surprisingly given the results in Figure 13,  is nearly 30% larger in the
two-sector model than in the one-sector model. Table 4 also reports standard deviations for
consumption and investment, and these are denoted by C and I respectively. For both of
the speci cations in Figure 13, the standard deviation of investment is substantially larger
than that of consumption and this is broadly consistent with what has been repeatedly
observed in the literature. I do not, in what follows, try to match these relative variabilities
directly to those present in the data. Rather, I use the ratio of these standard deviations to
discuss the e ect of varying eI , which plays a key role in keeping yz relatively smooth.
Table 4
The variability of markups, consumption and investment
31

Sectors

2
2
2
2
2
.3
5
5
5
60
1
1
.3
.4 .15
0
0
0
.1
1
0.035 0.045 0.075 0.198 0.146 0.397
0.014 0.018 0.036 0.026 0.025 0.027
0.081 0.057 0.011 0.034 0.036 0.035
The next three columns of table 4 consider the case where eI = 5 while the last column
considers a case where eI = 60. The qualitative response of markups is the same in all
cases with an initial jump downwards in markups followed by further declines and then a
monotonic convergence to the steady state. The speci cations do di er in their quantitative
implications, and these di erences can be seen in the table.
When C and F are kept equal to 1 and zero respectively, raising eI to 5 has unappealing
implications for the relative variability of consumption and investment. Because investment
is now more costly to change, markups must vary a great deal more. With an average markup
of 1.4, this increased variability poses little risk that prices will end up below marginal cost,
however. What is more problematic is that the high cost of changing investment means that
consumption is nearly three times more variable than investment.
It is possible to lower the relative variability of consumption by simply lowering the extent
to which the markups on consumer goods C vary. This is shown in the fourth column where
I lower this variability by reducing  C . This has two implications. the rst is that it means
that prices of investment goods must fall relative to the prices of consumption goods in
booms. This is at least somewhat consistent with what is found in US data. The correlation
between detrended GDP and the detrended ratio of the de ator for equipment investment
to the de ator for nondurable consumption expenditures is -.28 when I use data from 1947
to 1998.
The lowering of  C also requires that investment become more variable in order to keep
the variability of Y constant. This, in turn means that the volatility of ~I must be raised
again. The resulting standard deviation of ~I is then high enough that there is nearly a 5%
chance that markups fall below one even when the average markup is 1.4.
eI
C
F

C
I

1

32

The fth column shows that, by raising  F to .1, the variability of ~I can be reduced
while keeping constant the variability of yc and even raising slightly the ratio I =C . It is
all the more remarkable that I =C rises in this column given that I am increasing  C from
.3 to .4. This means that variability in the eÆciency of nancial contracts can play a mayor
role in explaining cyclical uctuations.
Temporary changes in F do not have strong implications for aggregate output. As
stressed by Cooper and Ejarque (1994), an increase in F discourages investment (because
contracts for borrowing become expensive) while encouraging consumption (because returns
on savings are temporarily depressed). Having this occur when markups on goods and
services are already high so that output is low ensures that investment falls relative to
consumption at these times. This increases the volatility of investment relative to that of
consumption and thus reduces the need to make ~I variable relative to ~C . Interestingly,
this pattern of variability of F ts with the idea that monetary policy a ects the economy
not only through its e ect on interest rates but also through its e ects on the eÆciency of
the nancial system. As in the sticky price models like Rotemberg and Woodford (1997),
tight monetary policy might reduce output because markups rise as a result of price rigidity.
However, the disproportionate e ect of this on investment may be due in part to the fact
that the nancial contracts market is less eÆcient at these times. Note that the changes in
the margins on nancial contracts required by this speci cation are only one tenth the size
of the required changes in ~I . Thus, the average value of F need not be particularly large
and the behavior of the economy may be well approximated by linearizing around the point
where F equals one.
The last column shows that attractiveness of speci cations with very high values of eI is
limited, even though these make yz smoother. When eI equals 60, the standard deviation
of ~I must be nearly .4 even if  F is raised to the empirically implausible value of 1. To
keep the ratio of I =C greater than one, the volatility of ~I must be raised further if  F is
lowered. This section has thus shown that there is a tradeo between raising eI to raise the
accuracy of smooth trends as estimators of yz and limiting the volatility of eÆciency wedges
33

that is needed to explain cyclical uctuations.
This nding covers only situations where ineÆciency wedges are responsible for cyclical
movements in GDP. However, it is quite possible that the ndings would extend to alternate
models of cyclical uctuations. The reason is that high values of eI prevent investment
from uctuating. This has the advantage of increasing the smoothness of the response of
investment to news about future productivity growth and thereby improves the accuracy of
smooth trends as estimators of the e ect of smooth technical progress. On the other hand,
it presumably tends to reduce the e ect of all shocks on investment. Thus, high values of eI
may make it necessary for rms to be provided with quite variable incentives for investment
to ensure that cyclical investment remains more volatile than cyclical consumption.

6 Conclusion
Shocks that lead to gradual and prolonged increases in productivity do not generate perfectly
smooth changes in output because they create strong wealth e ects. However, one can
explain the size of long term changes in US GDP growth rates with only small shocks of this
type. This means that fairly smooth paths for GDP result from shocks of this sort when
their size is empirically plausible. The results is that smooth trends measure fairly well the
e ect of this technical progress on GDP and, by the same token, detrended GDP is mostly
a ected by disturbances whose e ect is only transitory.
GDP growth can presumably be made smoother still in response to changes in technical
progress by considering less standard models. In particular, it may be possible to reduce
the size of the shocks to perceived wealth that accompany innovations that lead to gradual
changes in the productivity. One method for doing so is to change the way information about
these innovations is released in the economy. In this paper, I have supposed that information
about the permanent e ect of these shocks is released all at once, at the moment when these
shocks have their rst, negligible impact. It may be more empirically appealing to imagine
that this information is released gradually. In particular, some individuals may know about
the permanent e ects of certain technical breakthroughs before others so that the wealth
34

revisions of di erent individuals may be staggered over time. The result might be an even
smoother response of GDP to these shocks. It is important to stress, however, that these
modelling changes do not seem to be necessary for obtaining a coherent framework where
detrended GDP is essentially independent of technical progress.

35

7 References
Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier, \An Exploration into Pigou's Theory of Cycles,"
mimeo, November 2000.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, \The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,"in Taylor, John B. and Michael Woodford
eds.
, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999.
Handbook of Macroeconomics

Cogley, Timothy and James M. Nason, \Output Dynamics in Real Business Cycle Models,"
, 85, June 1995, pp. 492-511.
American Economic Review

Cooper, Russell and Joao Ejarque, \Financial Intermediation and Aggregate Fluctuations: A Quantitative Analysis,"
, August 1994
NBER Working Paper 4819

Gali, Jordi, \Monopolistic Competition, Business Cycles, and the Composition of Aggregate Demand,"
63, June 1994, pp. 73-96.
Journal of Economic Theory,

| \Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
Aggregate Fluctuations?,"
89, March 1999, pp. 24971.
American Economic Review,

Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler and J. David Lopez-Salido, \Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
Costs of Business Fluctuations,"
, March 2002.
NBER Working Paper 8850

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Hu man, \Investment, Capacity
Utilization and the Real Business Cycle,"
, 78, June
1988, pp. 402-17.
American Economic Review

Helpman, Elhanan and Manuel Trajtenberg, \A Time to Sow and a Time to Reap:
Growth Based on General Purpose Technologies," in Helpman, Elhanan, ed.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1998.

Gen-

eral Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth,

King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser and Sergio Rebelo, \Production, Growth and Business
Cycles, I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,"
, 21,
March/May 1988a, pp. 195-232.
Journal of Monetary Economics

King, Robert G. and Sergio Rebelo, \Resuscitating Real Business Cycles," in Taylor,
John B. and Michael Woodford eds.
, Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1999.
Handbook of Macroeconomics

Manuelli, Rodolfo E., \Technological Change, the Labor Market and the Stock Market,"
, November 2000
NBER Working Paper 8022

36

Mans eld, Edwin,

, New York: Norton, 1968.

The Economics of Technological Change

Prescott, Edward C., \Theory ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,"
Fall 1986, 9-22.

Federal Reserve

Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review,

Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford,\Markups and the Business Cycle,",
, 1991.

Macroeco-

nomics Annual

|\Real Business Cycle Models and the Forecastable Movements in Output, Hours and
Consumption ,"
, 86, March 1996, 71-89.
American Economics Review

| \An Optimization-Based Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,"
, 1997, pp. 297-345.

NBER

Macroeconomics Annual

Shea, John, \What do Technology Shocks Do?"
pp. 275-310.

37

NBER Macroeconomics Annual,

1998,

Table 3
Indicators of Accuracy of Trend/Cycle Decomposition
One-sector

Two-sector

eI = :3; eI = 5 eI = 60

MSE of tted trend

1.30e-4

MSE of tted trend
(full sample)

1.80e-4

1.84e-4 1.72e-4 1.70e-4

Correlation of actual
and tted cycle
R2 in regression of
tted on actual cycle
CoeÆcient in regression of
tted on actual cycle
CoeÆcient in regression of
actual on tted cycle
R2 in regression of ^y c
on yc
CoeÆcient in regression of ^yc
on yc
R2 in regression of ^y c
on yz

0.939

0.938

0.943

0.943

.884

.881

.891

.892

.872

.872

.874

.874

1.017

1.014

1.022 1.0123

.998

.997

.998

.999

.999

.999

.999

.999

.002

.003

.002

.001

0.592

0.523

0.649

0.657

0.649

0.562

0.742

0.758

2.59

1.39

2.58

1.81

Properties of tted cycle

Properties of tted trend growth
R2 in regression of ^y z
on yz
CoeÆcient in regression of ^yz
on yz
CoeÆcient in regression of yz
on ^yz
Properties of the HP lter

1.33e-4 1.26e-4 1.25e-4

MSE of HP lter
(full sample)
MSE of HP lter

3.15e-4

3.15e-4 3.15e-4 3.15e-4

2.95e-4

2.95e-4 2.95e-4 2.95e-4

R2 in regression of

.698

.698

.699

.699

.583

.583

.583

.583

tted on actual cycle
CoeÆcient in regression of
tted on actual cycle
38

Figure 1:

The rate of growth of US trend GDP

0.010

0.009

0.008

0.007

0.006
50

55

60

65

70

39

75

80

85

90

95

Figure 2:
Response of trend US GDP growth to unit impulse in AR(5)
2000

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

0

20

40

60

80

40

100

120

140

Figure 3:
Response of detrended US GDP (level) to a unit impulse
1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

5

10

41

15

Figure 4:
Response of Output Growth to a z Shock in the One−sector Model
60

40

20

percent

0

−20

−40

−60

−80

0

20

40

60

80
period

42

100

120

140

Figure 5:
Response of Hours to a z Shock in the One−sector Model
80

60

40

percent

20

0

−20

−40

−60

−80

−100

0

20

40

60

80
period

43

100

120

140

Figure 6:
Response of C/z to a z Shock in the One−sector Model
150

100

50

0

percent

−50

−100

−150

−200

−250

−300

−350

0

20

40

60

80
period

44

100

120

140

Figure 7:
Evolution of growth in z after a shock to trend output growth in one sector model
3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

0

20

40

60

80

45

100

120

140

Figure 8:
Evolution of hours worked after shock to trend output growth in one sector model
4000

3000

2000

1000

0

−1000

−2000

−3000

−4000

0

20

40

60

80

46

100

120

140

Figure 9:
Normalized responses of output growth to z shock
0.8

0.6

One sector, µ=1
I

Two sectors, e =.3, µ=1
0.4

0.2

I

Two sectors, e =.3, µ=1.4

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

−0.8

−1

0

20

40

60

80
Period

47

100

120

140

Figure 10:
I

Responses of output growth to z shock with e =60
20

15

10

5

0

−5

0

20

40

60

80
Period

48

100

120

140

Figure 11:
Evolution of growth of z after a shock to trend output growth with eI=60
4500

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

−500

0

20

40

60

80
period

49

100

120

140

Figure 12:
m

Log Periodogram of GDP and y realizations
3

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3

−4

−5

−6

−7

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2
0.25
0.3
Frequency: cycles per quarter

50

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Figure 13:
The Evolution of Cyclical Markup Shocks
0.5

0

−0.5

−1

One−sector model
−1.5

Two−sector model

−2

eI=.3,νC=1,νF=0

−2.5

0

5

10
Period

51

15

