NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY PRIVATIZATION REFORM AND LABOR MARKETS:
THE CASE OF CHILE

Sebastian Edwards
Alejandra Cox Edwards

Working Paper 8924
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8924

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002

We are indebted to Manuelita Ureta for helpful discussions, and to Alejandro Jara and Rajesh Chakrabarti
for assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Sebastian Edwards and Alejandra Cox Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Social Security Privatization Reform and Labor Markets: The Case of Chile
Sebastian Edwards and Alejandra Cox Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 8924
May 2002
JEL No. H55, J3, P5

ABSTRACT
We analyze the way in which social security privatization reform affects labor market outcomes.
We develop a model of the labor market where we assume that, as is the case in most emerging markets,
a formal and an informal sectors coexist side by side. According to our model, a social security reform
that reduces the implicit tax on labor in the formal sector, will result in an increase in the wage rate in the
informal sector and will have an undetermined effect on aggregate unemployment. Results from
simulation exercises suggest that in the case of Chile the reforms resulted in an increase in informal sector
wages of approximately 2.0%. These results also suggest that the reforms made a positive, but small,
contribution to the reduction of Chile’s aggregate of unemployment.

Sebastian Edwards
University of California, Los Angeles
Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

Alejandra Cox Edwards
California State University, Long Beach

2

I.

Introduction
In recent years policy makers, politicians and academics have become deeply

concerned about the future of social security. The specter of a massive insolvency crisis
has generated, throughout the world, a frantic search for a solution to what the World
Bank has called the “old age crisis.” Conferences have been organized, wise-men groups
have been assembled, and blueprints for reform have been discussed. Throughout this
process, and in an effort to learn from lessons of experience, many analysts have focused
on Chile’s pioneering social security reform. In 1980 Chile replaced an insolvent
government-run social security system, by a privately managed system based on
individual retirement accounts. Almost twenty years after the launching of this
privatization effort, the Chilean experience has become a required case study for anyone
interested in reforming social security.1 Most analyses of Chile’s experience have
concentrated on three aspects of this privatization program: (1) Its effect on the fiscal
accounts, including its effect on public sector’s contingent liabilities. (2) The effects of
the new system on old-age pensions, including a comparison of replacement rates under
the old a new regime. And (3) the effects of the reform on aggregate national savings.2
Surprisingly, very few studies of the Chilean episode have dealt with the overall
labor market implications of the social security reforms. This, however, is not unique of
the Chilean case. In fact, while a number of studies for a variety of countries have
analyzed the way in which social security systems affect labor market incentives for older
individuals, very few authors have analyzed formally the way in which a major social
security reform affects overall labor market outcomes.3 And yet, it may be argued that a
reform that (in principle) changes the rate of payroll taxes, and affects the relationship

3

between social security contributions and future earnings will have substantial effects on
the aggregate and (sectoral) demand and supply for labor. This would be clearly the case
if contributions to the pay-as-you go system are considered (at least in part) a tax, and
contributions to individual retirement accounts are seen largely as deferred
compensation.4
The privatization of social security – either partially or fully – is likely to have a
particularly significant effect on overall labor markets outcomes in emerging economies,
including in former socialist nations. Most emerging countries are characterized by
segmented labor markets, where a modern and an informal labor market coexist. Under
these circumstances, only those employed in the “modern” segment will be covered by
labor market regulations, including social security. Those employed in the so-called
informal sector work without formal contracts, generally do not pay taxes, are not
affected by minimum wages laws, and are excluded from the formal safety net.
The purpose of this paper is to analyze the way in which a social security reform
of the Chilean-type affects labor market outcomes in an economy characterized by a
segmented labor market. Our main interest is to evaluate the way in which Chile’s social
security reform affected the country’s level of employment, its rate of unemployment and
wages. In order to do this we develop a model of the labor market in an emerging
economy, and we simulate it using parameter values for Chile. We also use micro survey
data to investigate some key features, such as coverage, of Chile’s privatized social
security system.
The paper is organized as follows: Section I is the introduction. In Section II we
provide a brief evaluation of Chile’s social security reform. Section III deals with the

4

effects of social security reform on wages, income distribution, employment and
unemployment. The section begins with a general discussion of Chile’s labor market
reforms. We next develop a model of a segmented labor market to analyze the way in
which policies aimed at reducing the tax component of social security contribution affect
the key labor market variables. In section IV we use micro survey data to obtain an
estimate of the “tax component” of social security contributions under Chile’s privately
managed social security system.5 We then use, in Section V, the results from this
empirical analysis to simulate our model, and compute the effects of Chile’s social
security reform on employment, unemployment and wages. The results from our
simulation exercise suggest that the effect of the reform on Chile’s aggregate
employment was rather modest. The results also suggest that the reforms resulted in a
small increase in average wages. Finally, in section VI we provide some concluding
remarks.

II.

The Privatization of Chile’s Social Security System
In late 1980 Chile’s military regime privatized the country’s traditional pay-as-

you-go social security system.6 Twenty years after Chile’s social security reform, most
observers agree that Chile’s program was a true pioneer, and that there is much to learn
from it. In this section we provide a brief discussion of the main aspects of the reform..7
II.1 The Old Pay-as-you-go System
Chile’s original social security system was designed in the 1920s as a
collective capitalization fund. Accumulated funds, however, were poorly managed, and
benefits -- especially for the better to do -- escalated quickly. For all practical purposes,

5

and in spite of the original intentions of its founders, by the 1970s the system had become
an insolvent pay-as-you-go regime, characterized by very high contribution rates. In
1973, for example, total contributions to the retirement plan -- by employers and
employees -- averaged 26 percent of wages. Once contributions to the national health
system were included, total contributions exceeded, for some workers, 50 percent of
wages. What made things worse was that there was almost no connection between
retirement contributions and (perceived) benefits. Contributions were largely seen as
taxes, while benefits received from the social security system were seen as entitlements.8
While in 1955 there were 12 active contributors per retiree, by 1979 there were
only 2.5. As a result of this, and of a highly inefficient management, the Chilean system
became increasingly unfunded. By the early 1970s the system as a whole was already
running a dramatic deficit. The gap between revenues and outlays -- administrative costs
plus pensions -- was made up by the public sector. By 1971 the central government’s
contributions to the retirement system amounted to almost 3% of GDP, and the present
valued of the system’s contingent liabilities exceeded 100% of GDP.
II.2 The Privatization of Social Security in Chile
In 1980 the military privatized the social security system. The core of Chile’s
new privately managed system are individual retirement accounts managed by private
companies known as “Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones”, AFPs. A key feature
of the system is that it is mandatory for individuals working for a formal employee.
Participants can freely decide which AFP will manage their retirement funds, and are free
to transfer them across the different management firms. Upon reaching the minimum
pensionable age, individuals can choose to buy an annuity, or to withdraw their funds

6

according to a predetermined (actuarially fair) plan.9 The system also has a survivor’s
term life insurance component, and a disability program funded with an additional
insurance premium. In the reformed system, the State continues to play an important
role. It regulates and monitors the operation of the management companies, and
guarantees a minimum pension10. In an effort to increase the attractiveness of the new
system, and in order to reduce political opposition, contribution rates under the new
system were lowered; as a result, those individuals that joined the new system
experienced an average increase of net take-home pay equal to10%.11 It was expected
that, given the anticipated higher rates of return on the accumulated funds, the lower
contributions would be enough to finance higher replacement rates for pensions.
Contributions to the retirement component of the system are equal to 10% of
income, considerably lower then the 26% (on average) under the old system. Total
contributions for retirement, health and survivorship insurance add up to 20% of wages,
with a cap equivalent to an annual wage rate of US$40,000 per year. A detailed
regulatory framework -- enforced by an institution especially created for this purpose, the
Superintendency of AFPs -- regulates investment portfolios, ensures free determination
of fees and commissions and free entry into the industry. Until 2000, each AFP could
manage only one retirement fund; likewise, each participant could have only one
retirement account.
Self employed workers are not required to participate in the system. They have
the choice, however, to set voluntary retirement accounts which are (basically) subject to
the same regulations as those of formal sector employees. In 1998 the percentage of
active contributors – that is those making deposits into their retirement accounts --stood

7

at 58% of total employment, with an additional 4% of workers still contributing to the old
system. This means, then, that in 1998 the total coverage of the Chilean retirement
system amounted to 62% of employment. The 38% that is not covered by the social
security system corresponds, largely, to those that work in the informal sector, or to the
self employed (for details on the actual characteristics of those not covered by the new
system, see the discussion in section III of this paper). At 62% of employment, the
current coverage of the system is similar to that of the old pay-as-you-go system.
The volume of pension funds privately managed by the AFPs has increased
dramatically. Between 1985 and 1997 they increased from 10% of GDP to almost 45%
of GDP. Furthermore, recent simulations suggest that by year 2010 the accumulated
funds will represent 110% of GDP, and that by 2020 they would have reached 134% of
GDP.12 The type of assets the retirement funds can invest in are tightly regulated.
During the early years, funds were largely restricted to government securities, bank
deposits, investment grade corporate bonds and mortgage bonds. At this time, however,
a number of equities, both domestic and foreign, are allowed.
During the early years of the reform the real (inflation adjusted) average rate of
return of accumulated funds was very high, averaging during 1982-1995, 12.8 percent per
annum. More recently, however, the real rate of return has declined significantly, and has
averaged, between September 1994 and August 2000 the (real) rate of return for the
system was 4.9%. This rate is rather low, and has raised some people’s concerns about
the system’s ability to deliver pensions with a relatively high replacement rate in the
future.

8

Existing regulations impose a floor on the return individual AFP pay to their
members. In any given year an AFP cannot pay a return lower than 2 percentage points
of the system’s average. If the actual return of a particular AFP falls below this
minimum, the difference has to be made up by using funds from a specially set “reserve
fund.” The restriction on a minimum rate of return, coupled with the regulations that
each AFP cannot have more than one fund, and that individuals cannot distribute their
funds across funds, reduced the extent of competition of the system, and resulted in the
different AFPs holding extremely similar portfolios. Reforms introduced in 2000,
however, have allowed each AFP to have a second fund.
The new system allows men to draw a pension at 65, and women at 60, or earlier
if they have accumulated enough funds to finance a pension of 70 percent of their
(pensionable) salary. When an individual retires he can choose between two systems:
(A) he can use the accumulated funds to buy an annuity from an insurance company; or,
(B) he can chose to enroll in a “programmed withdrawal” scheme, where the
accumulated funs are drawn according to an actuarially determined schedule. By 1997
there were already 250,000 retirees receiving pensions under the new system. Of these,
approximately one half had opted for annuities, and one half for programmed withdrawal.
Using a sample of 4,064 individuals, it has been estimated that the average replacement
rate under the new system had amounted to 78%, significantly higher than under the old
pay-as-you-go regime.13
The new system also establishes that, for those individuals that qualify, there is a
minimum pension guaranteed by the state, which as of December 1998 was equal to 85%
of the minimum wage. From an international comparative perspective, replacement rates

9

have been quite high in Chile – indeed higher than under most industrialized countries’
systems.14
II.3 Transitional Costs and Weaknesses of the New System
Most proposals to privatize social security, struggle with issues related to the
transition. Chile dealt with this problem in a simple, and costly manner. All transitional
costs were borne by the government and were paid out of the general budget. Individuals
that had been contributing to the old system received government bonds – the so-called
“recognition bonds”. These bonds yielded per annum 4% in inflation adjusted terms, an
were placed in the each individual retirement account. The value of the bonds received
by each person was determined using a formula that took into account their history of
contributions to the old system. From a fiscal point of view the transition was rather
expensive, representing almost 5%of GDP in the peak year of 1983. It is estimated that
by 2015 these costs would have almost disappeared.
The privatized Chilean system has exhibited two important weaknesses: First, at
62% of workers, the level of total coverage of the new system is low. This is explained
by two basic factors: first, the self-employed – which are not legally required to
participate in the system-- have limited incentives to make voluntary contributions.
Second, the existence of a government-guaranteed (universal) minimum pension creates a
moral hazard situation among low income workers, many of which are self employed.
For these individuals it pays to contribute only sporadically, and only enough as to obtain
the minimum pension once they retire.15 Second, the cost of running the private system –
in terms of fees, commissions and, especially, marketing costs – has been very high,

10

tending to exceed, during the last few years, 10% of contributions. This has resulted in a
significant reduction of the net rate of return accrued to participants.16
II.4 Chile’s Social Security and Labor Market Reforms
The reform of social security was only one component of a broad effort to
transform Chile into a modern market economy. During the second half of the 1970s the
military government implemented a number of fundamental reforms, including a major
overhaul of the tax system, the opening up of the economy to international competition,
the privatization of most state owned enterprises, and the creation of a modern financial
market. In the early 1980’s the scope of the reforms was broadened to include labor
markets and social security.
In 1979, and under considerable international pressure, the military government
initiated an effort to reform Chile’s labor legislation. The main objectives of these
policies were: (a) To reform job security legislation, by limiting the extent of severance
payments. These were reduced form “one month per year of service, with no limit”, to
“one month per year of service, with a 5 months limit.” (b) To reduce unions’ power by
decentralizing collective bargaining, and eliminating the old “close-shop” practice. And
(c), reduce payroll taxes. This last measure was to be achieved, partially, by the social
security reform, discussed above.17
Between 1985 and 1997, Chile’s labor markets performed well.18 What makes
this experience particularly interesting is that between 1983-85 and 1993-95, Chile went
from rates of unemployment usually associated with some European countries, to
unemployment rates similar to those traditionally prevailing in the U.S. While during
1983-85 the open rate of unemployment averaged 17.3%, by 1993-95 it had declined to

11

5.8 percent. And all of this while real wages experienced rates of growth in excess of 5%
per year.19 An interesting question is which of the components of the labor-related
reforms – the reduced degree of job security, the reformed collective bargaining, or the
social security reform -- were more important in helping Chile improve its labor market
performance. Although providing a full answer to this question is beyond the scope of
this paper, in section III we develop a model that allow us to quantify the effect of the
social security reform on some of the key labor market variables. We proceed as follows:
we first develop (in Section III) a model of segmented labor market, and investigate the
way in which changes in taxes on labor in the “covered or modern” sector impact labor
market outcomes. Next, in Section IV, we use micro survey data to analyze the extent to
which participants considered the new system as a “deferred compensation” scheme.
Finally, in Section V, we calibrate and simulate the model for the case of Chile. Our
findings suggest that the social security reform had a modest effect on Chile’s labor
market performance. This, however, needs not be the case in other countries: the actual
impact of a Chile-style social security reform on unemployment, wages and income
distribution will depend on the specific values of the relevant parameters.

IV. A Model of Social Security Reform and Labor Markets
In this section we develop a two-sector model to analyze the effects of a social
security reform on employment, unemployment and wages. Labor markets in emerging
economies in general – and in Chile, in particular –, have a number of institutional
features that set them apart from labor markets in industrial nations. The most important
among these features are:

12

•

In emerging countries labor markets are usually characterized by a rather large
“informal” segment. This segment is, de facto, not directly affected by labor market
regulations, such as minimum wages, job security legislation or social security. The
informal sector coexists with a “modern” sector, where labor market regulations are
fully in effect. The fact that in Chile the social security system covers only 62% of
those employed, provides some evidence of the existence of this segmented
structure.20

•

Contributions to social security are often seen as a (partial) tax on labor, rather than as
deferred compensation, or an insurance program. At the same time, benefits from
these programs are seen by individuals as an entitlement. The percentage of the
contribution that is actually considered a pure tax depends on the nature of the social
security system and, more specifically, on the perceived connection between
contributions and benefits.21
Formally, assume that, as is the case in many developing and transitional economies,

the labor market is segmented. There is a “modern” or “covered” sector subject to a
minimum wage and to social security coverage, and an “informal” or “unprotected”
sector with no social security coverage, and competitively determined wages. With other
things equal, workers will rather be employed in the “protected” sector. The problem,
however, is that there are not enough jobs in that sector; individuals that apply for a job in
the modern sector face a probability (p) of obtaining it, and a probability (1-p) of being
unemployed. In equilibrium, and under the assumption of risk neutrality, the wage rate
obtained in the informal segment is equal to the expected (take home) wage rate in the
protected sector. We further assume that every period employment in the modern sector

13

turns over fully, so that the probability of getting a job in that sector is equal to the ratio
of openings to applicants.22
We assume that prior to the reform workers in the protected sector are subject to a
payroll tax – whose purpose is to fund the social security system—equal to T1. We also
assume that there is a disconnect between social security contributions and benefits.
More specifically, we assume that social security contributions are considered by
individuals to be fully a tax. Notice, however, that the analysis that follows would not be
affected by the assumption that only a fraction of the contribution was considered to be a
tax. Workers employed in the modern sector receive a “take home” wage rate equal to
the minimum wage (Wmin ). The cost of labor to firms operating in this sector is equal to
the minimum wage plus the payroll tax. The social security reform will result in a
reduction of this tax. There are two sources for this reduction: first, as was the case in
Chile, the reform itself may entail a reduction in the contribution. Second, the
replacement of the old pay-as-you-go system by individual retirement accounts, reduces
the disconnect between contributions and benefits. In the post reform period, at least part
of the contribution will be considered as deferred compensation (see Section IV for an
estimate for the case of Chile.)
Equations (1) - (4) describe the wage determination process in this economy.
Equation (1) establishes that in equilibrium the wage rate in the informal sector (WI) is
equal to the expected (net of taxes) wage rate in the modern sector E (W N M). According
to equation (2) the probability of finding a job in the modern sector is equal to the ratio of
openings – that is employment in that sector (L M) – to applicants. The latter is given by
the sum of openings (L M ) plus the total number of unemployed (U). It is assumed, for

14

simplicity, that the unemployed received an income equal to S. Equation (3) says that the
cost of labor in the modern sector is equal to the minimum wage inclusive of the payroll
tax ( T1). In equation (4) we present the demand for labor equations in the modern and
informal sectors. P M and P I are good prices in each sector, the functions f ( ) and g ( )
are physical marginal productivity of labor. K M and K I are the stock of capital used in
the modern and informal sector, respectively.

(1)

WI = E (W N M) = p Wmin + (1 – p) S

(2)

p = [LM / (LM + U)]

(3)

W M = W min (1 + T 1)

(4)

W M = P M f (L M , K M ); W I = P I g (L I, K I ).

Equation (5) is the resource constraint in the labor market, and establishes that
employment in the modern sector, plus employment in the informal sector plus
unemployment has to be equal to total labor supply (L s). According to equation (6),
labor supply is a positive function of real wages; O represents “other” factors affecting
the supply of labor.23 Equation (7) define the aggregate price index and the aggregate
wage rate, as geometric means of sectoral prices and wages, respectively. In order to
simplify the analysis, in equation (8) we have assumed that the modern sector
corresponds to tradable goods and that, as a consequence, P M is given by international
prices (P*M).24 Equation (9) establishes that product prices in the informal sector are a
positive function of wages in that sector. We further assume that an increase in W I, will

15

have a less than proportional effect on prices of goods produced in the informal sector.
That is, d log P I < d log W I.

(5)

LM+LI+U=LS

(6)

L S = h (W/P,O); h’ > 0.

(7)

P = P I β P M (1-β); W = W I θ W M (1-θ)

(8)

P M = P*M ;

(9)

P I = z (W I); z’ > 0; d log P I < d log W I.

Equation (10) is the resource constraint for capital, and says that the sum of
capital used in each sector has to equal the total stock of capital. Equation (11) says that
the allocation of the capital stock across sectors will depend on the relative product
prices. Notice that in order to simplify the computations, and to focus on the issues at
hand, we have assumed that there is no net investment.

(10)

K M+ K I = K

(11)

K M = j (P M/P I); K I = v (P M/P I).

The initial (pre reform) labor market is depicted in Figure 1, under the simplifying
assumption that the unemployed get no assistance (S = 0). Distance O M - O I is total
labor supply, L M and L I are the demand for labor schedules, and yy is a rectangular
hyperbola, that satisfies the equilibrium condition in equation (1). The wage rate and the
level of employment in the informal sector are determined by the intersection of the yy

16

and L I schedules. W min is the minimum wage which, as stated above, is assumed to be
set in net take-home bases. T 1 is the payroll tax, and W M is the cost of labor in the
modern sector. W I is the wage rate in the informal sector. The initial level of
employment in the modern sector is given by distance O M – L M 1; distance O I – L I 1
depicts initial employment in the informal sector. The total number of unemployed is
equal to distance L M 1 – L I 1 . As pointed out earlier, we consider the case where the
reform reduces the (perceived) tax component of social security contributions. That is,
we assume that as a result of the social security reform, there will be a reduction of T1, to
some lower level, possibly even to zero. This would unleash a series of effects, including
a higher demand for labor in the modern sector, a change in aggregate labor supply, and
changes in wages and in employment in the informal sector.
Formally, the model given by equations (1) - (11) can be solved to obtain the
effects of this type of social security reform, on a number of variables, including informal
sector wages (W I), the volume of unemployment (U), and product prices of in the
informal sector (P I). In order to simplify the exposition, we follow a long tradition in
international trade theory – the Ricardo-Viner approach – and we assume that capital is
fixed in its sector of origin. We begin with the effects of changes in the tax component of
the social security contribution (d log T) on informal sector wages (d log WI):

(12)

d log W I = ∆ -1 { - [α U ( U / ( L M + U )) ( 1 / η M )]
- [( U / ( L M + U ) α M ( 1 / η M )]} ( T 1 / ( 1 + T1) ) d log T.

Where,

17

(13)

∆ = - α U - [α I ( U / ( L M + U )) ( 1 / η I ) ( µ - 1 )]
- [( U / ( L M + U )) φ (α I + µ β ) ].

α I , α M and α U are the shares of employment in the informal sector, employment in the
modern sector, and unemployment in the labor resources constraint (5). η I and η M are
the inverse of the elasticities of the demand for labor with respect to wages in the I and M
sectors, respectively, and are negative.25 φ is the supply elasticity of labor, and is
positive. µ is the elasticity of the price of informal sector goods (PI) with respect to the
wage rate in that sector, and is greater than zero and smaller than one. It follows from
equation (13), then, that ∆ is negative. Consequently, according to equation (12), the
following result holds:

(d log W I / d log T) < 0.

This means that a social security reform that reduces the payroll tax, will unambiguously
generate an increase in the wage rate in the informal sector I, the sector that is not
covered by the by the social security system, and that prior to the reform had the lowest
wage rate. Notice that, by construction, net (take home) wages in the modern sector are
not affected by the reform. This is because we have assumed that the minimum wage is
set in take-home bases, and that the reform does not affect it. The more general case
where the reform generates an increase in net wages in the M sector is discussed below.
The effect of the reform on aggregate unemployment (U), is given by:

18

(14) d log U = ∆ -1 { (α I / η I ) - [α I ( U / ( L M + U )) ( 1 / η I ) ( 1 / η M ) ( µ - 1 )]
- [( U / ( L M + U )) φ (α I + µ β ) ( 1 / η M )]} (T 1 / (1+T1)) d log T.

The sign of equation (14) is undetermined. It follows from this that within the
framework developed in this paper, a reduction in the payroll tax in the modern sector
will have an ambiguous effect on the number of unemployed. Whether the level of
unemployment will increase or decline will depend on two basic factors: the supply
elasticity of labor in the economy -- parameter φ in equation (14) --; and the demand
elasticity of labor demand in the informal sector. The more elastic is the supply for labor
and the more inelastic is the demand for labor in the informal sector, the more likely it is
that the reform will result in an increase in the level of unemployment.
Equation (15) gives the effect of the reform on product prices in the informal
sector, and is positive:

(15)

d log P I = ∆ -1 { - ( U / ( L M + U )) (α M / η M )
- α U ( U / ( L M + U )) ( 1 / η M )} ( T 1 / ( 1 + T1 )) d log T.

The working of the model is illustrated in Figure 2, where it is assumed that the
reform reduces the social security tax from T 1 to T 2. The new cost of labor in the
modern sector is WM2. Distance O I - O’I is assumed to be equal to the increase in the
amount of labor supplied to the economy. Because of this increase in aggregate labor
supply, the original demand for labor in the informal sector has to be redrawn as L’I.

19

Since the product price of I has increased, the demand for labor in the informal sector
shifts up, and is represented in Figure 2 by L I’ (PI 1). The wage rate in the informal
sector is now determined by the intersection of a new rectangular hyperbola y’y’ and a
new demand for labor in sector I, and is given by W I2. Employment in the informal
sector has changed from distance O I – L I1 to distance O I1 – L I2. Because of the
reduction in W M, employment in the modern sector has increased from L M1 to L M2. The
new level of unemployment, which as indicated by equation (13), could be either higher
or lower than the initial level of unemployment, is given by distance L M2 - L I2 .
The results in equations (12) – (15) assume that there is no change in the takehome wage in the modern sector. In Chile, however, the government mandated an
increase in take-home wages equal to 10 percent, for those that opted for the privatized
regime (Edwards 1998a). In the context of the model developed in this paper, an increase
in the take-home wage in the sector covered by social security can be modeled as an
exogenously determined increase in the minimum wage rate. Formally speaking, then,
this more general policy package corresponds to a situation where both the minimum
wage (W min ) and the payroll tax, change (in opposite directions). In this case the change
in the wage rate in the informal sector will be given by:

(16)

d log W I = ∆ -1 {[ - [α U ( U / ( L M + U )) ( 1 / η M )]
- [( U / ( L M + U ) α M ( 1 / η M )]] { T 1 / ( 1 + T1) ) d log T
+ d log W min }.

The change in the level of employment, in turn, will now be given by:

20

(17) d log U = ∆ -1 { (α I / η I ) - [α I ( U / ( L M + U )) ( 1 / η I ) ( 1 / η M ) ( µ - 1 )]
- [( U / ( L M + U )) φ (α I + µ β ) ( 1 / η M )]} {(T 1 / (1+T1)) d log T
+ d log W min}.

In this case, then, the final effect of the policy package will depend on the way in which
the changes in the payroll tax and in the minimum wage are related to each other. A
reasonable assumption – and one that captures the case of the Chilean reforms – is that
the increase in the take-home wage in the modern sector, is equal to a fraction of the
(percentage) reduction in the payroll taxes. Under these assumptions the qualitative
results derived above for the more simple version of the model still apply: a social
security reform that reduces the tax component of social security contributions will:


increase the wage rate in the informal sector; which is the sector with the
lowest wages under the pay-as-you-go system;



will have an ambiguous effect on the level of unemployment.

Notice, however, that because the effect on unemployment is ambiguous, it is not
possible to say anything definitive with respect to the effects of the reform on income
distribution. In fact, it is possible that income becomes more unequally distributed as a
result of the privatization of social security.26
Although the model developed here is simple, and has some limitations, it has
enough structure to provide insights into some of the most important effects of a pension
reform on labor markets.27 In Section IV we use micro survey data for 1994 to analyze

21

some important characteristics of Chile’s privatized social security system. In Section V
we use the model developed here to simulate the effect of the social security reform on
Chile’s labor market outcomes.

IV.

Chile’s New Pension System: Who Is Covered? How Much Do Participants
Value The System?
The model developed in the preceding section can be used to analyze empirically

the effect of social security reform on labor market outcomes. In order to calibrate and
simulate the model, however, data on a number of key parameters are required. These
include: (a) The rate of coverage of the social security system (parameter α M); (b) the
wage elasticities of demand for labor, in the covered and uncovered sectors -- (1/η M) and
(1/η I). (c) The wage elasticity of supply of labor (φ); and (d), workers’ perceptions of
the tax component of social security contributions, under both the old pay-as-you-go
regime, and the new privatized system.
In the case of Chile, some of these parameters (e.g. the labor elasticities) have
been estimated in previous studies. Other key variables, however, are not readily
available. In particular, there are no reliable calculations of the percentage of social
security contributions that are considered to be a tax by labor market participants. In
principle, this implicit tax can be obtained by estimating a wage rate equation that include
a “compensating differential” for individuals that participate in the social security system.
If social security contributions are considered to be a form of deferred compensation,
individuals that are enrolled in the system would be willing to accept, for an equivalent
job, a lower take-home (cash) wage than those individuals that do not participate in the

22

social security system. If, however, social security contributions are considered to be
fully a tax, those enrolled in the system will demand, for an equivalent job, the same cash
salary than those that are not in the system and, thus, are not subject to this tax. The
magnitude of the “compensating differential,” for otherwise equivalent jobs will, then,
provide an estimate of the proportion of the contribution that is actually perceived as a
tax by labor market participants.
In this section we use micro data to estimate the implicit tax component of social
security contributions. Ideally one would like to use comparable data for the pre and post
reform era. Unfortunately, however, detailed survey data have only been collected since
1990. For this reason, we pursue the following strategy: First, we use micro data from
the post-reform period to obtain a “base estimate” for the perceived tax component of the
privatized social security system. Second, we make several alternative assumptions with
respect to the perceived tax component of the old (pre-reform) system. This allows us to
consider an interval of possible reductions of the tax stemming from the reform. Third,
we combine this estimated range of tax reduction with parameters obtained from other
studies to compute, using the model developed in Section III, the effects of Chile’s social
security’s reform on the country’s labor market.
Our basic data set is the CASEN (Caracterización Socioeconómica Nacional)
national survey for 1994. Using 1994 has a number of advantages. First, it is a fairly
“normal” year, when Chile was neither facing a recession or serious disturbances from
abroad. Second, it is a year when the democratic system was being consolidated, and
thus the country was not subject to serious political disturbances. And third, in 1994 the
privatized social security system had already been operational for some time, and was

23

entering into a mature phase. The CASEN survey collects information on demographics,
education, type of dwelling, health care, occupation, employment, and income, among
other variables. We are interested on two specific, and interrelated, questions:
•

What is the coverage of Chile’s privatized social security system? Or, in other
words, what percentage of those with a paying job, make contributions to the
system? This is a key issue within the context of the model developed in
Section III of this paper, where it was assumed that only a fraction of those in
the labor market – those employed in the “formal” sector – participate in the
social security system actively.

•

To what extent do participants in the system consider it a deferred
compensation scheme? As mentioned, we deal with this issue by estimating
“compensating differential” wage equations. The results from these estimates
are used as the bases for a simulation exercise presented in section V.

IV.1 Extent of Coverage of Chile’s New Social Security System
Table 1 presents summary data, for 1994, on the coverage of Chile’s privately
managed social security system. These data correspond to those individuals in the
sample that had a paying job at the time of the survey, and have been organized by urbanrural sectors, age and gender. “AFP” refers to the percentage of individuals in that
particular group that made contributions to a privately managed retirement fund (an
AFP). “Other” refers to the percentage of individuals that made contributions to other
retirement systems, including the old pay-as-you-go system and the armed forces
retirement fund; “No” refers to those individuals that had not made contributions to any
retirement system.

24

The table is rather self-explanatory, and shows that as recently as 1994 Chile’s
system fell considerably short of universal coverage. Urban males have the highest
coverage – defined as contributing to any retirement scheme --, at 69.9 percent. The
lowest coverage corresponds to males in the rural sector, with 47.2%. It may also be seen
that, with the exception of rural males, those in the 16 to 39 year-old have the highest
degree of coverage. For the sample as a whole, in 1994 the coverage rate of the formal
retirement systems was 60.2%. Data from the CASEN survey also suggest that there is a
very high degree of compliance with respect to required contributions. More that 95% of
employees with an employment contract made contributions, as required by law, to a
retirement system.
Although there are no comparable survey data for the pre reform period, existing
estimates indicates that Chile’s old pay-as-you-go system covered 58% of those
employed. This means, then, that after the privatization reform there has only been a
small increase in the coverage of the formal retirement system. The fact that younger
workers exhibit a higher coverage ratio may indicate, however, a secular trend towards
greater participation in the system.
IV.2 Deferred Compensation or Taxes?
The model developed in section III of this paper assumes that a reform of the
social security system implies a reduction in the (implicit) tax on labor. More
specifically, we assume that while under the pay-as-you-go system, contributions are
(largely) seen as taxes, under the privately managed regime contributions are seen (at
least partially) as a deferred compensation scheme. In this subsection we use data from

25

the CASEN survey to investigate whether, on average, individuals indeed value the new
privatized system, and consider it as a component of their total compensation package.
For an individual employed in the formal sector, total labor compensation will be
equal to his take-home (cash) salary, plus a proportion of his contribution to the
retirement system. If contributions are fully seen as deferred compensation, that
proportion will be equal to one. If on the other hand, contributions are fully seen as
taxes, that proportion will be equal to zero, and the total compensation will be only equal
to the take-home salary.28 In principle, then, the value attached by individuals to the
pension system can be estimated by comparing wages from jobs that are equivalent in all
respects, except with regard to contributions to the retirement program. If individuals
value being enrolled in the pension’s program, we would expect that, for otherwise
equivalent jobs, the take-home pay of those that participate in the system will be lower
than that of individuals that do not make contributions. The actual difference in the
(cash) take-home pay, for otherwise equivalent jobs, can, then, be attributed to the value
that individuals attach to being members of the retirement system.
We use survey data for over 23,000 individuals to estimate a “treatment” model,
that combines a wage equation with an equation that captures the decision to contribute in
the social security system:29
(18)

log w j = x j β + γ C j + µ j

1, if C* j > 0
(19)

Cj =
0, otherwise

26

C* j =

(20)

y j α + εj .

Equation (18) is the wage equation. log w j is the log of take-home wages for individual
j; x j is a vector of traditional determinants of real wages that include, among other,
education, experience, size of firm, gender, and geographical location of the job; C j is an
endogenous dummy variable (i.e. the treatment variable) that takes a value of one if
individual j participates in the retirement system, and zero if he does not. µ j is an error
term, whose properties are discussed below. β and γ are parameters to be estimated. The
decision to contribute to the social security is assumed to be the result of an unobserved
latent variable C* j, described in equation (20). C* j, in turn, is assumed to depend linearly
on vector y j. α is a parameters vector to be estimated, and ε j is an error term. Error
terms µ j and ε j are assumed to be bivariate normal, with a zero mean and a covariance
matrix given by:

(21)

σ

ρ

ρ

1

If the wage and contribution equations are independent, the covariance term ρ in equation
(21) will be zero.
Parameter γ in equation (18) measures the (average) value that individuals attach
to participating in the privatized social security system. We expect its estimated
coefficient to be ≤ 0. If the (average) value attached to social security contributions is
zero – that is, if contributions are fully considered a tax --, the estimated coefficient

27

should not be significantly different from zero. If, on the other hand, contributions are
considered to be fully a deferred form of compensation, we would expect the estimated
coefficient γ to be approximately equal to the rate of contribution.
The model given by equations (18) - (20) can be estimated simultaneously using a
maximum likelihood procedure. Chile’s specific institutional arrangements, however,
complicate somewhat the task of interpreting the results obtained from the estimation of
this system. The main difficulty stems from the fact that the social security law requires
individuals to make contributions not only to the retirement system (at 10% of wages),
but also to the health system (7%) and to a mandated life insurance program (3%). Total
contributions for this “package,” then, stand at 20% of wages. This means that the
estimated value of parameter γ is in the range of zero to – 20%.
In the wage equation (18) the dependent variable is the log of net (take-home)
wages; the notation used for the independent variables is provided in Table 3. We control
for the usual variables that explain wage differentials, including schooling, experience
(which, as customary, we proxy by age), experience squared, geographical location of the
job, gender of the individual, and size of the firm where the individual is employed. The
variable Contri is the endogenous dummy variable that indicates if the individual makes
contributions to the system. In the estimation of equation (19) we assume that the
decision on whether to make a contribution depends on schooling, age, industry where
the individual is employed, size of the firm, gender, and whether the individual in
question has a formal employment contract. Our data set consists of 23,198 civilian
workers in the urban sector, that held a paying job, and did not receive retirement benefits
at the time of the survey. Our sample excludes individuals with a household income

28

below the indigent poverty line – or “extreme poverty line --, as well as those with a
salary that exceed the maximum subject to social security contributions.
The results obtained from the joint estimation, using a maximum likelihood
procedure, of the model given by equations (18) - (20 ) are presented in Table 2. The
Wald test statistic for independence of the two equations (for the covariance term ρ being
equal to zero) is equal to 111, strongly suggesting that both equations should indeed be
estimated jointly. Panel A in table 2 corresponds to the wage equation (18), while Panel
B contains the results for “treatment” equation (20). As may be seen from Table 2-A, the
estimated coefficients for the traditional variables – schooling, experience and
experienced squared – are along the line of what is expected, and are consistent with
previous estimates for Chile and other emerging economies. Both schooling and
experience have significant and positive coefficients; as expected, experience squared has
a negative and significant coefficient. Women earn significantly less than men, and there
are regional and firm size significant wage differentials. The most important result, for
our purpose, is that the estimated coefficient of the social security contribution variable is
significantly negative, as expected. Its point estimate –0.0885 suggests that, on average
and for equivalent jobs, individuals that contribute to the social security (cum health)
system have a take-home wage that is almost 9% lower than those that do not contribute
to the system. Since the mandatory (for retirement and health) contribution is 20%, this
means that individuals that make contributions consider part of them as taxes. More
specifically, these results suggest that individuals consider little over one half of their
contribution to be a tax.

29

A few words on the results from the treatment equation (Panel B in Table 2): the
decision to contribute to the social security system is affected in a positive way by
schooling, experience (although at a declining rate), and the size of the firm. Women
tend to contribute less than men, and part time workers tend to contribute less than those
that work full time. Naturally, and as expected, those that have an employment contract
(dcontra) have a (very) high probability of contributing. Some of the sectoral variables
are also significant, suggesting that with other things given, the probability of making
contributions to the private social security system is affected by type of industry where
the individual works.
In order to investigate for the robustness of the results reported in Table 2, we
estimated earnings equations for alternative samples. The results obtained from these
alternative estimations confirmed those reported in Table 2, and are not presented here
due to space considerations. In section V of this paper we use the estimates reported in
Table 2 as am input into our simulation exercises.

V.

Chile’s Pension Reform and The Labor Market
In this section we present the results from simulation exercises, based on the

model derived in section III, on the effects of the social security reform on Chile’s labor
market. We proceed as follows: We use values for the key parameters from previous
studies of the Chilean economy, as well as from the econometric results presented in the
previous section to provide a “base case” calibration of the model. In order to test for the
robustness of the results, we then consider alternative values for the key parameters. This

30

procedure allows us to obtain a range of estimates for the effects of the social security
reform on Chile’s labor market variables.
In Table 4 we present the values of the parameters used in the simulation exercise.
The elasticities were taken from previous studies on the Chilean economy.30 The data on
the labor force and the rate of unemployment were taken from Banco Central de Chile.
The percentage of workers in the informal sector was taken from the analysis reported in
section IV of this paper. The parameter for µ was taken from a number of studies on
Chile’s inflation. In our base case analysis we assume that under the traditional pay-asyou-go system, contributions to the social security system (at an average rate of 26% of
wages) were fully considered to be a tax; as pointed out above, benefits during the prereform era were considered to be an entitlement. Finally, we assumed that in the post
reform period, mandated contributions to the pension system had a tax component equal
to 5.6% of wages. That is, we assume that individuals considered that slightly over one
half of the required contribution to the pension fund constituted a tax. This figure is
based on the econometric results reported in the preceding section. More specifically, it
was obtained by assuming that the perceived tax element of the contributions is equally
distributed between the retirement component and the health component.31
In Table 5 we present the simulation results for the case where the reform reduces
the (implicit) tax on labor, but where there is no increase in the take-home pay for those
enrolled in the system. These results were obtained after calibrating equations (12) and
(14) in Section III. Table 6, on the other hand, contains the results from a simulation
exercise that assumes that the reform results in a 10% increase in net take-home pay for
those enrolled in the system, and correspond to equations (16) and (17). In both tables

31

we have presented a “low” and a “high” case scenario. As may be seen, these results
suggest that, by reducing the implicit tax on labor, Chile’s pension reform had a positive
(but small) effect on wages in the informal sector, at the same time as it contributed to a
reduction in the rate of unemployment.
The results in Table 6, which are based on assumptions that closely capture
Chile’s experience, suggest that the actual effect of the pension reform on labor market
outcomes was rather modest with respect to unemployment reduction. According to our
simulation exercise, in the high case scenario, the reforms only contributed 1.0
percentage points to the reduction of the rate of unemployment. The total effect on net
wages was more important, however: first, according to this simulation exercise the
reform contributed to an increase in net wages in the informal sector that ranged from 1.7
to 2.1percent. Second, by design of the reform package net (take home) wages in the
formal sector increased by 10%.32
An important question is how sensitive are these results to the assumption that
labor market participants considered that under the old system the tax equivalent of
contributions was 26% of wages, while under the privatized system it was 5.6% of
wages. In order to deal with this issue we performed a series of simulation exercises,
under alternative values of the perceived tax component of contributions, both before and
after the reform. More specifically, we made the following alternative assumptions: (a)
We assumed that under the old pay-as-you-go regime, half of the contribution was
considered a tax (T1 = 13%). (b) With respect to the post-reform era, we considered a
range of values for the tax component of contributions. These values go from an
estimated tax (T2) of 6.2% of wages, to 4.9% of wages.33 The results obtained under

32

these alternative parameter values are close to those reported in Table 6. More
specifically, this sensitivity analysis suggests the following lower bound for the estimated
effects of Chile’s social security reform: an increase in informal sector wages of 1.4%,
and a reduction in unemployment of 0.4 percentage points.

VI.

Concluding Remarks
In 1981, Chile reformed its social security system. An inefficient and insolvent

pay-as-you-go regime was replaced by system based on individual retirement accounts.
Over the years Chile’s reform has been widely praised, and has been carefully studied by
policy makers throughout the world. In this paper we have focused on a neglected aspect
of Chile’s social security reform: its impact on labor market outcomes, including
unemployment and wages. We develop a model of the labor market where we assume
that, as is the case in most emerging markets, a formal and an informal sectors coexist
side by side. According to our model, a social security reform that reduces the implicit
tax on labor in the formal sector – as was the case in Chile --, will result in an increase in
the wage rate in the informal sector. The effect of this type of reform on aggregate
unemployment is undetermined, however. Results from simulation exercises suggest that
in the case of Chile the reforms resulted in a rather modest increase in informal sector
wages: approximately 2%. These results from the simulation exercise also suggest that
the reforms made a positive, but modest, contribution to the reduction of Chile’s
aggregate of unemployment.

33

Figure 1
wages

wages

LM
WM=Wmin+T1

Wmin

WI

yy
LI
OM

1

LM

1

LI

OI

34

Figure 2
wages

wages

LM
y’y’
1

WM =Wmin+T1

2

LI’(P I)

2

1

WM =Wmin+T2

LI’(P I)

1

LI(P I)

Wmin
2

WI

1

WI

yy
OM

1

LM

2

LM

1

LI

2

LI

OI

OI’

35

Table 1: Coverage of Chile’s Social Security System, 1994:
Urban and rural, by age and gender*

A. URBAN
16 to 39 40 to 59

60 plus

years

years

years

Total

URBAN
Males
AFP

68.87

60.01

35.02

63.36

Other

3.09

9.84

18.95

6.58

28

30.15

46.04

30.03

no answer

0.04

0

0

0.02

Total

100

100

100

100

AFP

66.56

52.89

24.57

59.63

Other

2.46

9.27

16.72

5.57

30.98

37.6

58.71

34.72

0

0.24

0

0.08

100

100

100

100

No

URBAN
Females

No
no answer
Total

36

B. RURAL
Males
AFP

44.85

39.12

21.02

40.79

Other

2.65

11.33

13.47

6.41

52.49

49.56

65.51

52.8

No answer

0.01

0

0

0.01

Total

100

100

100

100

AFP

48.79

41.69

17.83

44.93

Other

1.59

6.25

13.63

3.64

49.62

52.06

68.54

51.44

100

100

100

100

No

RURAL
Females

No
Total

* Totals may no add up to 100 due to rounding errors.
Source: calculated by the authors using raw data from Casen 94

37

TABLE 2
Wages and Social Security Contributions
(Maximum Likelihood Simultaneous Estimation)
A. Wage Equation
(Dependent variable: log of take-home (net) wages)
--------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
P>|z|
-------------+------------------------------------------yschool |
.079173
.0010154
77.97
0.000
ex |

.0217501

.0007858

27.68

0.000

ex2 |

-.0001781

.0000159

-11.20

0.000

woman |

-.1636414

.0066837

-24.48

0.000

REGION1 |

.0479687

.0116115

4.13

0.000

REGION2 |

-.0120154

.0125271

-0.96

0.337

REGION3 |

-.0427694

.0129711

-3.30

0.001

FIRM6_9 |

.0166319

.0132469

1.26

0.209

FIRM10_49 |

.0554989

.0089351

6.21

0.000

FIRM50_199 |

.1193046

.0105452

11.31

0.000

FIRM_200 |

.2371546

.0107323

22.10

0.000

Contri |

-.0885305

.0129523

-6.84

0.000

_cons |

10.45468

.019303

541.61

0.000

-------------+-------------------------------------------B. Treatment Equation
(Dependent variable: Dummy for social security contributions)
--------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
z
P>|z|
-------------+------------------------------------------yschool |
.0359285
.0037132
9.68
0.000
age

|

.0356025

.0059522

5.98

0.000

38

(Table 2, continuation)
--------------------------------------------------------age2 | -.0003571
.0000723
-4.94
0.000
FIRM6_9 |

.0849724

.0483861

1.76

0.079

FIRM10_49 |

.3225233

.0344014

9.38

0.000

FIRM50_199 |

.4179108

.0455909

9.17

0.000

FIRM_200|

.5256829

.0514504

10.22

0.000

part_ti |

-.2436089

.0600502

-4.06

0.000

woman |

-.1087624

.0288949

-3.76

0.000

AGRI |

.2301454

.1331833

1.73

0.084

MINI |

.286353

.1472251

1.95

0.052

INDU |

.2978188

.1297052

2.30

0.022

UTIL |

.2220377

.1905074

1.17

0.244

CONS |

.2163195

.1317592

1.64

0.101

COMM |

.2355087

.128338

1.84

0.066

TRAN |

.1413476

.1317512

1.07

0.283

FINA |

.4103262

.139452

2.94

0.003

GOV

|

.2871577

.1284112

2.24

0.025

dcontract |

1.93364

.0283869

68.12

0.000

_cons |

-1.841414

.1741268

-10.58

0.000

-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Number of obs
=
23198
Wald chi2(12)

=

7967.36

Prob > chi2

=

0.0000

Log likelihood

= -21518.074

Wald test of indep. eqns.
(rho = 0): chi2(1)= 110.95;
Prob > chi2 = 0.0000

39

Table 3: Notation Used in Estimation of Treatment Model

yschool

Years of schooling

ex (age)

Experience measured by age

exp2 (age2)

Experience (age) squared

AGRI

Dummy for agriculture

MINI

Mining

INDU

Industry

UTIL

Utilities

CONS

Construction

COMM

Commerce

TRAN

Transportation

FINA

Financial services

GOV

Government

REGi

Regional dummies (i=1..3 ). REG1 refers to the two largest
metropolitan areas.

Contri

Dummy that takes value of one if the individula has made a
contribution to the socila security system

FIRMj_k

Dummy that takes value of one if the firm where the
individual is employed has j to k workers. FIRM_200 refers
to firms with 200 or more workers.

40

Part_ti
dcontract

Dummy that takes value of one if individual works part time
Dummy that takes the value of one if the individual has an
employment contract

Woman

Dummy that takes a value of one if the individual is a woman

41

Table 4: Parameter Values Used in Simulation Exercises

PARAMETER

DESCRIPTIPON

VALUE

F

Total labor force (thousand of people)

3,700

LM

Employment in modern sector (thousands)

1,850

LI

Employment in “informal” sector (thousands) 1,450

U

Unemployed (thousands)

400

µ

Wage “passover coefficient” in prices in
Informal sector goods

0.3 to 0.5

φ

Supply elasticity of labor with respect to
wages

0.3

β

Weight of informal sector prices in price level

0.3

(1/η I)

Demand elasticity for labor in informal sector

-0.5 to –0.7

(1/η M)

Demand elasticity for labor in modern sector

-0.4 to –0.6

T1

Initial implicit tax on labor

T2

Post reform implicit tax on labor

Source: see text.

26.0 %

5.6 %

42

TABLE 5:
Chile’s Pension Reform and the Labor Market:
Simulation Results a
(Equations 12 and 14)

Low Case Scenario

High Case Scenario

3.8 %

4.8 %

- 1.5 %

- 2.1 %

Percentage change in real
wage in informal sector

Change in rate of
unemployment (in
percentage points)

a: This exercise assumes that there is no change in the net take-home pay for those in the
“formal” segment of the labor market.

Source: Calculated by the authors on the bases of the model developed in section III of
this paper.

43

TABLE 6:
Chile’s Pension Reform and the Labor Market:
Simulation Results a
(Equations 16 and 17)

Percentage change in real
wage in informal sector

Change in rate of
unemployment (in
percentage points)

Low Case Scenario

High Case Scenario

1.7 %

2.1 %

- 0.7 %

- 1.0 %

a: This exercise assumes that, at the time of the reform, there is a 10% increase in the net
take-home pay for those in the “formal” segment of the labor market.

Source: Calculated by the authors on the bases of the model developed in section III of
this paper.

44

ENDNOTES
1

World Bank, 1994. The Old Age Crisis, Washington, D.C. On Chile’s reforms, see

Edwards, Sebastian, and Alejandra Edwards. 1991. Monetarism and Liberalization: The
Chilean Experiment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, second edition, and
Bosworth, Barry P.; Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Radl Lab<n, editors. 1994. The Chilean
Economy: Policy Lessons and Challenges. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
2

See, for example, the discussion in Diamond, Peter and Salvador ValdJs-Prieto. 1994.
Social Security Reforms. In The Chilean Economy: Policy Lessons and Challenges,

edited by B. Bosworth, R. Dornbusch and R. Lab<n. Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institution.
3

The papers collected in Gruber J. and D. A. Wise, (Eds) 1999. Social Security and

Retirement around the World, University of Chicago Press, analyze in great detail the
way in social security affects labor force decisions of older persons in eleven
industrialized countries.
4

Siebert, Horst. 1998. "Pay-as-you-go versus capital funded Pension systems. The

Issues" in Redesigning Social Security, H. Siebert (Ed.), Kiel Institute of the World
Economy., Lorz, Oliver. 1998. "Social Security and Employment", in Redesigning Social
Security, H. Siebert (Ed.), Kiel Institute of the World Economy, and Edwards, Sebastian,
1998b. “ Chile: Radical Change Towards a Funded System” in Redesigning Social
Security, H. Siebert (Ed.), constitute some of the few papers that analyze the possible
effects of social security reforms on labor markets.

45

5

This is equivalent to analyzing whether, as expected by the architects of the reforms,

individual participants consider contributions into the new system as deferred
compensation.
6

The decision to replace the government-run program by one based on privately

managed individual retirement accounts was part of an ambitious program aimed at
transforming Chile into a market-oriented economy.
7

See Diamond, Peter. 1994.

Privatization of Social Security: Lessons from Chile.

Revista de An<lisis Econ\mico 9 (1) (June): 21-34.
8

Cox-Edwards, Alejandra. 1992. “Economic Reform and Labor Market Legislation in

Latin America.” California State University, mimeo and Diamond and Valdes-Prieto.
9
10

There are no penalties for working while receiving a pension.
In case an accumulated fund does not provide for an annuity above the minimum

pension, the state complements the funds, so long as the individual has made
contributions for a minimum of twenty years.
11

Iglesias, A. and D. Vittas, 1992.

The Rationale and Performance of Personal Pension

Plans in Chile , Working Paper 867, The World Bank.
12

Fuentes Silva, Roberto. 1995.

Evoluci\n y resultados del sistema. In Quince aZos

despues: Una mirada al sistema privado de pensiones, edited by S. Baeza and F.
Margozzini. Santiago: Centro de Estudios Pdblicos.
13

Baeza ValdJs, Sergio, and Radl Burger Torres. 1995.

Calidad de las pensiones del

sistema privado chileno. In Quince aZos despues: Una mirada al sistema privado de
pensiones, edited by S. Baeza and F. Margozzini. Santiago: Centro de Estudios Pdblicos.

46

14

On industrial countries replacement rates see, for example, Davis, E. P.1998.

“”Pensions in the Corporate Sector”, in Redesigning Social Security, H. Siebert (Ed.),
and the papers in Grueber and Wise. Naturally, since this is a defined contribution
system, future replacement rates may vary.
15

See Edwards, Sebastian, 1998a. “ The Chilean Pension Reform: A Pioneering

Program”, in Privatizing Social Security, by M. Feldsrein (ed.). for details on the
system’s operative aspects and Cox-Edwards, Alejandra. 2000. “Pension projections for
Chilean Men and Women: Estimates from social security contributions” (The World
Bank), .for the impact of the reform on women’s income.
16
17

This point has been forcefully made by Diamond and Valdes-Prieto, among others.
See Edwards, Sebastian, and Alejandra Edwards. 2000. “Economic Reforms and

Labor Market: Policy Issues and Lessons from Chile”. Economic Policy, April 2000,
for details on the labor reforms.
18

Strictly speaking this improved performance began in 1985-86, after Chile recovered

from the debt crisis.
19

The initial level of wages was, however, highly depressed Edwards and Edwards,

Monetraism.
20

Bach,M. and Ricardo Paredes (1996) “Are There Dual Labor Markets in Chile?:

Empirical Evidence”, Journal-of-Development-Economics; 50(2), August 1996, pages
297-312., present micro-based evidence for Chile that supports the view that the
country’s labor market is characterized by the coexistence of these two labor segments.
21

Diamond and Valdes-Prieto. In the case of Chile, Torche, A. And Gert Wagner,

1997. “Prevision Social: Valoracion Individual de un Beneficio Mandatado”. Cuandernos

47

de Economia, N 103, pp. 363-390, have argued that, although the reform reduced the tax
component of contributions to social security, it did not fully eliminated it. In section III
of this paper we use micro survey data to investigate this issue in detail.
22

This mechanism is similar to the one consider in migration models of the Harris-

Todaro type. In our model, however, there is no migration. The assumption of risk
neutrality is not essential; all the results will follow if individuals have a constant degree
of risk aversion.
23

We have abstracted from intertemporal issues. Altough our results will still go

through in an explicit intertemporal context, the computations would become
significantly more complex.
24

This simplification allows us to maintain product prices in the modern sector constant.

An alternative assumption, and one that would not affect the basic aspect of the analysis,
is that the modern sector is comprised of both tradable and non-tradable goods. In this
case, we would need a product market clearing condition for modern sector goods.
25
26

That is, η I = ( d log W I ) / ( d log L I ).
There is some evidence that, in spite of poverty reduction, income distribution became

more unequal in Chile during the 1980’s and 1990s. See Valdes, A. 1999. “Poverty and
income Distribution in a High Growth Economy: Chile, 1987-95” in G. Perry and D. M.
Leipziger (Eds) Chile: Recent policy Lessons and Emerging Challenges, The World
Bank, for an analysis of the evolution of poverty and income distribution in Chile in the
1980-1994 period.
27

Some of the limitations of the model include the fact that it does not consider all the

channels through which the reform will feedback to the rest of the economy. Also, it

48

does not consider explicitly the (possible) effect on the labor supply of the elimination of
the expected future benefits of the entitlement component of the old system. This effect,
however, is likely to be small and could be easily incorporated into the system by
amending equation (6).
28

This, however, is only a first order approximation. The actual proportion of the

contribution will depend on the individual’s rate of discount, and the pension fund’s rate
of return, among other things.
29

Maddala, G.S. 1983. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics,

Cambridge University Press, Cambidge, U.K.
30

Coeymans J.E. 1992 “Productividad, Salarios y Empleo en la Economía Chilena,”

Cuadernos de Economía, August, 1992, and Coeymans J.E. and Y. Mundlak, 1993.
“Sectoral growth in Chile: 1962-82”, Research Report, vol. 95. Washington, D.C.:
International Food Policy Research Institute.
31

The results in Table 2 suggest that, after controlling for other factors, those

individuals that are subject to mandated contributions (at a 20% rate), have a take-home
pay that is on average 8.9% below that of individuals that don’t participate in the system.
The estimated perceived tax of the pension component is, then, calculated as [0.1-(0.089
/2)] = 0.056.
32

We also simulated the model under the assumption that the supply for labor is

inelastic. In this case the estimated increase in informal sector salaries is higher, ranging
from 3.7% to 6.2%.
33

These bounds are derived from the point estimate, plus/minus one standard deviation.

