                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MODERN HYPER- AND HIGH INFLATIONS


                                             Stanley Fischer
                                              Ratna Sahay
                                             Carlos A. Végh


                                          Working Paper 8930
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8930


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




This paper has been prepared for the Journal of Economic Literature. We are grateful to Mary Hallward-
Driemeier of the World Bank for her contributions at an early stage in the writing of the paper; to Leonardo
Bartolini, Peter Doyle, Bob Flood, Javier Hamann, Esteban Jadresic, Prakash Loungani, Peter Montiel,
Maansi Sahay Seth, Murat Ucer, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the IMF, World Bank,
and AEA meetings for helpful comments and discussions; and to Claire Adams, Manzoor Gill, Nada Mora,
Prachi Mishra, and Kartikeya Singh for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the IMF.


© 2002 by Stanley Fischer, Ratna Sahay and Carlos A. Végh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Modern Hyper- and High Inflations
Stanley Fischer, Ratna Sahay and Carlos A. Végh
NBER Working Paper No. 8930
May 2002
JEL No. F41, E63



                                              ABSTRACT

        Since 1947, hyperinflations (by Cagan's definition) in market economies have been rare. Much
more common have been longer inflationary processes with inflation rates above 100 percent per annum.
Based on a sample of 133 countries, and using the 100 percent threshold as the basis for a definition of
very high inflation episodes, this paper examines the main characteristics of such inflations. Among other
things, we find that (i) close to 20 percent of countries have experienced inflation above 100 percent per
annum; (ii) higher inflation tends to be more unstable; (iii) in high inflation countries, the relationship
between the fiscal balance and seigniorage is strong both in the short and long-run; (iv) inflation inertia
decreases as average inflation rises; (v) high inflation is associated with poor macroeconomic
performance; and (vi) stabilizations from high inflation that rely on the exchange rate as the nominal
anchor are expansionary.




Stanley Fischer                  Ratna Sahay                              Carlos A. Végh
Citigroup                        Research Department                      Department of Economics
399 Park Avenue                  International Monetary Fund              UCLA
New York, NY 10043               Washington, DC 20431                     Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                         rsahay@imf.org                           and NBER
fischers@citi.com                                                         cvegh@ucla.edu
                                            -2-




                                     I. INTRODUCTION

        In his classic work, Phillip Cagan (1956) studied seven of the eight hyperinflations
that took place between 1920 and 1946.2 Cagan defined a hyperinflation as beginning in the
month inflation first exceeds 50 percent (per month) and as ending in the month before the
monthly inflation rate drops below 50 percent for at least a year. Although he did not specify
a minimum span of time for an inflationary episode to qualify as a hyperinflation, none of the
Cagan seven lasted less than 10 months.

        Hyperinflations are largely a modern phenomenon. While the data must be highly
imperfect, the evidence (Table 1) indicates that many of the famous pre-20th century
inflations were modest by present standards: the inflation associated with the Black Death
was less than 50 percent per annum and the Spanish inflation resulting from the discovery of
the New World averaged less than 2 percent and probably never exceeded 15 percent per
annum. Inflation in the Roman empire in the fourth century, following Diocletian,3 may in
some years have reached triple digit levels measured in the prices of denarius (a small—and
getting smaller—coin) but was very low measured in terms of the gold solidus (a larger
coin).4 The more recent inflations summarized in Table 1, associated with wars and paper
money, did on occasion reach triple digit per annum levels.

        The first recorded inflation that meets Cagan's definition of a hyperinflation appears
to be the assignat inflation of revolutionary France, during which there were at least five
months in 1795–96 in which inflation exceeded 50 percent (see Capie, 1991, and Sargent and
Velde, 1995). The link with the French revolution supports the view that hyperinflations are a
modern phenomenon related to the need to print paper money to finance large fiscal deficits
caused by wars, revolutions, the end of empires, and the establishment of new states.

        Between 1947 and 1984 there were no hyperinflations. Since 1984, there have been at
least seven (in six countries) in the market economies—with the Nicaraguan hyperinflation
the worst among the seven. By the same Cagan definition, there have also been in this decade
hyperinflations in transition economies, particularly the countries of the former Soviet Union.
Table 2 shows hyperinflations during 1956–1996, as defined by Cagan, but excluding

2
 The seven hyperinflations were: Austria, October 1921–August 1922; Russia, December
1921–January 1924; Germany, August 1922–November 1923; Poland, January 1923–January
1924; Hungary I, March 1923–February 1924; Greece, November 1943–November 1944;
and Hungary II, August 1945–July 1946. In addition, there was, by Cagan’s definition, a
hyperinflation in China from October 1947 to March 1948 (Huang, 1948).
3
 Inflation in the century leading up to Diocletian’s price control edict in 301 AD appears to
have averaged under 4 percent per annum (Paarlberg, 1993).
4
  This appears to have been an early example of the adage that inflation is a regressive tax,
for the solidus was reportedly too valuable to be held by the poor.
                                            -3-




episodes that lasted less than two months.5 The Serbian case stands out as the worst among
recent hyperinflations, with a peak monthly inflation rate that exceeds those in all the Cagan
seven except the post-World War II Hungarian hyperinflation.6

        Inter-war controversies over hyperinflation centered on the question of whether the
process was driven by monetary expansion (for example Bresciani-Turroni, 1937, and
Graham, 1930) or the balance of payments.7 The latter view accorded a major role in the
inflationary process to the assumed exogenous behavior of the exchange rate. According to
Bresciani-Turroni, this view was held throughout the German hyperinflation by the
Reichsbank, bankers, industrialists, much of the press, and most German economists. Cagan
advanced the analysis within a monetary framework by including the role of expectations,
asking whether the process of expectations formation itself might have caused hyperinflation,
and concluding—assuming adaptive expectations—that underlying monetary growth was
instead responsible.

        Since 1956, the formal analysis of hyperinflations has advanced in a number of
directions, each of which brought in its train a large literature.8 First, with the development of
the theory of rational expectations, the notion that expectations alone could have caused
hyperinflation became more difficult to sustain, except if there were multiple equilibria, some
of them hyperinflationary and others not. Such an outcome is possible, for instance, if the
inflation tax is subject to the Laffer curve, as is implied by the demand for money function
assumed by Cagan (Bruno and Fischer, 1990).9 The introduction of rational expectations also

5
  We exclude episodes lasting less than two months because many transition economies,
especially those in the former Soviet Union, suffered at least one month of more than
50 percent inflation when price controls were lifted. Since these episodes were more in the
nature of a price level adjustment than an ongoing process of high inflation, we have changed
the definition to exclude them.
6
    The peak monthly rate in the post-World War II Hungarian hyperinflation was 41.9x1015.
7
 It should be noted that, at the time, some analysts also emphasized the role of expectations;
see Laidler and Stadler (1998).
8
 Of course, the verbal accounts of some of the inter-World War authors contain many of the
mechanisms and subtleties developed more formally in the later literature.
9
 In the presence of multiple equilibria, the key question becomes whether “learning” (or any
other convergence process) will lead the economy to the “good” (i.e., non-explosive) Laffer
curve equilibrium. While, theoretically, learning does not rule out the possibility of
convergence to sunspot equilibria (Woodford, 1990), experimental evidence suggests that the
economy will tend to converge to a low inflationary steady-state (Marimon and Sunder,
1993). Also, as pointed out by Woodford (1990), there are many different ways – all equally
plausible and satisfying some weak criteria for rational decision-making -- of specifying a
                                                                                     (continued)
                                            -4-




led to a more sophisticated econometric treatment of the demand for money, and therefore to
attempts to estimate money demand functions in hyperinflations under the constraint of
rational expectations (for example, Sargent and Wallace, 1973).

        Second, consideration of inflation as a tax, formalized for instance in Bailey (1956),
implied a change in emphasis from monetary to fiscal factors as the root cause of
hyperinflations—with the complication that in the presence of the Keynes-Tanzi effect
(whereby, due to lags in tax collection, higher inflation reduces the real value of government
tax revenues), an initially money-driven inflation could generate a growing fiscal deficit in an
unstable feedback process.10

        Third, in a famous article, Sargent (1982) studied the process of ending
hyperinflations, emphasizing that a credible change in policies, preferably embedded in legal
and institutional changes, could bring a hyperinflation to an end at essentially zero cost.
Along similar lines, the notion that higher inflation reduces the normal policy lags meant that
there could be scope for heterodox policies, involving for instance temporary wage and price
controls, which would make it possible to move from a high inflation to a low inflation
equilibrium very rapidly and at low output cost.

        Fourth, and closely related to Sargent's approach, the development of the game
theoretic approach to policy made it possible to analyze the concept of credibility (Persson
and Tabellini, 1990), thus providing analytic content for a concept frequently invoked by
central bankers and other policymakers.

         In addition to the deepening understanding of hyperinflation, the period since 1956
has also seen the introduction of the important concept of chronic inflation by Felipe Pazos
(1972). Pazos emphasized that the inflationary problem in many countries, especially in Latin
America, was not so much one of occasional outbursts of hyperinflation followed by
stability, but rather that of an ongoing process of double digit (per annum) inflation, rising
occasionally to triple digits.11 Institutional mechanisms created to protect against the effects

learning process. For the case of linear rational expectations models, Marcet and Sargent
(1995) analyze the speed of convergence in a setting in which agents learn by fitting ARMA
models to a subset of state variables. For details on learning and its relation to the rational
expectations hypothesis, see the excellent review by Evans and Honkapohja (2001)
10
  However, high inflation could actually reduce the fiscal deficit if the real value of
government expenditure falls by more than real tax revenues. Cardoso (1998) points to the
so-called Patinkin effect, the converse of the Tanzi effect, which could arise if, for instance,
nominal government spending is fixed and its real value reduced by inflation—an
equilibrating mechanism that was operative during Brazilian high inflations.
11
  Marcet and Nicolini (1998) study a model with learning that can explain sudden outbursts
of high inflation in chronic inflation countries. In a similar vein, see Zarazaga (1993).
                                            -5-




of inflation make the problem more deep-seated and difficult to deal with. In particular,
Pazos emphasized the difficulties for disinflationary policies caused by overlapping, often
indexed, wage contracts. Devastating as hyperinflations are when they occur, the problem of
moderate or chronic inflation better describes the form in which inflation confronts most
countries that have suffered the effects of inflation in the last half-century.

        Increasing evidence on the real effects of inflation stabilization programs in chronic
inflation countries brought to the forefront the possibility that—contrary to conventional
wisdom—disinflation may lead to an initial expansion in economic activity—particularly in
GDP and consumption—as argued by Kiguel and Liviatan (1992) and Végh (1992). The
recession typically associated with disinflation appears to occur later in the programs.
Interestingly, the initial expansion appears to be related to the use of the exchange rate as the
main nominal anchor. Several types of models have been developed to explain these puzzling
stylized facts, which emphasize the role of inflation inertia, lack of credibility, purchases of
durable goods, and supply side effects (see Calvo and Végh, 1999, for a critical review).

       Cagan (1956, p. 25) justified treating hyperinflations separately on the grounds that
they permit "[r]elations between monetary factors ... [to] ... be studied ... in what almost
amounts to isolation from the real sector of the economy." In this paper, we follow Cagan's
approach of studying inflationary episodes, but rather than confine ourselves to
hyperinflations strictly defined—which are quite rare—we examine the still relatively rare
episodes of very high inflation, defined as inflations in excess of 100 percent per annum (an
exact definition is provided below).

        We do this for four main reasons. First, inflations in this range are sufficiently
disruptive that in practice virtually no country has been willing to live with them for more
than a few years. Second, both popular usage—which often refers to triple digit inflation as
hyperinflation—and the literature have tended to treat 100 percent as a distinguishing line
between high and extraordinary inflations. Third, in studying episodes of extreme inflation, it
is useful to have the extra statistical degrees of freedom offered by the larger sample of
countries that have experienced very high inflation, rather than hyperinflations. Fourth, as it
turns out, certain simple economic relationships stand out more clearly in high inflations than
they do in normal conditions.

        We start by characterizing in Section II the dynamic behavior of inflation in different
ranges, first by listing the frequency of inflationary episodes in different ranges, and then by
using transition matrices to assess, in particular, whether inflationary dynamics are different
at high inflation rates. For the remainder of the paper we concentrate on episodes of very
high inflation. In our definition (formally stated in Section II), a “very high inflation episode”
takes place when the 12-month inflation rates rises above 100 percent. Based on this formal
definition, we identify 45 such episodes in 25 countries. In Section III, we proceed to
examine several mechanisms that are basic to the analysis of inflation such as the relationship
between money growth and inflation on the one hand and among fiscal deficits, seigniorage,
and inflation on the other. We also examine the causal relation among money, inflation, and
exchange rates, as well as the concept of inflation inertia. In Section IV, we shift gears and
                                            -6-




focus on (i) the behavior of macroeconomic variables during high inflation periods compared
with low inflation periods and (ii) the real effects of disinflation. Section V concludes by
summarizing the results and, in the process, identifying ten key stylized facts associated with
very high inflation.


                         II. CHARACTERISTICS OF HIGH INFLATION

                          A. Inflationary Episodes and Dynamics

         Table 3a presents data for 133 market economies on the frequency of inflationary
episodes for specified ranges of the inflation rate in the period 1960-1996 (or, if data were
not available, the longest available sub-sample). An inflationary episode is defined as taking
place when the 12-month inflation rate rises above the lower bound of the specified range. In
that case, we take the start of the episode to be the first month of that 12-month period and
the last month to be the first month before the 12-month inflation rate falls below the lower
bound and stays there for at least 12 months.12 For example, take the 100 percent threshold,
and imagine a country whose 12-month inflation rate is above 100 percent only in, say, June
1970. Then, under our definition, this country experienced a 100 percent inflationary episode
from July 1969 to June 1970. Notice that, under this definition, the minimum duration of an
episode is 12 months.

        Although a variety of adjectives have been used to categorize inflationary episodes,
for instance moderate, high, extreme, and hyper- (Dornbusch and Fischer, 1993), there is as
yet no agreed convention.13 Seen in international perspective, the ranges in the table can be
regarded as "moderate to high" (for the 25–50 percent range), and "high" (for the
50-100 percent range), with the remaining categories constituting at the least "very high"
inflation rates—although 25 percent per annum would not be regarded as moderate in many
countries.




12
   Although our definition is modeled on that of Cagan (1956) in his classic article, it differs
in one important respect from his: namely, Cagan based his definition on monthly rates of
inflation whereas ours is based on 12-month inflation rates.
13
  The ranges used in this paper draw largely from previous work. One way to proceed would
be to look for breaks in the transition probabilities. If any were found, this would suggest that
inflation behaves differently in different ranges. We follow this approach only in examining
some results of Bruno and Easterly (1995) discussed later in this section.
                                             -7-




         Table 3a tells us that most countries, most of the time, experience inflation of less
than 25 percent per annum.14 However, over two-third (92) of the countries in the sample
experienced an episode of more than 25 percent per annum inflation. Over half (49) of those
countries in turn suffered from an episode in excess of 50 percent per annum, while 25
experienced an inflationary episode of more than 100 percent and 11 countries suffered from
at least one episode of more than 400 percent per annum inflation. The average duration of
the inflationary episodes is remarkably similar—and, at 3–4 years, surprisingly long—while
the maximum duration declines as the inflation rate rises. Only one country (Argentina) that
experienced an inflationary episode in excess of 400 percent per annum repeated the
experience.

        Data on inflationary episodes in 28 transition economies are presented in Table 3b.
All of these economies experienced an episode of inflation of more than 25 percent; indeed
most of them (19 out of 28) suffered from an inflationary episode in excess of 400 percent
per annum. Most of the extreme inflations in these countries were at the start of the transition
process when, in light of large monetary overhangs, the price level jumped in response to
price liberalization. For this group of countries, over the period since prices were freed,15
monthly inflation was generally above 25 percent per annum,16 although inflation in most of
them is now into the low double or even single digit annual rates.

         In Table 4, we present related (to Table 3a) information on the statistical properties of
inflation in the market economies, in the form of a transition matrix. Categorized by the
inflation rate in year t (rows), these matrices show the frequencies with which the inflation
rate in the subsequent year (t+1) is in different ranges.17 For instance, if the inflation rate in
year t is in the range of 25–50 percent, the probability that it will be less than 25 percent in

14
  The total number of country-months in the sample included in Table 3a is 44,910. For
80.1 percent of those months, the monthly inflation rate is less than 1.9 percent
(corresponding to an annual rate of 25 percent).
15
  The starting dates selected depend on when the prices were freed and on data availability.
Thus, they tend to vary across the transition economies, being 1991 for most of Eastern
Europe and Mongolia,1992 for the former Soviet Union, 1988 for Poland, 1990 for the
former Yugoslavian states and Vietnam, 1986 for China, and 1976 for Hungary.
16
     Of a total sample of 2,023 monthly inflation rates, only 37 percent were below 1.9 percent.
17
  We have also calculated a transition matrix for the corresponding monthly rates of
inflation. For all but the 200–400 percent per annum range, the probability of inflation
remaining in a given range is smaller with monthly than with annual data. Further, the
probability that the inflation rate will fall is uniformly higher for the monthly than the annual
data. These results are due mainly to the greater variability in monthly inflation rates
compared to annual rates.
                                              -8-




the following year is 46.5 percent (corresponding to the entry in the second row, first
column).

         Three features of Table 4 are noteworthy. First, when the inflation rate is less than
25 percent, it is very likely (95.4 percent probability) to be in that range in the following
year. In contrast, for all higher inflation ranges (excluding the last range which has no upper
bound), the probability that inflation will stay in its current range is less than 50 percent.18
Second, consider the columns labeled “Prob will rise” and "Prob will fall." The probability
that inflation will rise to a higher range increases from 4.6 percent in the lowest range to
47.1 percent in the next-to-last range.19 This captures the idea that higher inflation is more
explosive. Third, until inflation reaches the 200 percent level, it is still more likely to fall
than rise.

        Finally, combining Table 2 with information in Table 3a, we see that of the 11 market
economies that experienced episodes of inflation of more than 400 percent,20 more than half
(six) also had a hyperinflation, as defined by Cagan. This certainly suggests that extreme
inflations carry with them a high danger of hyperinflation.


                                     B. Very High Inflations

        In the remainder of this paper, most of our attention will be focus on episodes of very
high inflation, as defined in Section II. This definition does not require the monthly inflation
rate to be within the range every month, nor does it imply that the average inflation rate
within an episode necessarily exceeds 100 percent per annum.21

        Detailed data on the 45 episodes of very high inflation in 25 countries are presented
in Table A1 (in the Appendix). Twelve of the countries (18 episodes) are in South America
or the Caribbean (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela), nine countries (19 episodes) are in Africa

18
     In discussing Tables 4 and 5, we refer to frequencies and probabilities interchangeably.
19
     However, there are relatively few observations in the higher inflation ranges.
20
  The eleven countries are Angola, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Democratic Republic
of Congo, Israel, Lebanon, Nicaragua, Peru, and Suriname.
21
   This is because of the end-point requirement in the definition; namely, that the twelve-
month rate stay below 100 percent for at least 12 months for an episode to end. It can be seen
from Table A1 that in 13 of the 45 episodes, the (geometric) average inflation rate within an
episode is less than 100 percent per annum. Note also that the end of two episodes (in Congo
and Venezuela) is dictated by the end of the sample period (December 1996).
                                              -9-




(Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, Uganda, and Zambia) with Afghanistan (2 episodes), Israel (one episode), Lebanon
(three episodes) and Turkey (two episodes) completing the list. The longest episodes were in
Argentina (over 17 years) and Brazil (over 15 years); the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(formerly Zaire), suffered from six episodes, totaling 15 years. The surprise in these data is
the number of very high inflation episodes in African countries, whose inflationary
experience has been studied much less than that of many other countries in the group,
particularly a number of Latin American countries and Israel.22

         Bruno and Easterly (1995) present data suggesting that 40 percent per annum is a
critical inflation threshold, above which the probability of inflation rising to 100 percent per
annum becomes much larger. Table 5, which uses more finely defined inflation ranges than
Table 4, shows that the probability of annual inflation rising increases as the inflation rate
rises towards 100 percent. These data confirm the impression that inflation tends to become
more unstable as it rises. Even so, there is no inflation range in Table 5 for which inflation is
more likely to rise than fall. Nor does there seem to be a significant discontinuity at
40 percent inflation.

        Tables 2 through 5 present useful characterizations of different aspects of the
inflationary process, with an emphasis on high inflations. In summary, most of the time, in
most countries, inflation is low, and low inflation is stable. However, since 1960, most
countries have suffered from at least one episode of inflation of more than 25 percent per
annum, and as many as 25 (out of 133) market economies have experienced an episode of
very high inflation (i.e., 12-month inflation above100 percent). Further, the data suggest that
inflation is more likely to increase the higher it is or, equivalently, that higher inflation is
relatively more unstable than lower inflation.


                                III. INFLATIONARY MECHANISMS

        Having documented the dynamic behavior of inflation, the natural next step is to try
to determine what are the key macroeconomic variables that underlie inflationary
processes.23 To that effect, this section first revisits and confirms a basic tenet of monetary
economics: in the long run money growth and inflation are highly correlated. In this
(admittedly narrow) sense, therefore, "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary
phenomenon," as famously argued by Friedman (1963). While a useful starting point, the
high correlation between money growth and inflation actually raises more questions than it
answers. The first question is causation: does money cause inflation? Or is there reverse

22
     See Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) for a recent analysis of high inflation in Africa.
23
 From this point onwards – and since we will be mostly looking at long-run relationships --
we will restrict our attention to market economies.
                                             - 10 -




causation from inflation to money/exchange rate? Our basic finding is that, more often than
not, causation (in the Granger sense) runs from exchange rate changes and inflation to money
growth. We interpret this result, however, as saying that, once inflation has been triggered,
monetary policy has typically been accommodative, thus allowing inflation to be driven by
temporary shocks and by its own dynamics (i.e., inflation persistence). This leads to the next
question: what triggers inflation to begin with? The standard explanation is fiscal imbalances.
By and large, we find that fiscal deficits indeed explain high inflation using standard
regression techniques. Finally, we tackle the issue of inflation persistence by providing two
definitions based on autoregressive processes, which allow us to quantify persistence and
examine how it varies with the level of inflation.


                                   A. Data and Methodology

         Since several of the econometric exercises in this section rely on a common data set
and regression techniques, we first describe the sample and the common methodology behind
them. We used as large a sample as possible with regard to both the number of countries as
well as the time period covered. However, both the quality and availability of data on several
macroeconomic variables varied widely across countries. To maintain consistency across all
the panel regressions that were run and maximize the number of countries included in the
sample, we imposed the condition that a country be included in the sample only if there were
at least ten annual observations during the 1960–1995 period for each of the five variables—
inflation, reserve money, broad money (including foreign currency deposits), fiscal balance,
and nominal GDP—that were needed for running the regressions. Consequently, 94 countries
were selected (all market economies), each with at least 10 annual observations.

        For each type of regression that is reported below, we allowed for different
coefficients for high and low inflation countries, where the high inflation countries were the
24 in this sample which experienced at least one episode of very high inflation (as described
in the previous section).24 In the panel regressions, we also allowed for lags of the
independent variables to affect the dependent variable of interest. In addition, sub-samples
that included only the high inflation countries were tested to see whether the coefficients
during their high inflation episodes differed from their low inflation episodes. In all panel
regressions we allowed for country and period-specific effects.

        To set the stage, Figure 1 shows the averages of inflation, money growth (M2),
seigniorage, and fiscal balance for high inflation countries (24 countries) and low inflation
countries (70 countries). As is evident from the Figure 1, high inflation countries also exhibit
high levels of money growth, seigniorage, and fiscal deficit. The remainder of this section
will formally examine these relationships.


24
     The only high inflation country not included (due to lack of data) is Afghanistan.
                                             - 11 -




                                     B. Money and Inflation

         Figure 2 and Table 6 show the cross-sectional (long-run) relationship between
inflation and money growth, with each observation representing the simple average over the
sample period of the inflation and the money growth rates, each defined as ln(1 + x/100)
where x is the corresponding annual rate. As shown in 2, the relationship between money
growth and inflation is extremely strong and close to one-to-one.25 The regression coefficient
is in fact 1.115 and highly significant (Table 6, column 1). Furthermore, the relationship
holds even when the sample is broken up into high and low inflation countries (Table 6,
column 2). In the long run, therefore, the data show a very strong relationship between
money growth and inflation.

        Does the money-inflation link remain valid in the short-run? To answer this question,
we ran a panel regression with annual data in which, in addition to allowing for different
coefficients on money growth in the low and high inflation countries, we also allow for two
lags of money growth. We then take a sub-sample that includes only high inflation countries
and test for different coefficients on high and low inflation episodes.

We find that while the relationship between money and inflation remains highly significant
(Table 6, columns 4 and 5) for both groups of countries, the coefficient for low inflation
countries is much lower, a result that is perhaps not surprising given that we are looking at a
short-run relationship and the fact that GDP growth is not taken into account in the
regressions. When two lags on money growth are included in the panel regression (Table 6,
column 5), the coefficients on both contemporaneous and lagged money growth are
significant and different across high and low inflation countries. The contrast between high
and low inflation countries in the speed with which the effects of money growth are
transmitted is quite dramatic: the bulk of the inflationary effects of money growth occurs
remarkably early in the high inflation countries; in low inflation countries, in contrast, the
effects are distributed evenly across the current and previous periods. In the panel sub-sample
with only high inflation countries (Table 6, columns 6 and 7), the previous results of a strong
effect of money growth on inflation carry through. We also find a differential effect during
high and low inflation episodes within high inflation countries, which is likely to be due to
(i) GDP growth being more important relative to the inflation rate during low inflation years,
and (ii) the negative impact of high inflation on the demand for money.26 In line with our
previous findings, adding lags shows that the bulk of the effects take place
contemporaneously (Table 6, column 6).



25
     The outlier in Figure 1 is Nicaragua (the furthermost from the regression line).
26
  We could not reject the OLS model in favor of a fixed-effects one, indicating the
overwhelming effect of money growth on inflation that is common across the high inflation
countries.
                                           - 12 -




        In sum, the data show that the inflation-money growth link is exceptionally strong,
both in the long- and short-run. While the relationship may not necessarily be instantaneous
nor precisely one-for-one, there can be no doubt that inflation can be ended if the monetary
taps are turned off.27 28In this sense, therefore, our evidence overwhelmingly confirms what
every schoolchild knows: inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon. This,
however, is only the beginning of wisdom—for the next question is what drives money
growth.


                        C. Money, Exchange Rates, and Inflation

         With the money-inflation link established, there remains the question of what drives
money growth. The question is relevant because high inflations are not popular, and it is
reasonable to believe that it is rare for governments to take a deliberate policy decision to
have a high inflation—even if a set or sequence of policy decisions produces a high
inflation.29 The usual answer to the question of what drives money growth is fiscal deficits:
in this view, inflation is a fiscal phenomenon. We shall turn to this view shortly.

        An alternative answer to what drives money growth is that rapid money growth, and
hence high inflation, is the unintended consequence of inappropriate monetary policies, for
instance policies directed at producing real outcomes that are inconsistent with the real
equilibrium of the economy, be it for unemployment, the real exchange rate, real wages, or
the real interest rate.30 For instance, as noted in the introduction, there was an active
controversy during and after the German hyperinflation over whether inflation was caused by
money growth or the balance of payments. The latter view can be made consistent with the
evidence that inflation is a monetary phenomenon by thinking of monetary policy as seeking

27
  We are aware that in talking about causation we have taken a step that goes beyond the
inflation-money growth correlations. But it is a short step, since money growth is always
potentially controllable—if necessary with a change in monetary operating practices.
28
  Naturally, for the government to be able to turn off the monetary taps permanently, the
underlying fiscal problems must be addressed. Otherwise, low inflation will only be
purchased at the cost of future high inflation (i.e., Sargent and Wallace’s (1981) celebrated
unpleasant monetarist arithmetic).
29
  It is sometimes argued that the Soviet inflation of the early-1920s was a deliberate act of
policy; it has also been argued that the German hyperinflation was an attempt to demonstrate
that reparations could not be paid.
30
  This is the so-called “shocks and accommodation” view of monetary policy in chronic
inflation countries; see, among others, Adams and Gros (1986), Bruno and Fischer (1986),
Bruno and Melnick (1994), and Calvo, Reinhart, and Végh (1995).
                                             - 13 -




to maintain a constant real exchange rate in circumstances where the nominal exchange rate
is being moved by exogenous forces (e.g., speculation, access to external loans, terms of
trade shocks, reparation payments, and so forth).

        An examination of the short-run dynamics of money, inflation, and the exchange rate
should shed light on the issue of whether monetary policy reacts to or leads inflation and the
exchange rate. To try to disentangle the dynamic relationships—in particular to see whether
money growth leads or lags inflation—we conducted Granger-causality tests by running
vector autoregressions (VARs) in a three-variable system, containing the inflation rate,
nominal exchange rate (percentage change), and money growth. The results are based on data
from only 8 of the 24 market economies. The data consisted of quarterly series for the
longest sample period for which data were available for each country (see Table 7 for
details).31 An analysis of the remaining 17 very high inflation countries was not conducted
because of large gaps in the availability of time-series data.

        For each country, we first ran an unrestricted VAR. We then ran a series of restricted
VARs by excluding each variable, one at a time, from the equations for the other two
variables (still in the three-variable system) and conducted chi- squared tests to see whether
the exclusion of these variables is rejected. Table 7 presents the results of the three-way
Granger causality tests. Seasonal dummies were used only if they were jointly significant at
the five percent level in the unrestricted VAR regression. The most appropriate lag length
was chosen on the basis of statistical significance.32

         The last three columns in Table 7 report whether a chi-squared test rejects the
exclusion of the variable of interest from the VAR regressions at the five percent level (two
stars), ten percent level (one star), or does not reject the exclusion (a dash). For example, in
the case of Argentina, the results indicate that exchange rate movements Granger-cause
money growth and inflation while inflation and money growth do not Granger-cause each
other or changes in the exchange rate. The overall picture that emerges is that Granger
causality appears to run more often from exchange rate changes or inflation to money growth
than vice versa.33

31
     The sample period is not confined to very high inflation episodes.
32
   We also ran the VARs imposing a uniform three-quarter lag length. The results on the
statistical significance of the exclusion restrictions were unchanged, except in the case of
Somalia.
33
  Our results are thus broadly consistent with the conclusions of Montiel (1989) and
Dornbusch, Sturzenegger, and Wolf (1990). They are also consistent with earlier analysis of
the classical hyperinflations by Frenkel (1977, 1979) and Sargent and Wallace (1973). In
particular, Sargent and Wallace (1973) conclude, based on Cagan’s seven hyperinflations,
that the causality from inflation to money is typically stronger than from money to inflation.
(See also Paal (2000)).
                                            - 14 -




         These regression results should not be interpreted as implying that, in some
circumstances, inflation is not caused by money growth, or that inflation could not be
stopped if monetary policy changed and money growth was reduced to a very low level.34
One explanation for the creation and persistence of very high inflation which we find
plausible is that inflation initially emerges as an undesired result of other policy decisions
(the obvious candidate being fiscal imbalances), and continues because policymakers often
tend to accommodate shocks (the shocks and accommodation view mentioned above) -- thus
allowing inflation to be driven by exogenous shocks and its own dynamics -- and/or are
reluctant to incur the costs needed to get rid of chronic inflation. There may be several
reasons for such reluctance. First, once the public expects high inflation to continue, it may
become too costly for the government not to validate public’s expectations (see, for instance,
Calvo (1988a)). Second, even if the mechanisms were found to credibly commit to low
inflation, political battles over the distribution of the required fiscal adjustment may lead to a
period of inaction that will erode the political support to proceed further (Alesina and Drazen
(1991)). As a result, things often need to get worse (in the form of outbursts of extreme high
inflation as in Argentina and Brazil in the late 1980s) before they get better (Drazen and
Grilli (1993)).


                       D. Fiscal Deficits, Inflation, and Seigniorage

        As mentioned above, the most commonly held view about the ultimate origins of
inflation is that it results from fiscal imbalances. But does the data bear this out? To answer
this question, we turn to an empirical analysis of the relationship between fiscal deficits,
seigniorage, and inflation. These links derive from the flow fiscal identity:

                           fiscal deficit = seigniorage + borrowing                                (1)

with the inflation-deficit link emerging from the link between seigniorage and inflation. In
addition, there is an associated intertemporal fiscal constraint which requires that the present
discounted value of primary deficits (i.e., deficits net of interest payments) plus the
government’s initial debt be equal to the present discounted value of seigniorage.35 As a
result of the restrictions imposed by this intertemporal constraint, there may be complicated

34
  In fact, as shown by Sargent and Wallace (1973), causality from inflation to money is
entirely consistent with a model in which inflation is driven by the need to finance a fixed
real amount of government spending. In such a model, the “causality” from inflation to
money growth emerges because the public’s expected rate of inflation influences future
money growth through the government budget constraint.
35
   Naturally, this formulation presupposes that the fiscal authority is solvent in an
intertemporal sense.
                                            - 15 -




dynamic relationships among the terms within the fiscal budget identity (1). For instance, for
a given present discounted value of primary deficits, less use of seigniorage today will
necessarily require the use of more seigniorage tomorrow, as shown by Sargent and
Wallace's (1981) monetarist arithmetic.36


Fiscal Deficits and Seigniorage

        We start by exploring the relationship between seigniorage and fiscal deficits. Even
though in the short-run, higher fiscal deficits may be financed by borrowing, the
intertemporal budget constraint and optimal tax arguments suggest a positive association
between seigniorage (as a financing source) and the deficit. Hence, we expect a negative
relationship between seigniorage and the fiscal balance (which is the variable used in the
econometric analysis).37

        Figure 3 shows the cross-sectional relationship between seigniorage and the fiscal
balance, each expressed as a share of GDP, for 94 market economies. Seigniorage was
computed as the increase in the nominal stock of high-powered money in a given year,
divided by nominal GDP in that year. A negative relationship is visible (Figure 3 and
Table 8, column 1): a ten percentage point reduction in the fiscal balance leads on average to
a 1.5 percent increase in seigniorage revenues (both as a share of GDP), with the highest
levels of seigniorage (more than six percent of GDP) recorded for Israel, Chile, Argentina,
Malta and Nicaragua.

        When panel regressions with annual data are run, the coefficient on the fiscal balance
becomes even more significant but remains unchanged quantitatively as compared to the
results obtained in the cross-section regressions (compare columns 1 and 2, Table 8). When
different coefficients are allowed for the high and low inflation countries (Table 8, column
3), the coefficient for high inflation countries rises sharply while that for the low inflation
countries falls and becomes insignificant. The difference between the coefficients of the high
and low inflation countries is statistically significant. A ten percentage point reduction in the
fiscal balance in the high inflation countries leads, on average, to a 4.2 percentage point
increase in seigniorage (both as a share of GDP). Allowing for separate coefficients (and
constant terms) raises the adjusted R-squared from 0.048 to 0.334 (Table 8, column 3).

       When panel regressions for the sub-sample of high inflation economies are run, the
simple OLS yields, as expected, a much higher coefficient than that obtained for all market

36
 In a similar vein, Drazen and Helpman (1990) show how the anticipation of future policies
may trigger inflation today.
37
  The public finance perspective that treats seigniorage as another form of taxation may
suggest that seigniorage revenue should be more closely associated with the level of
government spending rather than with the deficit (see, for example, Végh (1989)).
                                           - 16 -




economies (compare column 4 to column 2, Table 8). The largest effects of the fiscal balance
on seigniorage revenues are obtained during the high inflation periods: a ten percentage point
reduction in the fiscal balance leads to a 6.27 percentage point increase in seigniorage
revenues, both as a share of GDP (Table 8, column 5). On the other hand, the effect of the
fiscal balance on seigniorage revenues during the low inflation years is small and statistically
insignificant.

        The data thus show that the relationship between the fiscal deficit and seigniorage is
strong only in the high inflation countries. Moreover, even in these countries, the fiscal
deficit-seigniorage relationship is strengthened during periods of high inflation compared to
low inflation years.


Inflation and Seigniorage

         Even though in the high inflation countries seigniorage rises as a share of GDP as the
deficit increases, the relationship between inflation and seigniorage is likely to be more
complicated because seigniorage revenues may eventually decline as inflation rises; that is,
there may be a Laffer curve effect as inflation continues to rise. The reason for the fall in
seigniorage revenue at high rates of inflation is that the tax base—real money balances—may
fall more, in proportional terms, than the growth rate of the money base, thus leading to a fall
in seigniorage.38

       Working with the same samples as those used for seigniorage and fiscal deficits, we
estimate a non-linear relationship between seigniorage and inflation of the following form:

                        SeiJQLRUDJH .LQIODWLRQ LQIODWLRQ 2,

where we expect  to be positive and to be negative, that is, seigniorage revenues rise as
inflation rises, reaching a maximum and then declining with further increases in the inflation
rate. The cross-sectional plot is presented in Figure 4 (Table 9, column 2), which shows the
estimated non-linear relationship.39 Seigniorage revenues are maximized when inflation
reaches 174 percent.

        The main message to emerge from Table 9 is that a Laffer curve is visible and
significant in high inflation countries (Table 9, column 4) and in high inflation episodes for

38
   The Laffer curve shape emerges from the steady state relationship between the inflation
rate and seigniorage. If, for instance, expectations lag behind actual inflation, it may be
possible for a time to increase seigniorage by accelerating inflation even beyond the steady
state revenue maximizing rate.
39
  As before, the inflation rate is defined as ln(1 + inflation/100) and seigniorage as the
change in high-powered money as a share of GDP.
                                            - 17 -




the sub-sample with the high inflation countries only (Table 9, column 6). These findings are
consistent with the notion that a Laffer curve is more likely to emerge the higher is the level
of inflation.

        In terms of the linear regressions, Table 9 indicates that, as expected, the coefficient
on the inflation rate is significant for both high and low inflation countries (Table 9, column
3) and for both high and low inflation episodes for the subsample of high inflation countries
(Table 9, column 5).


Fiscal Deficits and Inflation

         Figure 5 shows the deficit-inflation link for the whole sample. As shown in Table 10,
column 1, the relationship is significant in the cross-section regression. This relationship,
however, becomes insignificant when different constant terms and coefficients are allowed
for in the high and low inflation market economies (Table 10, column 2).

        When annual panels are considered, the relationship between the fiscal balance and
inflation becomes significant for the high inflation countries but not for the low inflation
countries (Table 10, column 3). A reduction in the fiscal balance by one percent of GDP in
the high inflation countries leads to an increase in the inflation rate by 4.2 percent. The
introduction of lags (Table 10, column 4) improves the fit substantially, with all the lags
being significant for high inflation countries but not low inflation countries.

         The basic results from the annual panels carry through in the sub-sample of high
inflation countries in the sense that the relationship between inflation and the fiscal balance is
significant for high inflation episodes but not for low inflation episodes (Table 10, column 5).
In high inflation periods, a one percentage point reduction in the fiscal balance leads to a
6.3 percent increase in the inflation rate. It is also the case that the introduction of lags
improves the fit substantially with the second lag for high inflation episodes being
statistically significant (Table 10, column 6).40

        In sum, no obvious long- or short-run relationship between inflation and fiscal
balance is found for the low inflation countries or during the low inflation episodes in the
high inflation countries. The relationship, however, is quite strong in the high inflation
countries during the high inflation episodes.41 Lags in the fiscal balance are important in
explaining inflation in the high inflation countries and episodes.

40
  Notice that since the relevant variable for determining inflationary finance is the present
discounted value of primary deficits, a priori one would indeed expect additional lags to
improve the fit.
41
   Catão and Terrones (2001), however, find a statistically significant positive long-run
relationship between fiscal deficits and inflation for a panel of 23 emerging market countries
                                                                                     (continued)
                                             - 18 -




                                  E. Inflationary Persistence

        As argued above (and consistent with our findings so far), we believe that inflation is
typically caused by fiscal imbalances and is perpetuated by monetary accommodation to real
shocks and by its own dynamics. We now explore the issue of inflation's own dynamics,
which we will refer to as inflation persistence. Our aim is two-fold: first, to come up with a
quantitative measure of persistence and, second, to test if inflation persistence falls as the
level of inflation rises. The latter point is relevant because, according to conventional
wisdom, the inflationary inertia that is present at low inflation rates is responsible for the
Phillips curve-related output costs of reducing inflation. Sargent (1982), however, has argued
that several hyperinflations have been eliminated at no cost by a credible change in policy. A
common interpretation of Sargent's views is that the shortening of contracts that takes place
in high inflation episodes reduces inflationary inertia, thereby making it less costly to
stabilize from high than from moderate inflation.

        In an attempt to examine this argument empirically, let the inflationary process take
the following autoregressive (AR) form:42

                                                n
                                        π t = ∑ α i π t −i + u t                                     (2)
                                               i =1


where t is the inflation rate at time t, i is the lag length, n is the maximum lag length, and ut
is an error term which is i.i.d. We then define two indices of inflation inertia, the mean lag
and the median lag. The mean lag is defined as follows:

                                                ∑              i αi
                                                        n
                                                        i =1
                                     Mean lag =                                                      (3)
                                                ∑              αi
                                                        n
                                                       i =1



        This index is an average of the n lags, weighted by the coefficient, .i, associated with
each lag, i. If n equals zero, the mean lag is simply defined to be zero. Otherwise, the index
has a lower bound of unity, which occurs for the case in which n = 1.




during 1970–2000, using an estimator that distinguishes between short-run dynamics and
equilibrium relationships in heterogeneous panels.
42
   Using univariate autoregressive processes to measure inflation persistence has a long
tradition in the literature; see, in particular, Bruno and Fischer (1986), Bruno (1993), and
Stock (2001).
                                             - 19 -




                                                                                        ∑i =1αi ,
                                                                                           n
       The median lag, m, is chosen such that it divides the sum of the coefficients,
(the total frequency) equally before and after this lag. That is, we chose the smallest integer
m such that:

                                ∑ i=1 α i            ∑ i=1 α i
                                    m −1                     m

                                             ≤ 0.5 ≤                                           (4)
                                ∑ i=1 α i            ∑ i=1 α i
                                  n                    n




If m equals zero, the median lag is also defined to be zero.

        The hypothesis that the mean and the median lag lengths are higher in low inflation
episodes than in high inflation episodes is now examined in the high inflation countries that
were identified in Section 2.2 using quarterly data. Unfortunately, the duration of several
very high inflation episodes was far too short to lend itself to econometric estimation. To
increase the number of countries in our sample, however, we combined some of the episodes
identified in Table A1 (as in Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Mexico, Sierra Leone,
Uganda, and Uruguay) when subsequent episodes were adequately close (less than 10
quarters). The sample of countries was thus reduced to 16, with the revised high and low
inflation episodes reported in Table 11.43

       The empirical procedure employed in computing the lag lengths was as follows.
Since unit roots were present in several episodes, the regressions were run in first differences,
following Hamilton (1994, pp. 528). Specifically, equation (2) can be rewritten as:

                                                 n −1
                                 π t = ρπ t −1 + ∑ β i ∆π t −1 + u t ,                         (5)
                                                 i =1


where the coefficients in (5) are related to those in equation (2) as follows:


                                            α 1 = ρ + β1 ,

                                           α 2 = β 2 − β1 ,
                                                 …


       43
           While the high inflation episodes in Angola and Suriname were not short in
themselves, they were preceded and followed by low inflation episodes of limited length due
to lack of data.
                                            - 20 -




                                          α n = − β n−1 .

        Following the determination of the appropriate model,44 the s in equation (5) were
estimated and the .s in equation (2) were calculated. Finally, using equations (3) and (4), the
mean and the median lag lengths were calculated for each episode in each country. These
results are reported in Table 11. By and large, inflation persistence seems to be important.
With some exceptions, the hypothesis that inertia is lower during high inflation episodes than
during low inflation episodes is confirmed by the results for the mean lag length. The four
exceptions are Israel, Mexico, Suriname, and Zambia. In Israel and Suriname, the indices of
inertia appear to have increased during the high inflation episodes, while in Mexico and
Zambia, there was virtually no evidence of inertia, either in the high or in the low inflation
episodes. In three other countries—Chile, Nicaragua and Sierra Leone—the degree of inertia
in the economy appears not to have increased during their last post-stabilization period. By
and large, similar conclusions can be drawn from the median lag length.

        To formally test for the relationship between inflation inertia and the level of
inflation, we pooled the sample of 42 episodes for the 16 countries and ran an OLS
regression. Since institutional arrangements regarding indexation often differ markedly
across countries, country dummies were introduced in the regression. The results were:

                         mean lag = –ORJ               Adj. R2 = 0.63,
                                       (–2.21)

                       median lag = –0.58 log (              Adj. R2 = 0.60,
                                       (–2. 43)

where the t-statistic is reported below the regression coefficient. All country dummies, with
the exception of Zambia's, were significant at the 5 percent level. The regression results
support the view that inflation inertia falls as the level of inflation rises.

        What do we make of these results? Several remarks are in order. First, while the
measures of inflation persistence defined above have the virtue of simplicity, it is not entirely
clear that measures based on univariate autoregressive processes will indeed be capturing
“inertia”. To the extent that some underlying policy variable (i.e., the money supply in
Cagan’s model) is highly persistent, inflation will be equally “persistent” (in an
autoregressive sense) even in a model that completely abstracts from expectational and/or
nominal frictions. Hence, as argued by Leiderman (1993), testing for inflation inertia would
require estimating a structural model that embodies it in a falsifiable manner. In spite of this

44
  We estimated equation (5) with a maximum of seven lags, seasonal dummies, and a trend
for each episode. Using the F-test, the model was reduced to determine the appropriate lag
length and to see whether seasonal dummies and the trend belonged to the model. If the
seventh lag was significant, we included more lags in the model.
                                             - 21 -




obvious shortcoming, we still believe that AR-based measures of persistence are useful since,
in addition to the persistence of fundamentals, they will also capture indexation and
institutional practices that tend to give inflation a life of its own.

         Second, our result that, on average, higher inflation exhibits less persistence is
consistent with our priors. The main reason is that, as inflation increases, the length of
contracts becomes shorter and/or more contracts and prices are denominated in foreign
currency. In the extreme case (a full-blown hyperinflation a la Cagan), all prices are
expressed in foreign currency which, by construction, should completely eliminate inflation
inertia. In fact, it is the disappearance of inflation inertia in full-blown hyperinflations that
makes the exchange rate so effective in stopping inflation in its tracks.

        Finally, to put the issue of inflation persistence into perspective, it is useful to relate
our findings to an ongoing debate on U.S. inflation persistence. The conventional wisdom
within the Federal Reserve is that inflation persistence increased with the rise in inflation in
the 1970s and has been falling ever since (see Taylor (1998)). This belief receives support
from a sophisticated multivariate procedure carried out in Cogley and Sargent (2001). In this
view, therefore, the relation between the level and persistence of U.S. inflation would be
positive. In his discussion of Cogley and Sargent, however, Stock (2001) argues – based on
an univariate AR representation – that inflation persistence in the U.S. has not changed over
the past 40 years.45 46 Stock attributes the Cogley and Sargent’s finding to the fact that, in his
view, their specification tends to confuse volatility with persistence. Whatever the merits of
the argument, the fact that AR-based measures of persistence are not unduly influenced by
inflation volatility is a particularly important feature when it comes to analyzing this
phenomenon in developing countries. All in all, our reading of this debate is that there is
much to be learned from simple AR representations, as more sophisticated techniques do not
seem to necessarily translate into a cleaner measure of inflation persistence.


                     IV. REAL EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND STABILIZATION

        This section focuses on the very high inflation countries identified above and
examines the behavior of key macroeconomic variables during high inflation and
disinflation. Two main exercises are carried out. The first one compares the average behavior
of the main macroeconomic variables during periods of very high inflation—as defined in
previous sections—with periods of low inflation. This exercise is thus related to the effects of
high inflation on macroeconomic performance. The second exercise deals with the real
effects of disinflation from high inflation by looking at the behavior of the main
macroeconomic variables just before and after a disinflation process is under way. The main

45
     Stock (2001) measures persistence by the largest root of an AR representation of inflation.
46
     See also Sims’ (2001) comments on Cogley and Sargent.
                                            - 22 -




issue related to this exercise is whether stabilization from high inflation may be expansionary
and whether the nominal anchor matters; that is, whether exchange rate-based stabilizations
are more likely to be expansionary than money-based stabilizations.


                        A. Very High Versus Low Inflation Periods

        Figure 6 summarizes the differences in behavior of the main macroeconomic
variables during episodes of very high inflation using annual data for 18 of the 25 market
economies identified in the previous sections.47 48 Specifically, Figure 6 presents the averages
for the different variables for very high inflation years and low inflation years. Average
inflation was 739 percent during years of very high inflation and 22.4 percent during low
inflation years. (For scaling purposes, Figure 6 shows the figure for log (1 + x/100), where x
is either the inflation rate or the devaluation rate in percentage terms.) The average rate of
devaluation/depreciation is 984 percent during high inflation periods and 16.7 during periods
of low inflation.

         There are few surprises. Real GDP per capita fell on average by 1.6 percent per
annum during the very high inflation episodes, and rose by 1.4 percent during years of low
inflation. The same pattern holds for private consumption per capita, which fell on average
by 1.3 percent during very high inflation episodes, and rose by 1.7 percent during low
inflation years. Investment growth per capita fell by 3.3 percent during high inflation years,
while it increased by 4.2 percent during low inflation periods. The domestic currency
appreciated, in real terms, at a rate of 2.7 percent during high inflation years and depreciated
at a rate of 1.8 percent during low inflation years. The current account deficit, as a proportion
of GDP, is higher in low inflation years (3.6 percent) than in high inflation years
(2.4 percent). The average fiscal deficit is higher during high inflation years (7.8 percent of
GDP) than during low inflation years (4.2 percent). In sum, on average, periods of high
inflation are characterized by a contraction in the levels of GDP, consumption, and




47
  If a high inflation episode begins in the second half of the year, or ends in the first half of
the year, that year is taken as a low inflation year.
48
  Due to lack of data, we excluded Afghanistan, Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Jamaica, Lebanon,
Nicaragua, and Somalia. The sample consists of annual data, 1960-1995 (or longest available
sub-period). Note that the total number of observations varies according to the variable
considered. There are 647 observations for the nominal exchange rate, 590 observations for
inflation, 533 for real per capita GDP growth, 355 for real per capita consumption growth,
365 for real per capita investment growth, 285 for the change in the real exchange rate, 407
for the current account, and 499 for the fiscal balance.
                                            - 23 -




investment per capita, an appreciating currency (in real terms), and higher fiscal deficits.
High inflation is thus associated with bad macroeconomic performance.49

        In particular, Figure 6 is consistent with the view that inflation is bad for growth (see
Fischer (1996) for a brief survey). The literature on this topic is unanimous in finding that
very high inflation is bad for growth.50 There is, however, controversy over the nature of the
relationship at low inflation rates. Bruno and Easterly (1995) point to 40 percent as a danger
point, beyond which increases in inflation are very likely to lead to a growth crisis. In the
case of the transition economies, Fischer, Sahay, and Végh (1996) find that this cutoff point
occurs at about 50 percent. Sarel (1996) searches for a break-point in the relationship
between inflation and growth, and locates it at an annual rate of 8 percent. A more recent
paper (Khan and Senhadji, 2000) analyzes this relationship separately for industrial countries
and developing countries and finds that “the threshold level of inflation above which
inflation significantly slows growth is estimated at 1-3 percent for industrial countries and
7-11 percent for developing countries." Above that rate, inflation and growth are negatively
related; below it, the relationship is not statistically significant. In summary, the literature
finds that high inflation is bad for growth; the relationship is weaker or non-existent at low
rates of inflation; but there is no evidence that inflation is good for growth. 51

        Figure 6 also suggests that high inflation is bad for consumption and for investment,
with changes in consumption growth of roughly the same order of magnitude as those in
GDP growth and changes in investment of about twice that magnitude. If one accepts the
notion that inflation is bad for growth, the behavior of investment is hardly surprising. Based
on the business cycle literature, the higher volatility of investment growth is also to be
expected.

         What are the specific mechanisms that could be at work in explaining the stylized fact
that inflation is bad for growth? Any model in which the inflation rate adversely affects the
allocation of resources is bound to generate a negative correlation between inflation and
growth. Consider, for instance, a model in the spirit of Stockman (1981) in which the
inflation rate acts as a tax on investment (through a cash-in-advance on the purchase of
capital goods). In this context, periods of high inflation will lead to lower investment and,
hence, a lower capital stock. This reduces the demand for labor and leads to lower
employment, output, and real wages. On the demand side – and assuming a cash-in-advance

49
  Braumann (2001) also documents a sharp decline in real wages during periods of high
inflation, based on an analysis of 23 episodes.
50
     See, for example, Fischer (1993), De Gregorio (1993), and Bruno and Easterly (1995).
51
  We find it quite plausible to believe that deflation is bad for growth, and thus would not be
surprised if further research showed that inflation and growth are positively related for
extremely low and negative inflation rates, for example up to 2 percent per annum.
                                            - 24 -




for the purchase of consumption goods -- higher nominal interest rates will lower
consumption by making consumption more expensive during high inflation periods. These
results are general to the extent that any model in which the inflation rate distorts both
investment and consumption will generate a negative correlation between inflation, on the
one hand, and investment, output, and consumption on the other.52

        Finally, while the behavior of the current account captured in Figure 6 is consistent
with the theoretical predictions, the behavior of the real exchange appears to be at odds.
Specifically, in an open-economy version of the simple model just described, the lower
demand for non-tradables that would result from higher inflation should lead to a fall in the
relative price of non-tradables (i.e., a real depreciation of the currency) since the supply
response is relatively inelastic in the short-run. On the other hand, the lower demand for
tradable goods would translate into a lower current account deficit. We thus conjecture that
the behavior of the real exchange rate, which in our sample appreciates during high inflation
years, might be explained by numerous episodes in which nominal exchange rates have been
kept more or less fixed in spite of ongoing inflation.53 54


                              B. Real Variables in Disinflation

        Conventional wisdom—based on the experience of industrial countries—holds that
disinflation is costly in terms of output forgone. In fact, the notion that disinflation is
contractionary is so entrenched in the literature that the question has typically been not if but
by how much output would fall in response to an inflation stabilization program. To answer
this question, a large literature has computed the so-called "sacrifice ratio" associated with
disinflation, defined as the cumulative percent output loss per percentage reduction in

52
   Ambler and Cardia (1998) calibrate a richer model along these lines. They conclude that
the model does indeed predict a negative correlation between inflation and growth (both for
time series and, in the long-run, for a cross section). Since both variables are endogenous, the
size of this correlation will depend on the size of the underlying exogenous shocks. The
authors also offer an insightful analysis of the pitfalls associated with interpreting standard
inflation and growth regressions.
53
  Notice that the real exchange rate appreciates during high inflation periods even though the
average nominal depreciation (984 percent) is higher than the average rate of inflation (739
percent). This is related to the fact that the samples are not the same; that is, the number of
observations for the real exchange rate is much lower than that for the nominal
devaluation/depreciation and the inflation rate.
54
   With a smaller sample (23 episodes), Braumann finds the expected results: during high
inflation periods, a real depreciation goes hand in hand with an improvement in the external
trade accounts.
                                            - 25 -




inflation (see, for instance, Okun (1978), Gordon (1982), and Fischer (1986)). Ball (1994)
examined 28 disinflation episodes in nine OECD countries using quarterly data and found
that, with one exception, disinflation is always contractionary, with the sacrifice ratio ranging
from 2.9 for Germany to 0.8 in France and the United Kingdom. While Ball’s (1994)
estimates are somewhat lower than those in the earlier literature, they continue to support the
notion that disinflation in industrial countries is costly in terms of output. This stylized fact
is, of course, consistent with closed- economy, staggered-contracts models à la Fischer
(1977)–Taylor (1979, 1980) and other models that generate a short-run Phillips-curve (Lucas
(1972)).

        The Phillips-curve-based conventional wisdom has not gone unchallenged. In an
influential paper, Sargent (1982) examined the behavior of output in four classical
hyperinflations and argued that stabilization was achieved at small or no output cost.55 More
recently, and for the case of much more mundane inflationary processes, Kiguel and Liviatan
(1992) and Végh (1992) have argued that stabilization programs in chronic inflation
countries based on the nominal exchange rate (exchange rate-based stabilization) have
actually led to an initial expansion in output and consumption, with the conventional
contraction occurring only later in the programs.56 Fischer, Sahay, and Végh (1996, 1997)
also find evidence for the transition economies in favor of expansionary stabilizations, with
the expansions being more pronounced for the case of exchange rate-based stabilizations.
Easterly (1996), however, has argued that expansionary stabilization is a more general
feature of stabilization from high inflation countries, and occurs irrespective of whether the
nominal anchor is the exchange rate or not.57 We now proceed to revisit these important
issues.




55
 Sargent’s (1982) analysis has itself been challenged; most notably by Garber (1982) and
Wicker (1986); see also Végh (1992) and Bruno (1993).
56
   For econometric evidence in favor of this hypothesis, see Reinhart and Végh (1994,
1995a), De Gregorio, Guidotti, and Végh (1998) and Calvo and Végh (1999). Gould (1996)
and Echenique and Forteza (1997) take issue with some of the econometric findings. At a
more fundamental level, Kydland and Zarazaga (1997) argue against the view that
stabilizations necessarily have important real effects in high inflation countries.
57
   It should be noted that none of this evidence on the relationship between inflation and
growth bears on the optimal speed of disinflation. Burton and Fischer (1998) discuss several
cases of extremely rapid and successful (growth-increasing) disinflation from triple digit
rates; they also show that in other cases, starting at moderate rates of inflation, disinflation
has been very slow, for fear that more rapid disinflation would slow output growth.
                                           - 26 -




Stabilization Time Profiles

        We first compute the time profiles for the main macroeconomic variables in
"stabilization time".58 Stabilization time is denoted by T + j, where T is the year in which an
episode of very high inflation ends, and j (= -3, .., 3) is the number of years preceding or
following the year of stabilization.59 The average paths of variables are then calculated
relative to year T.60

        Consider first Figure 7. Inflation falls sharply in the year before stabilization and
continues to fall in the year of stabilization, but then stabilizes at around 25 percent. Real
GDP per capita growth is basically zero in the year before stabilization and turns positive (at
around 1 percent) in the year of stabilization, peaking at more than 3 percent in year T + 2. A
similar profile holds for per capita consumption growth: it is essentially zero in the year
before stabilization and jumps to around 2 percent in the year of stabilization, peaking at
2.6 percent in year T + 2. While exhibiting more variability, the behavior of real per capita
domestic investment growth fits the same pattern. It jumps from -1.2 percent in the year
before stabilization to more than 9 percent in the year of stabilization, to end with a rate of
growth above 10 percent in year T + 3. This preliminary evidence is therefore consistent with
the idea that, contrary to what happens in low inflation countries, stabilization from high
inflation appears to be associated with an expansion in output, consumption, and
investment.61


58
   In selecting the stabilization episodes, we take as our starting point the episodes of very
high inflation defined above (45 episodes in 25 countries, as listed in Table A1). In our
definition, when a very high inflation episodes ends, a stabilization starts. Due to (i) lack of
data, (ii) instances in which very high inflation episodes separated by less than 12 months
were consolidated into one, and (iii) instances in which the very high inflation episode is
ongoing as of 1995 (the end of our sample for stabilization purposes), we end up with 27
stabilization episodes in 18 countries (Argentina (1), Bolivia (1), Brazil (1), Chile (1), Congo
(3), Costa Rica (1), Ghana (2), Israel (1), Mexico (2), Peru (1), Sierra Leone (2), Sudan (1),
Suriname (1) , Turkey (2), Uganda (2), Uruguay (3), Venezuela (1), and Zambia (1).)
59
  If the episode of very high inflation ends in the second half of the year, we take T to be the
following year.
60
  Notice that the number of observations for each year in stabilization time may differ. The
number of observations for a given T + j may also differ across variables.
61
  See Henry (2001) for an analysis of the effects of stabilizations on the stock market. Based
on a sample of 81 episodes, he finds that, when stabilizing from inflation rates higher than 40
percent per year, the domestic stock market appreciates on average by 24 percent in real
dollar terms.
                                            - 27 -




        Figure 8 shows the behavior of other macroeconomic variables. As expected, the rate
of growth of the nominal exchange rate exhibits a similar pattern to the inflation rate. The
real exchange rate, which is appreciating until year T – 2, begins to depreciate in the year
before stabilization and continues to do so throughout the stabilization. The current account
balance worsens throughout the stabilization reaching a trough of 4 percent of GDP in year
T + 2. Finally, the fiscal deficit falls from more than 8 percent of GDP in year T – 3 to close
to 2 percent in T + 3.

       While Figure 7 is consistent with the idea that stabilization from high inflation may
be expansionary, it offers no sense of the statistical significance, if any, of the time profile,
nor does it address the question of whether factors other than the disinflation process itself
may be causing such behavior. To address these questions, Table 12 presents regressions of
the main macroeconomic variables on the stabilization time dummies, controlling for three
externals factors: OECD growth, terms of trade shocks, and LIBOR (in real terms).62

        Consider the first three columns, which show the results for GDP, consumption, and
investment. Note that the control variables appear to play an important role in explaining
these variables. In the case of GDP, for instance, all three control variables are highly
significant and, at least for OECD growth and real LIBOR, with the expected sign.63
Consumption growth is affected positively by terms of trade and negatively by real LIBOR,
whereas investment growth is only affected significantly by changes in real LIBOR.

        With respect to the stabilization time dummies, the results are somewhat mixed.
There is evidence of an expansionary response in output growth, as shown by the
significance of the coefficients on T + 1 and T + 2. There is, however, no evidence of any
significant response in consumption growth. In the case of investment growth, the coefficient
on T is significant. As to the other two variables—current account and the real exchange
rate—the stabilization time dummies are, by and large, not significant.


                           C. Does the Nominal Anchor Matter?

        The results so far provide only weak evidence in favor of the hypothesis that
stabilization may be expansionary. Since, as mentioned above, it has been argued that the
real effects of disinflation may depend on the nominal anchor, it is worth examining this

62
  The variable terms of trade is defined in such a way that a rise in the index denotes a terms
of trade improvement.
63
   The sign on the terms of trade is somewhat unexpected as it implies that a positive terms of
trade shock leads to lower output. Interestingly enough, the same shock does lead to a
significant increase in consumption and an improvement in the current account, as one would
expect.
                                          - 28 -




issue with the sample at hand. To that effect, we selected 9 out of the 27 episodes of
stabilization in our sample, which can be classified as exchange rate-based stabilizations
(ERBS).64 The rest of the episodes are classified as non-exchange rate based stabilizations
and include an assorted combination of other types of stabilization.65 This two-way
classification is sufficient for our purposes.

        We focus on GDP growth, consumption, and investment since we are mainly
interested in the expansionary effects of stabilizations. Figure 9 shows the stabilization time
profiles for these three variables for both exchange rate-based episodes (9) and non-exchange
rate based episodes (18). For ERBS, GDP growth rises very sharply upon stabilization—from
an already positive value in the year before stabilization—and then stays high until T + 2
only to fall sharply in year T + 3. This finding is in line with other studies (see Calvo and
Végh, 1999). In sharp contrast, the stabilization time profile for non-ERBS stabilizations
shows no discernible pattern. The profiles for consumption growth fit exactly the same
pattern. With respect to investment growth, the stabilization time profiles for ERBS and
non-ERBS look qualitatively similar, in that they both show a jump in investment at time T
but, quantitatively, the change for ERBS is much stronger. This evidence thus seems to
indicate that the profiles for the whole sample shown in Figure 7 are basically driven by these
nine episodes of exchange rate-based stabilization.

        To look further into this issue, Table 13 presents the same type of regressions as
before for the two sub-samples: ERBS and non-ERBS stabilizations. As column (1) shows,
in ERBS real GDP growth in the two years before stabilization (T – 2 and T – 1) is not
significantly different from average growth in the sample. In the first two years of the
stabilization, however, growth is indeed significantly different. In contrast, as shown in
64
  These include (initial year of the stabilization episode according to our criteria in
parenthesis) Turkey (1995), Argentina (1992), Brazil (1995), Chile (1977), Mexico (1989),
Peru (1986), Uruguay (1969 and 1992), and Israel (1986).
65
   We purposely choose to refer to the remaining episodes as “non-exchange rate based
stabilizations” (as opposed to “money-based stabilizations”) because they include not only
episodes which can be characterized as money-based stabilization (i.e., stabilizations carried
out under floating or dirty floating exchange rates) as, for example, Uruguay (1975), but also
other episodes which defy a clear classification. An example of the latter is Turkey (1981)
which relied on a PPP-type rule that aimed at keeping the real exchange rate more or less
constant (see Rodrik (1991)). It should also be noted that most stabilization episodes in
Africa were carried out under dual exchange rates (official and unofficial). With few
exceptions, however, the important characteristic of these non-exchange-rate based
stabilizations is that, to at least some extent, the money supply was under the control of the
monetary authorities (as is the case under dirty floating or dual exchange rates). As argued
by Calvo and Végh (1999), some control over the money supply is enough to make these
episodes formally resemble a “pure” money-based stabilization.
                                           - 29 -




column (2), in non-ERBS growth after the stabilization is never significant. As before, the
three controls variables are highly significant. A similar story holds for consumption growth
(columns (3) and (4)). For ERBS, consumption growth in the year of stabilization is highly
significant, whereas for non-ERBS no coefficient is significant after the stabilization. For
investment growth (columns (5) and (6)), there is no difference between the ERBS and non-
ERBS sample. It should be said, however, that the coefficient on T for the ERBS sample is
significant at the 11 percent level whereas that for non-ERBS is highly insignificant. Hence,
whatever effects we found for investment growth in the full sample are also coming from the
ERBS sample.

        In sum, the evidence shown here suggests that the expansionary effects of
stabilization—which are mostly evident in GDP and consumption—are due essentially to the
ERBS present in our sample. This is consistent with the idea that the nominal anchor matters
for the real effects of disinflations, with ERBS leading to an initial boom in output and
consumption.66 67

                              D. In Search of an Explanation

       The evidence reviewed above suggests that inflation stabilization is expansionary in
the short-run, particularly when based on the use of the exchange rate as the nominal anchor.
Why would that be the case?

        To early observers of many of these programs, the most conspicuous feature was the
sharp increase in private consumption, particularly of durable goods.68 We thus view

66
   This contrasts with Easterly’s (1996) results which suggest, based on a sample of 28
stabilization episodes, that there is no difference between the behavior of ERBS and
non-ERBS. In the same spirit, see Hamann (2001).
67
   Note that Figure 9 is also suggestive of the late contraction in ERBS discussed in the
literature. This feature, however, does not show as significant in the regressions shown in
Table 11. In this study, we do not make an attempt to focus on this late real effects, for which
more observations after the stabilization and perhaps a slightly different methodology would
be called for (see Calvo and Végh (1999) and Braumann (2001)).
68
   This is supported by data provided in De Gregorio, Guidotti, and Végh (1998) for a small
group of countries. For instance, in the 1978 Chilean ERBS, durable goods consumption
more than doubled from the beginning of the program to the year in which consumption
peaked, while total private consumption increased by only 26 percent. During the 1985
Israeli stabilization (and for the analogous period), durable goods consumption rose by 70
percent compared to 25 percent for total consumption. In the first four years of the Argentine
1991 Convertibility plan, car sales (a good proxy for durable goods consumption) rose by a
staggering 400 percent, compared to 30 percent for total private consumption.
                                            - 30 -




demand-side considerations as the most plausible explanation for the observed short-run
expansions. The most popular demand-side explanation (often referred to as the
“temporariness hypothesis”) is predicated on the idea that, in light of a rich history of failed
stabilization attempts, most stabilization programs in chronic inflation countries are bound to
suffer from lack of credibility.69 Following Calvo (1986), lack of credibility has typically
been formalized by positing that agents expect the program to be temporary. In the typical
model, cash is needed to purchase goods (via a cash-in-advance constraint) so that a lower
nominal interest rate reduces the “effective price” of consumption.70 Then, a non-credible
(i.e., temporary) stabilization induces consumers to switch future consumption towards the
present, thus resulting in a consumption boom. If, in addition, prices were sticky, this
consumption boom cannot take place under a money-based stabilization because the nominal
money supply cannot increase endogenously to accommodate the higher consumption
expenditures.

        There are two potential problems with the temporariness hypothesis. First, by
construction, it can only explain consumption booms in episodes in which the program was
non-credible in its early stages. However, since no program in chronic inflation countries is
likely to be viewed as fully credible, this is perhaps not a very damaging criticism. More
important is the fact that, at a quantitative level, this hypothesis relies critically on a large
intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Since estimates of this parameter are typically low,
the quantitative explanatory power of this hypothesis is rather limited (Reinhart and Végh
(1995b)). It should be noted, however, that the formal introduction of durable goods should
improve the quantitative performance of this hypothesis for two reasons. First, there is some
evidence to suggest that, if durable goods consumption is taken into account, estimates of the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution become higher (see Fauvel and Samson (1991)).
Second, in the presence of durable goods, households will also engage in intertemporal price
speculation (Calvo (1988b)). Unfortunately, the additional quantitative power brought about
by these additional considerations has not yet been established.

        A related, demand-side explanation has been offered by De Gregorio, Guidotti, and
Végh (1998). In their model, consumers follow inventory-type rules (i.e., (S,s) rules) for the
purchase of durable goods. While purchases of durable goods are “lumpy” at an individual
level (since any given individual consumer only buys/replaces his/her durable good every
once in a while), they are initially smooth in the aggregate (as consumers buy/replace
durables at different times). Consider now a stabilization that generates some sort of
wealth/income effect. In response, some consumers that were not planning to buy/replace
their durable good today will decide to bring forward their purchases and perhaps even

69
 See Calvo (1986), Calvo and Végh (1993, 1994a, 1994b), Mendoza and Uribe (1999), and
Venegas-Martinez (2001), among others.
70
  In a cash-in-advance setting, the “effective price of consumption” is an increasing function
of the nominal interest rate.
                                            - 31 -




upgrade (i.e., next year’s Toyota becomes today’s Mercedes Benz). The resulting
“bunching” produces a boom in durable goods consumption. This boom is necessarily
followed by a slowdown because all the consumers that brought forward their purchases of
durable goods will not want to replace them for a while. In the presence of idiosyncratic
shocks, consumers would “de-bunch” over time until a new steady-state is reached in which
aggregate purchases are constant over time. This mechanism is thus capable of generating a
consumption boom-bust cycle without having to resort to lack of credibility.71

        Yet another and early demand-based explanation of the boom-bust cycle in
consumption, originally due to Rodriguez (1982), was based on backward-looking inflation
expectations, in the spirit of Cagan.72 Specifically, Rodriguez (1982) presents a model in
which, due to the interest parity condition, the nominal interest rate falls one-to-one with the
rate of devaluation. Since expected inflation is backward-looking, the real interest rate falls,
thus expanding aggregate demand on impact. The excess demand for home goods leads to a
real appreciation of the domestic currency, which eventually throws the economy into a
recession. This model thus provides a coherent and plausible explanation for episodes in
which there is an early fall in the domestic real interest rate (as happened in the Argentine
1978 program, which inspired Rodriguez’s contribution). It cannot, however, explain
programs in which the real interest rate increased on impact, as in many heterodox programs
in the mid-1980s (see Calvo and Végh (1999)).

        Finally, another strand of the literature has focused on the supply-side responses that
may be unleashed by stabilization.73 The main idea is that inflation acts as a “tax” either on
labor supply (by distorting the consumption-leisure choice) or on investment (by making it
more expensive to hold readily-available working capital). Hence, removal of such a
distortion would lead to a higher labor supply and more investment, resulting in a
permanently higher level of output. While such supply-side responses are likely to be a
major factor in the long-run (in line with the inflation and growth literature examined above),
we remain skeptical about their ability to explain short-run expansionary effects. The main
problem with this hypothesis is that, empirically, the short-run response of investment seems



71
  Again, if some liquid assets were needed to purchase durable goods, this boom could not
happen under a money-based stabilization.
72
   See also Dornbusch (1982), Fernandez (1985), Calvo and Végh (1994c) and Ghezzi
(2001). Notice that, as shown in Calvo and Végh (1994c), Rodriguez’s story can be
reinterpreted as applying to a model with rational expectations and sticky wages (reflecting
backward looking wage indexation).
73
  See Lahiri (2000, 2001), Rebelo (1997), Rebelo and Végh (1995), Roldos (1995, 1997),
and Uribe (1997).
                                            - 32 -




to be, at best, weak.74 Also, if true, one should see a short-run expansion in any stabilization,
regardless of the nominal anchor.

        Which of the above models does better when confronted with the data? Rebelo and
Végh (1995) nest most of the above explanations into a single model and compare their
qualitatively and quantitative power. In line with the simple models described above, they
conclude that only the temporariness and sticky wages models are capable of replicating the
key empirical regularities. Quantitatively, however, supply-side effects are key in helping
the model account for any sizable fraction of the observed magnitudes. Still, the model has
problems in accounting for the large real appreciation observed in most of these programs.
Further progress on this quantitative front has been recently made by Burnstein, Neves, and
Rebelo (2000), who show how, by introducing distribution costs into the picture, the model
can explain a much more sizable fraction of the observed real exchange rate appreciation.


                                          E. In Sum

        There is by now abundant evidence that high inflation is bad for growth. While the
debate over the mechanisms and causality are far from being resolved, the negative
correlation between high inflation and macroeconomic performance is clearly there. So, at
the very least, the old idea that in some sense inflation may be good for growth or is perhaps
an inevitable part of the growth process should remain buried in the cemetery of harmful
policy ideas.

        There is also increasing evidence that stabilization from high inflation is
expansionary. While not everybody would accept this notion, different researchers with
different methodologies seem to be arriving at similar conclusions. It is at least safe to say
that the idea is to be taken seriously and that it is no longer a heresy to think of an
expansionary inflationary stabilization program.

       We also believe that the evidence supports the idea that the nominal anchor matters
and that, other things being equal, exchange rate-based stabilizations are more likely to be
expansionary. This idea also makes sense theoretically: unlike a money based stabilization
which—by its very nature—reduces inflation by inducing a liquidity crunch, in exchange

74
   Also, at a theoretical level, a somewhat unsatisfactory aspect of some of these models is
that they rely on a number of features --- gestation lags, adjustment costs, and particularly
the assumption that the investment good is a ''cash good'' --- which do not have a clear
economic interpretation. In particular, there is no evidence that would seem to tie investment
to the level of cash transactions. While, from a qualitatively point of view, the assumption
that investment be a “cash good” is not necessary to generate the desired results (as made
clear by Lahiri (2001)), such an assumption is essential from a quantitative point of view if
this type of models is to have any chance of replicating the actual orders of magnitudes
observed in the data (see Rebelo and Végh (1995)).
                                           - 33 -




rate-based stabilizations the money supply is endogenous and will accommodate whatever
increase in money demand results from real channels. This why exchange rate-based
stabilizations are so attractive as a means of reducing inflation from very high levels – even
though the issue of how to exit from a peg before the advent of a potential crisis remains
unresolved.


                  V. IN CONCLUSION: TOP TEN LIST ON HIGH INFLATION

        What have we learned after our long journey through the world of high inflation and
stabilization? While the sample of 161 countries (133 market economies and 28 transition
economies) offers very rich and diverse experiences, some general conclusions can still be
drawn. Here, in our judgment, are the ten most important stylized facts related to high
inflation and stabilization:


   1. Since 1957, inflation has been commonplace throughout the world. Based on a
      sample of 133 countries (for a total of close to 45,000 observations), we find that
      more than two-thirds of the countries have experienced an episode of more than
      25 percent per annum inflation; more than one-third has experienced episodes in
      excess of 50 percent per annum; close to 20 percent of countries have experienced
      inflation in excess of 100 percent; and around 8 percent have experienced episodes of
      more than 400 percent per annum inflation. The average duration of high inflation
      episodes at different levels of inflation is remarkably similar and, at 3–4 years,
      surprisingly long.

   2. In contrast to the market economies, all 28 transition economies experienced at least
      one episode of inflation above 25 percent per annum. Indeed, almost 80 percent
      suffered inflation in excess of 400 percent. Most of the extreme inflations in these
      economies were related to price liberalization.

   3. Higher inflation tends to be more unstable. By constructing transition matrices, we
      find that, as inflation rises, the probability of inflation staying in the same range
      decreases and the probability that inflation will rise above its current level increases.

   4. Since 1947, hyperinflations (meeting Cagan’s definition) in market economies have
      been rare (a total of seven). Much more common have been longer inflationary
      processes with inflation rates above 100 percent per annum. We define an episode of
      “very high inflation” as taking place when the 12-month inflation rate rises above 100
      percent. In that case, we take the start of the episode to be the first month of that 12-
      month period and the last month to be the first month before the 12-month inflation
      rate falls below the lower bound and stays there for at least 12 months. We identified
      45 such episodes in 25 countries. Thirty-seven of these very high inflation episodes
      took place in either Latin America or Africa. The duration of these episodes ranges
      from the minimum possible (12 months) to 208 months (Argentina, 1974–1991).
                                              - 34 -




         Monthly average inflation rates during these episodes vary from 3.6 percent to 27.4
         (Democratic Republic of Congo, 1989–1996).

      5. As expected, the long-run (cross-section) relationship between money growth and
         inflation is very strong. When the sample is divided between low and high inflation
         countries, the relationship is found to be stronger for high inflation than for low
         inflation countries. In the pooled, cross-section time-series panels, we find that the
         money-inflation link remains strong for the sample as a whole. When the sample is
         divided, however, the relationship for high inflation countries is basically unchanged
         compared to the long-run, whereas that for the low inflation countries becomes much
         weaker.

      6. The long-run relationship (based on cross-section data) between fiscal balance and
         seigniorage is significant and negative. In the short-run, the relationship is strong for
         high inflation countries but insignificant for low inflation countries.

      7. The expected positive relationship between fiscal deficits and inflation cannot always
         be detected in the data. We find no significant long-run (cross-section) relationship
         between fiscal deficits and inflation. In the annual cross-section time series panels,
         the relationship is significant for the high inflation countries but not for the low
         inflation countries.

      8. Inflation inertia—defined either as the mean lag length or the median lag length of an
         autoregressive inflation process—falls as the level of inflation rises. This evidence
         supports the notion that nominal rigidities are weakened as inflation reaches higher
         levels.

      9. Periods of high inflation are associated with bad macroeconomic performance. In
         particular, high inflation is bad for growth. The evidence is based on a sample of 18
         countries which have experienced very high inflation episodes. During such periods,
         real GDP per capita fell on average by 1.6 percent per annum (compared to positive
         growth of 1.4 percent in low inflation years); private consumption per capita fell by
         1.3 percent (compared to 1.7 percent growth in low inflation years) and investment
         growth fell by 3.3 percent (compared to positive growth of 4.2 percent in low
         inflation years).

10.      Exchange rate-based stabilizations appear to lead to an initial expansion in real GDP
         and real private consumption. Stabilizations which were not based on the exchange
         rate do not appear on average to have had a significant effect on output, consumption,
         or investment.
                                          - 35 -




                                        REFERENCES

Adams, Charles, and Daniel Gros, 1986, “The Consequences of Real Exchange Rate Rules
      for Inflation: Some Illustrative Examples,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 33, pp. 439-476.

Alesina, Alberto, and Alan Drazen, 1991, “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 81, pp. 1170-1188.

Ambler, Steve, and Emanuela Cardia, 1998, “Testing the Link between Inflation and
      Growth,” in Price Stability, Inflation Targets, and Monetary Policy (Ottawa: Bank of
      Canada), pp. 89-116.

Bailey, Martin J., 1956, “The Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance,” Journal of Political
        Economy, Vol. 64, pp. 93-110.

Ball, Laurence, 1994, “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?,” in Monetary Policy, ed. by
        N.G. Mankiw (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 155-182.

Braumann, Benedikt, 2001, “High Inflation and Real Wages,” IMF Working Paper 01/50
      (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Bresciani-Turroni, Constantino,1937, The Economics of Inflation (New York: Augustus
       Kelley (third impression, 1968). (Original Italian edition, 1931.)

Bruno, Michael, 1993, Crisis, Stabilization, and Economic Reform: Therapy by Consensus
       (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly, 1995, “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth,”
       NBER Working Paper No. 5209 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of
       Economic Research).

Bruno, Michael, and Stanley Fischer, 1986, “The Inflationary Process: Shocks and
       Accommodation,” in The Israeli Economy: Maturing Through Crises, ed. by Yoram
       Ben Porath (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press), pp. 347-371.

Bruno, Michael, and Stanley Fischer, 1990, “Seigniorage, Operating Rules, and the High
       Inflation Trap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 105, pp. 353-374.

Bruno, Michael, and R. Melnick, 1994, “High Inflation Dynamics: Integrating Short-Run
       Accommodation and Long-Run Steady-States,” mimeo, The World Bank.

Burnstein, Ariel T., Joao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, 2000, “Distribution Costs and Real
       Exchange Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based-Stabilizations,” NBER
       Working Paper No. 7862, forthcoming in Journal of Monetary Economics.
                                          - 36 -




Burton, David, and Stanley Fischer, 1998, “Ending Moderate Inflations,” in Moderate
       Inflation: The Experience of Transition Economies, ed. by C. Cottarelli and
       G. Szapary (Washington: IMF and National Bank of Hungary), pp. 15-96.

Cagan, Phillip, 1956, “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Studies in the Quantity
       Theory of Money, ed. by Milton Friedman (Chicago: University of Chicago Press),
       pp. 25-117.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1986, “Temporary Stabilization: Predetermined Exchange Rates,”
       Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, pp. 1319-1329.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1988a, “Servicing the Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 78, pp. 641-667.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1988b, “Costly Trade Liberalizations: Durable Goods and Capital
       Mobility,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 35, pp. 461-473.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh, 1995, “Targeting the Real
       Exchange Rate: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 47,
       pp. 97-133.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1993, “Exchange Rate-Based Stabilisation under
       Imperfect Credibility,” in Open-Economy Macroeconomics, ed. by Helmut Frisch and
       Andreas Worgotter (London: MacMillan Press), pp. 3-28.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1994a, “Credibility and the Dynamics of
       Stabilization Policy: A Basic Framework,” in Advances in Econometrics, Vol. II, ed.
       by Christopher Sims (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 377-420.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1994b, “Inflation Stabilization and Nominal
       Anchors,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 12, pp. 35-45.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1994c, “Stabilization Dynamics and Backward-
       Looking Contracts,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 43, pp. 59-84.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1999, “Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in
       Developing Countries,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by John Taylor and
       Michael Woodford (Amsterdam: North Holland), pp. 1531-1614.

Capie, Forrest H., ed., 1991, Major Inflations in History (Aldershot, Hants, England: Edgard
       Publishing).

Cardenas, Enrique, and Carlos Manns, 1989, “Inflacion y Estabilizacion Monetaria en
      Mexico durante la Revolucion,” El Trimestre Economico, Vol. 56, pp. 57-79.
                                          - 37 -




Cardoso, Eliana, 1998, “Virtual Deficits and the Patinkin Effect,” IMF Working Paper 98/41
      (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Catão, Luis, and Marco Terrones, 2001, “Fiscal Deficits and Inflation: A New Look at the
       Emerging Market Evidence,” IMF Working Paper 01/74 (Washington: International
       Monetary Fund).

Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2001, “Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation
       Dynamics,” forthcoming in NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

De Gregorio, Jose, 1993, “Inflation, Taxation, and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Monetary
      Economics, Vol. 31, pp. 271-298.

De Gregorio, Jose, Pablo E. Guidotti, and Carlos A. Végh, 1998, “Inflation Stabilization and
      the Consumption of Durable Goods,” Economic Journal, Vol. 108, pp. 105-131.

Drazen, Allan, and Elhanan Helpman, 1990, “Inflationary Consequences of Anticipated
      Macroeconomic Policies,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 57, pp. 147-164.

Drazen, Allan, and Vittorio Grilli, 1993, “The Benefits of Crises for Economic Reforms,”
      American Economic Review, Vol. 83, pp. 598-607.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1982, “Stabilization Policies in Developing Countries: What Have We
      Learned?,” World Development, Vol. 10, pp. 701-708.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer, 1993, “Moderate Inflation,” World Bank Economic
      Review, Vol. 7, pp. 1-44.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Federico Sturzenegger, and Holger Wolf, 1990, “Extreme Inflation:
      Dynamics and Stabilization,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, pp. 1-
      84.

Easterly, William, 1996, “When Is Stabilization Expansionary? Evidence from High
       Inflation,” Economic Policy, Vol. 22, pp. 67-107.

Echenique, Federico, and Alvaro Forteza, 1997, “Are Stabilization Programs
      Expansionary?,” mimeo, Berkeley and Universidad de la Republica (Uruguay).

Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, 2001, Learning and Expectations in
       Macroeconomics (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Fauvel, Yvon, and Lucie Samson, 1991, “Intertemporal Substitution and Durable Goods: An
       Empirical Analysis,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 24, pp. 192-205.
                                          - 38 -




Fernandez, Roque, 1985, “The Expectations Management Approach to Stabilization in
      Argentina, 1976-82,” World Development, Vol. 13, pp. 871-892.

Fischer, Stanley, 1977, “Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
       Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, pp. 191-205.

Fischer, Stanley, 1986, “Exchange Rate versus Money Targets in Disinflation,” in his
       Indexing, Inflation, and Economic Policy (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press),
       pp. 247-269.

Fischer, Stanley, 1993, “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics, Vol. 32, pp. 482-512.

Fischer, Stanley, 1996, “Why Are Central Banks Pursuing Long-Run Price Stability?,” in
       Achieving Price Stability (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 7-34.

Fischer, Stanley, Ratna Sahay, and Carlos A. Végh, 1996, “Stabilization and Growth in
       Transition Economies: The Early Experience,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       Vol. 10, pp. 45-66.

Fischer, Stanley, Ratna Sahay, and Carlos A. Végh, 1997, “From Transition to Market:
       Evidence and Growth Prospects,” in Lessons from the Economic Transition, ed. by
       Salvatore Zecchini (Norwell, Massachusetts: Kluver Academic Publishers), pp. 79-
       102.

Fisher, Willard C., 1913, “The Tabular Standard in Massachusetts History,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 417-420.

Frenkel, Jacob A., 1977, “The Forward Exchange Rate, Expectations, and the Demand for
       Money: The German Hyperinflation,” American Economic Review, Vol. 67, pp. 653-
       670.

Frenkel, Jacob A., 1979, “Further Evidence on Expectations and the Demand for Money
       during the German Hyperinflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 5 (1979),
       pp. 81-96.

Friedman, Milton, 1963, Inflation: Causes and Consequences (Bombay: Asia Publishing
      House).

Garber, Peter M., 1982, “Transition from Inflation to Price Stability,” Carnegie-Rochester
       Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 16, pp. 887-912.

Ghezzi, Piero, 2001, “Backward-Looking Indexation, Credibility, and Inflation Persistence,”
       Journal of International Economics, Vol. 53, pp. 127-147.
                                         - 39 -




Gordon, Robert J., 1982, “Why Stopping Inflation May Be Costly: Evidence from Fourteen
      Historical Episodes,” in Inflation: Causes and Effects, ed. by Robert E. Hall
      (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 11-40.

Gould, David M., 1996, “Does the Choice of Nominal Anchor Matter?,” Federal Reserve
       Bank of Dallas Working Paper No. 96-11.

Graham, Frank, 1930, Exchange, Prices, and Production in Hyperinflation: Germany,
      1920-1923 (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press).

Hamann, Javier, 2001, “Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilization: A Critical Look at the Stylized
     Facts,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 48, pp. 111-138.

Hamilton, Earl, 1936, “Prices and Wages at Paris under John Law’s System,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 42-70.

Hamilton, Earl, 1965, American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain, 1501-1560
      (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press).

Hamilton, James D., 1994, Time Series Analysis (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
      University Press).

Henry, Peter, 2001, “Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?,” NBER Working Paper No.
       8289.

Huang, Andrew C., 1948, “The Inflation in China,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
      62, pp. 562-575.

Kemmerer, Edward, 1940, Inflation and Revolution, Mexico’s Experience of 1912-1917
     (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press).

Khan, Mohsin S., and Abdelhak S. Senhadji, 2000, “Threshold Effects in the Relationship
      Between Inflation and Growth,” IMF Working Paper 00/110 (Washington:
      International Monetary Fund).

Kiguel, Miguel, and Nissan Liviatan, 1992, “The Business Cycle Associated with Exchange
       Rate-Based Stabilization,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol.6, pp. 279-305.

Kydland, Finn E., and Carlos E. Zarazaga, 1997, “Is the Business Cycle of Argentina
      Different?,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Fourth quarter,
      pp. 21-36.

Lahiri, Amartya, 2000, “Disinflation Programs under Policy Uncertainty,” Journal of
        International Economics, Vol. 50, pp. 351-373.
                                          - 40 -




Lahiri, Amartya, 2001, “Exchange Rate Based Stabilization under Real Frictions: The Role
        of Endogenous Labor Supply,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 25,
        pp. 1157-1177.

Laidler, David E. and George W. Stadler, 1998, “Monetary Explanations of the Weimar
        Republic’s Hyperinflation: Some Neglected Contributions in Contemporary German
        Literature,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 30, pp. 816-831.

Lerner, Eugene M., 1955, “Money, Prices and Wages in the Confederacy, 1861-65,” Journal
       of Political Economy, Vol. 62, pp. 562-75.

Leiderman, L., 1993, Inflation and Disinflation: The Israeli Experiment (Chicago: The
       University of Chicago Press).

Lucas, Robert E., 1972, “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
       Theory, Vol. 4, pp. 3-24.

Lui, Francis T., 1983, “Cagan’s Hypothesis and the First Nationwide Inflation of Paper
        Money in World History,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, pp. 1067-74.

Marcet, Albert, and Juan Pablo Nicolini, 1998, “Recurrent Hyperinflations and Learning,”
       CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1875.

Marcet, Albert, and Thomas J. Sargent, 1995, “Speed of Convergence of Recursive Least
       Squares Learning with ARMA Perceptions,” in Learning and Rationality in
       Economics, ed. by Alan Kirman and Mark Salmon (Oxford: Basil Blackwell), pp.
       pp.179-215.

Marimon, Ramon, and Shyam Sunder, 1993, “Indeterminacy of Equilibria in a
      Hyperinflationary World: Experimental Evidence,” Econometrica, Vol. 61, pp. 1073-
      1107.

Mendoza, Enrique, and Martin Uribe, 1999, “Devaluation Risk and the Syndrome of
     Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” NBER Working Paper No. 7014.

Montiel, Peter, 1989, “Empirical Analysis of High-Inflation Episodes in Argentina, Brazil,
      and Israel,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 36, pp. 527-549.

Okun, Arthur M., 1978, “Efficient Disinflationary Policies,” American Economic Review,
      Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 68, pp. 348-352.

Paal, Beatrix, 2000, “Measuring the Inflation of Parallel Currencies: An Empirical
       Reevaluation of the Second Hungarian Hyperinflation,” mimeo (Stanford University).

Paarlberg, Don, 1993, An Analysis and History of Inflation (Westport: Praeger).
                                         - 41 -




Pazos, Felipe, 1972, Chronic Inflation in Latin America (New York: Praeger).

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1990, Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility and Politics
       (Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers).

Rebelo, Sergio, 1997, “What Happens When Countries Peg their Exchange Rates? (The Real
       Side of Monetary Reforms),” NBER Working Paper No. 6168.

Rebelo, Sergio, and Carlos A. Végh, 1995, “Real Effects of Exchange Rate-Based
       Stabilizations: An Analysis of Competing Theories,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
       pp. 125-174.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Carlos A. Végh, 1994, “Inflation Stabilization in Chronic Inflation
       Countries,” mimeo (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Carlos A. Végh, 1995a, “Do Exchange Rate-Based Stabilizations
       Carry the Seeds of their Own Destruction?,” mimeo (International Monetary Fund).

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Carlos A. Végh, 1995b, “Nominal Interest Rates, Consumption
       Booms, and Lack of Credibility: A Quantitative Examination,” Journal of
       Development Economics, Vol. 46, pp. 357-378.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2002, “FDI to Africa: The Role of Price
       Stability and Currency Instability,” mimeo (Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).

Rodriguez, Carlos A., 1982, “The Argentine Stabilization Plan of December 20th,” World
      Development, Vol. 10, pp. 801-811.

Rodrik, Dani, 1991, “Premature Liberalization, Incomplete Stabilization: The Ozal Decade in
       Turkey,” in Lessons of Economic Stabilization and its Aftermath, ed. by Michael
       Bruno, Stanley Fischer, Elhanan Helpman, and Nissan Liviatan (Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: MIT Press), pp. 323-358.

Roldos, Jorge, 1995, “Supply-Side Effects of Disinflation Programs,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol.
       42, pp. 158-183.

Roldos, Jorge, 1997, “On Gradual Disinflation, the Real Exchange Rate, and the Current
       Account,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 16, pp. 37-54.

Sarel, Michael, 1996, “Nonlinear Effects of Inflation on Economic Growth,” IMF
        Staff Papers, Vol. 43, pp. 199-215.
                                          - 42 -




Sargent, Thomas J., 1982, “The Ends of Four Big Hyperinflations,” in Inflation: Causes and
       Consequences, ed. by Robert E. Hall (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 41-
       97.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Francois R. Velde, 1995, “Macroeconomic Features of the French
       Revolution,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103, pp. 474-518.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, 1973, “Rational Expectations and the Dynamics of
       Hyperinflation,” International Economic Review, Vol. 14, pp. 328-350.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, 1981, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,”
       Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota Quarterly Review, Vol. 5, pp. 1-17.

Sims, Christopher, 2001, “Discussion of Cogley and Sargent’s ‘Evolving Post-World War II
       Inflation Dynamics’,” forthcoming in NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Stock, James H., 2001, “Discussion of Cogley and Sargent’s ‘Evolving Post-World War II
        Inflation Dynamics’,” forthcoming in NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Stockman, Alan, 1981, “Anticipated Inflation and the Capital Stock in a Cash-in-Advance
      Economy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 387-393.

Taylor, John B., 1979, “Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model,” American Economic
       Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 69, pp.108-113.

Taylor, John B., 1980, “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 88, pp. 1-23.

Taylor, John B., 1998, “Monetary Policy Guidelines for Employment and Inflation Stability,”
       in Inflation, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy, ed. by Robert M. Solow and John
       B. Taylor (Cambridge: MIT Press), pp. 29-54.

Uribe, Martin, 1997, “Exchange-Rate-Based Inflation Stabilization: The Initial Real Effects
       of Credible Plans,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 39, pp. 197-221.

Végh, Carlos A., 1989, “Government Spending and Inflationary Finance: A Public Finance
       Approach,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 36, pp. 657-77.

Végh, Carlos A., 1992, “Stopping High Inflation: An Analytical Overview,” IMF Staff
       Papers, Vol. 39, pp. 629-695.

Venegas-Martinez, Francisco, 2001, “Temporary Stabilization: A Stochastic Analysis,”
      Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 25, pp. 1429-1449.
                                         - 43 -




Wicker, Elmus, 1986, “Terminating Hyperinflation in the Dismembered Hapsburg
      Monarchy,” American Economic Review, Vol. 76, pp. 350-364.

Woodford, Michael, 1990, “Learning to Believe in Sunspots,” Econometrica, Vol. 58, pp.
     277-307.

Zarazaga, Carlos, 1993, “Hyperinflations and Moral Hazard in the Appropriation of
       Seigniorage,” Working Paper 93-26, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
                                                                             Table 1. Historical Episodes of High Inflation




                                             Dates of                Duration             Cumulative           Geometric Annual            Max. Annual
Country/Episode                              Episodes                                     Inflation 1/          Rate of Inflation            Inflation   Source(s)


Ancient Rome
Diocletian                                   151-301                151 years                19,900.0                     3.6                    N.A.    Paarlberg (1993)

China/ Sung Dynasty                        1191-1240                 50 years                  2,092.6                     6.4                   18.0    Lui (1983)

Europe/ Black Death 2/                     1349-1351                  3 years                    138.5                   33.6                    56.3    Paarlberg (1993)

Spain                                      1502-1600                 99 years                    315.2                    1.4                    14.6    Hamilton (1965), Paarlberg (1993)

France/John Law 6/                     Feb.1717-Dec.1720            47 months                      55.2                  11.9                  1,431.3   Hamilton (1936), Paarlberg (1993)

American Revolution 3/ 6/             Feb.1777-Jan.1780             36 months                  2,701.7                 203.7                 16,098.7    Fisher (1913), Paarlberg (1993)

French Revolution 4/ 6/               Feb.1790-Feb.1796             73 months                26,566.7                  150.5                 92,067.6    Capie (1991)

U.S. Civil War/ North                     1862-1864                  3 years                     116.9                  29.4                      45.1   Paarlberg (1993), Lerner (1955)
Confederacy 6/                        Feb.1861-Apr.1865             51 months                  9,019.8                 189.2                   5,605.7

Mexican Revolution 5/ 6/              Feb.1913-Dec.1916             47 months                10,715.4                  230.6               7,716,100.0   Cardenas and Manns (1989), Kemmerer (1940)

China                                      1938-1947                 10 years            2,617,681.0                   176.6                    612.5    Huang (1948)



1/ Inflation expressed in percentage terms.
2/ Price of wheat in England.
3/ Depreciation of the continental Currency (in units per Spanish Dollar), based on prices of beef, Indian corn, wool, and sole leather.
4/ Value of assignat.
5/ Pesos per U.S. dollar.
6/ Maximum annual inflation based on annualized maximum monthly inflation rate
                                                             Table 2. Hyperinflations, 1956-1996 (Cagan Definition) 1/ 2/


                                                                                           During Hyperinflation                                     Twelve-months After Hyperinflation

                                                                                                           Monthly Inflation Rate           Monthly Inflation Rate
                                                            Duration                Cumulative       Geometric                          Geometric
Countries                     Dates of Episode            (in months)              Inflation         Average     Median         Highest Average     Median       Highest


Angola 3/                       Dec-94        Jun-96                19              62,445.9                40.3           36.0              84.1             9.5            5.3            38.1
Argentina                       May-89        Mar-90                11              15,167.0                58.0           61.6             196.6            12.0           11.2            27.0
Bolivia                         Apr-84        Sep-85                18              97,282.4                46.6           51.8             182.8             5.7            2.7            33.0
Brazil                          Dec-89        Mar-90                 4                  692.7               67.8           70.2              80.8            14.8           14.4            21.5
Nicaragua                       Jun-86        Mar-91                58        11,895,866,143                37.8           31.4             261.2             1.8            0.8            20.3
Congo, Dem. Rep. of             Oct-91        Sep-92                12                7,689.2               43.8           35.2             114.2            15.9           12.6            40.9
Congo, Dem. Rep. of             Nov-93        Sep-94                11              69,502.4                81.3           65.0             250.0            12.9           12.8            26.2

Armenia                         Oct-93        Dec-94                15              34,158.2               47.6            44.5           437.8               2.4             2.0            7.8
Azerbaijan                      Dec-92        Dec-94                25              41,742.1               27.3            23.1            64.4               5.2             3.3           27.8
Georgia                         Sep-93        Sep-94                13              76,218.7               66.6            66.3           211.2               0.4             0.9           13.0
Tajikistan                      Apr-93        Dec-93                 9               3,635.7               49.5            36.4           176.9               0.1             3.3            6.6
Tajikistan                      Aug-95        Dec-95                 5                 839.2               56.5            63.0            78.1               2.9             2.1           19.6
Turkmenistan                    Nov-95         Jan-96                3                 291.4               57.6            55.7            62.5              11.2             9.7           25.0
Ukraine                         Apr-91        Nov-94                44           1,864,714.5               25.0            14.9           285.3              10.9             7.7           28.4
Serbia                          Feb-93        Jan-94                12         156,312,790.0              228.2            54.2       175,092.8               1.0            -0.2           12.4

 Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics; national authorities, and IMF staff estimates.
 1/ Cagan defines hyperinflation "as beginning in the month the rise in prices exceeds 50 percent and as ending in the month before the monthly rise in prices drops below that amount and stays below
for at least a year. The definition does not rule out a rise in prices at a rate below 50 percent per month for the intervening months, and many of these months have rates below that figure."
 2/ Excludes the following one and two month episodes. In the market economies, Chile (October 1973) and Peru (September 1988, July-August 1990). In the transition economies, Estonia
(January-February 1992), Latvia (January 1992), Lithuania (January 1992), Krygyz Republic (January 1992), and Moldova (January-February 1992). In addition, we also excluded Belarus (April 1991, January-
February 1992), Kazakstan (April 1991, January 1992), Russia (April 1991, January 1992), and Uzbekistan (April 1991, January-February 1992) even though by Cagan's definition these episodes lasted more
than 2 months, as they appear related to two price jumps (April 1991, and January-February 1992).
 3/ Period after hyperinflation is from July to December 1996.
                                  Table 3a. Market Economies:
                     Frequencies of Episodes by Level of Inflation, 1960-96 1/
                                         (Monthly Data)

     Range of                                                               Duration (in months)
    Annualized         Number of         Number of
    Inflation 2/       Episodes 3/       Countries           Average             Minimum             Maximum

   25 and above                 212                 92               41.0                  12              313

   50 and above                  87                 49               43.4                  12              216

   100 and above                 45                 25               40.0                  12              208

   200 and above                 17                 13               47.2                  15              106

   400 and above                 13                 11               43.9                  17                  98



                                 Table 3b. Transition Economies:
                     Frequencies of Episodes by Level of Inflation, 1987-96 1/
                                         (Monthly Data)

     Range of                                                               Duration (in months)
    Annualized         Number of         Number of
    Inflation 2/       Episodes 3/       Countries           Average             Minimum             Maximum

   25 and above                  30                 28               56.5                  16              104

   50 and above                  25                 25               53.0                  14              103

   100 and above                 25                 23               45.9                  12              100

   200 and above                 24                 22               40.6                  13                  59

   400 and above                 20                 19               39.7                  13                  59

  Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics, national authorities, and IMF desk economists.

  1/ The starting period for market economies (133 in total) was determined by data availability, while for
transition economies (28 in total) by the period in which prices were freed on a large-scale.
  2/ 25 percent per annum = 1.9 percent per month; 50 percent per annum = 3.4 percent per month; 100 percent
per annum = 5.9 percent per month; 200 percent per annum = 9.6 percent per month; 400 percent per annum =
14.4 percent per month.
  3/ See text for definition of an inflationary episode.
                            Table 4. Market Economies: Transition Matrix 1/



  Range of                                Year T+1                                  Probability        Number of
  Inflation      < 25      25-50     50-100 100-200       200-400    > 400      Will Rise Will Fall   Observations

   Year T

     < 25        95.4        4.1         0.4        0.1       0.0       0.0           4.6       0.0        3343

    25-50        46.5       38.4       13.3         1.4       0.4       0.0          15.1      46.5         279

   50-100        10.6       23.0       47.5        14.8       1.6       2.5          18.9      33.6         122

   100-200       10.1       11.9       18.6        42.4      15.3       1.7          17.0      40.6          59

   200-400       11.7        5.9         5.9       11.8      17.6      47.1          47.1      35.3          17

    > 400         2.7        0.0         8.1       13.5       8.1      67.6           0.0      32.4          37

    Total                                                                                                  3857


Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics.

1/ Calculated as number of observations in year T+1 in the corresponding column range as a percentage of numbers
of observations in the corresponding row range in year T. (Rows add up to 100.) Based on pooled, cross-section
annual data 1960-96, from 133 countries.
             Table 5. Market Economies: Probability of Inflation
                      Being Above 100 Percent Next Year
                Depending on Inflation in the Current Year 1/


                            Probability that Inflation Next Year
   Range of                 Will be Above           Will     Will              Number of
   Inflation                  100 percent           Rise      Fall            Observations

 Current Year

      < 20                            0.1                6.0          0.0          3171

     20-40                            1.0              12.6          41.8            388

     40-60                            7.5              25.2          41.1            107

     60-80                          15.7               29.4          41.2              51

    80-100                          37.0               37.0          48.1              27

     > 100                          71.7                 0.0         28.3            113

Total                                                                              3857

Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics.

1/ Calculated as number of observations in a given range followed by observations in the
100 percent and above range, next range, and range below, respectively, as percentage of
observations in the initial range (pooled, cross-section annual data 1960-96, from 133 countries).
                                            Table 6. Inflation and Money Growth
                                             Dependent Variable: Inflation Rate 1/ 2/
                                                   (t-statistics in parentheses)

                                                                                                                    Annual Panel High Inflation
                                    Cross-Section                                Annual Panel                              Countries
Independent
Variables                       OLS               OLS              OLS             Fixed 4/          Fixed 4/        OLS 6/              Fixed 4/ 7/
                                (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)            (6)                   (7)

Intercept                     -0.069***                          -0.047***
                               (-4.96)                            (-8.19)
Intercept\hi 3/                                 -0.041                                                              0.100**
                                                (-0.87)                                                              (2.10)
Intercept\low 3/                               -0.028***                                                            0.059***
                                                (-3.13)                                                              (4.26)
M2 1/                         1.115***                           0.972***
                              (12.13)                            (30.64)
M2\hi 1/ 3/                                     1.091***                           1.011***          0.886***       0.978***              0.881***
                                                (8.160)                            (109.70)           (74.75)       (21.86)               (17.30)
M2\low 1/ 3/                                    0.804***                           0.219***          0.165***       0.513***              0.421***
                                                (11.92)                             (7.50)              (5.57)       (9.97)                 (6.37)
M2\hi(-1) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                                   0.242***                             0.228***
                                                                                                      (16.33)                               (3.89)
M2\low(-1) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                                  0.190***                             0.152***
                                                                                                        (6.40)                              (2.57)
M2\hi(-2) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                                   -0.078***                             -0.085
                                                                                                       (-6.54)                             (-1.17)
M2\low(-2) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                                   0.111***                             -0.022
                                                                                                        (3.78)                             (-0.98)
R-squared                  0.917             0.925           0.855                  0.902              0.922         0.919                 0.937
Adj. R-squared             0.916             0.923           0.855                  0.897              0.917         0.918                 0.933
Observations                 94                94            2318                   2318                2130          410                    380
Sources: International Financial Statistics; authors' estimations.

Note: Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level is indicated by one, two, and three stars, respectively.

1/ Inflation rate is defined as ln(1 + inflation/100), money growth as ln(1 + M2 growth). Minimum of 10 observations per country.
2/ All results corrected for heteroskedasticity if it existed.
3/ Hi and low refer to coefficients for high and low inflation countries or high and low inflation episodes.
4/ Fixed refers to a fixed-effects model with both country and time dummies, both of which are significant unless otherwise indicated.
5/ The number in parentheses next to the independent variables refers to the number of lags.
6/ Fixed effects model of this regression was not significant.
7/ Time dummies not significant.
                                  Table 7. VAR-Based Granger Causality Tests in Selected High Inflation Countries


                                                                                         Appropriate
                             Years             Annualized                                    Lag                                         Exchange
                              and               Average             Seasonal               Length              Money                       Rate
        Country             Quarters            Inflation          Dummies 1/          (in quarters) 2/       Growth 3/   Inflation 3/   Change 3/


Argentina                1967:1-1991:1            191.8                No                    1                      -          -            **


Ghana                    1966:1-1996:4             32.6                Yes                   3                      *         **            *


Jamaica                  1970:3-1996:4             20.7                Yes                   1                      -          -            **


Peru                     1967:1-1996:4             99.1                Yes                   5                      **        **            **


Somalia                  1967:1-1989:3             26.2                Yes                   2                      -         **             -


Sudan                    1966:1-1994:2             32.6                Yes                   3                      **        **            **


Turkey                   1970:1-1996:4             46.0                Yes                   1                      **         -             -


Uruguay                  1967:1-1996:4             59.3                Yes                   2                      -         **            **


  Sources: International Finance Statistics, International Monetary Fund; and authors' calculations.
  1/ Seasonal dummies were used in the VAR regressions when they were jointly significant at the 5 percent level.
  2/ Lag length determined by the one that was most significant.
  3/ ** = significant at 5 percent level
      * = significant at 10 percent level
       - = not significant at 5 percent or 10 percent levels.
                                      Table 8. Seigniorage and Fiscal Balance
                                       Dependent Variable: Seigniorage 1/ 2/
                                            (t-statistics in parentheses)

                                                                                       Annual Panel High Inflation
                               Cross-Section                 Annual Panel                     Countries
Independent
Variables                            OLS                  OLS         Fixed 4/            OLS                  Fixed 4/
                                     (1)                   (2)           (3)               (4)                    (5)

Intercept                          1.455***             1.626***                        2.77***
                                    (6.48)              (17.27)                         (8.13)

Fiscal 1/                          -0.152**             -0.152***                      -0.376***
                                    (-2.30)              (-5.33)                        (-4.72)

Fiscal\hi 1/ 3/                                                      -0.420***                             -0.627***
                                                                      (-14.52)                              (-5.84)

Fiscal\low 1/ 3/                                                       0.007                                   -0.041
                                                                       (0.36)                                  (-0.52)

R-squared                      0.085              0.048         0.371                    0.137                 0.416
Adj. R-squared                 0.075              0.048         0.334                    0.135                 0.392
Observations                     94                2318          2318                     410                   410
Sources: International Financial Statistics; authors' estimations.


Note: Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level is indicated by one, two, and three stars, respectively.
1/ Seigniorage is defined as [RM-RM(-1)]/GDP, where RM is reserve money in current period, RM(-1) is reserve
money in last period and GDP is output in current period, and fiscal is defined as the fiscal balance in percent of
GDP.
2/ All results corrected for heteroskedasticity if it existed.
3/ Hi and low refer to coefficients for high and low inflation countries or high and low inflation episodes.
4/ Fixed refers to a fixed-effects model with both country and time dummies, both of which are significant.
                                                Table 9. Inflation and Seigniorage
                                               Dependent Variable: Seigniorage 1/ 2/
                                                   (t-statistics in parentheses)


                                                                                                        Annual Panel High Inflation
                                  Cross-Section                         Annual Panel                            Countries
Independent
Variables                    OLS                 OLS               Fixed 4/           Fixed 4/          Fixed 4/         Fixed 4/ 5/
                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)               (5)               (6)

Intercept                  1.157***           0.806**
                            (7.15)             (2.51)
inflation 1/                5.44***           9.563***
                            (5.81)             (2.65)
inflation\hi 1/ 3/                                                 4.246***          9.775***           3.950***           9.938***
                                                                   (17.55)           (15.52)             (8.00)             (5.19)
inflation\low 1/ 3/                                                3.342***           2.013             4.474**             10.85*
                                                                    (2.83)            (0.74)             (2.13)             (1.89)
infsq 1/                                       -4.691
                                               (-1.31)
infsq\hi 1/ 3/                                                                       -1.586***                            -1.628***
                                                                                      (-9.47)                              (-2.94)
infsq\low 1/ 3/                                                                        5.006                               -1.655
                                                                                       (0.73)                              (-0.17)
R-squared                0.339             0.361              0.397                   0.421              0.425             0.398
Adj. R-squared           0.332             0.347              0.361                   0.386              0.343             0.370
Observations               94                 94               2318                     2318              410                410
Sources: International Financial Statistics; authors' estimations.

Note: Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level is indicated by one, two, and three stars, respectively.



1/ Seigniorage is defined as [RM-RM(-1)]/GDP, where RM is reserve money in current period, RM(-1) is reserve money in last period
and GDP is output in current period, inflation is defined as ln(1 + inflation/100) and infsq is the square of the ln(1 + inflation/100).
2/ All results corrected for heteroskedasticity if it existed.
3/ Hi and low refer to coefficients for high and low inflation countries or high and low inflation episodes.
4/ Fixed refers to a fixed-effects model with both country and time dummies. These results indicate the significance of both unless
otherwise specified.
5/ Period effects not significant.
                                                     Table 10. Inflation and Fiscal Balance
                                                     Dependent Variable: Inflation rate 1/ 2/
                                                          (t-statistics in parentheses)

                                                                                                                       Annual Panel High Inflation
                                                Cross-Section                           Annual Panel                           Countries
Independent
Variables                                   OLS                    OLS            Fixed 4/          Fixed 4/             Fixed 4/       Fixed 4/
                                            (1)                    (2)               (3)               (4)                  (5)            (6)

Intercept                                 0.113***
                                           (7.26)
Intercept\hi 3/                                                  0.447***
                                                                  (4.16)
Intercept\low 3/                                                 0.083***
                                                                 (13.16)
Fiscal 1/                                 -0.010**
                                           (-2.45)
Fiscal\hi 1/ 3/                                                  -0.00001        -0.042***         -0.016***            -0.063***       -0.024***
                                                                  (-0.001)        (-17.49)           (-5.63)             (-11.23)        (-3.38)
Fiscal\low 1/ 3/                                                  -0.001           0.000             -0.001               -0.005         -0.012
                                                                   (-1.43)         (-0.19)           (-0.54)              (-0.77)        (-1.32)
Fiscal\hi (-1) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                            -0.028***                             -0.014
                                                                                                     (-8.51)                             (-1.27)
Fiscal\low (-1) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                             -0.001                              -0.012
                                                                                                     (-0.54)                             (-1.34)
Fiscal\hi (-2) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                            -0.032***                            -0.057***
                                                                                                    (-11.08)                             (-5.52)
Fiscal\low (-2) 1/ 3/ 5/                                                                             0.002                               -0.007
                                                                                                      (0.76)                             (-1.07)
R-squared                         0.032               0.556                        0.442             0.542                0.543          0.644
Adj. R-squared                    0.021               0.541                        0.408             0.512                0.478          0.586
Observations                        94                  94                          2318               2130                410             380
Sources: International Financial Statistics; authors' estimations.


Note: Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level is indicated by one, two, and three stars, respectively.


1/ Inflation rate is defined as ln(1 + inflation/100) and fiscal is defined as the fiscal balance in percent of GDP.
2/ All results corrected for heteroskedasticity if it existed.
3/ Hi and low refer to coefficients for high and low inflation countries or high and low inflation episodes.
4/ Fixed refers to a fixed-effects model with both country and time dummies. These results indicate the significance of both unless otherwise
specified.
5/ The number in parentheses next to the independent variables refers to the number of lags.
                                                  Table 11. Inflation Inertia In High-Inflation Countries



Country          Episodes      Average                    Calculated Coefficients of Lags                           Appropriate     Mean   Median R-squared
                                annual                                                                              lag length 1/   Lag     Lag
                               inflation    α1     α2        α3        α4         α5         α6      α7      α8

Argentina      1959:2-1974:2        28.0   0.46   0.06     -0.07      0.34      0.05        -0.37                        6          3.4     4.0       0.369
               1974:3-1991:3       310.6   0.47                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.220
               1991:4-1997:1         6.2   0.30   0.12      0.11      -0.22     0.10        -0.02   -0.03   0.06         8          3.2     3.0       0.916

Bolivia        1959:2-1981:2        12.5   0.49   0.14     -0.29      0.24      0.27        -0.26                        6          3.3     3.0       0.412
               1981:3-1986:3       789.3   0.58                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.337
               1986:4-1997:1        12.3   0.28   -0.13    -0.30      0.27      0.04        -0.08                        6          2.9     3.0       0.346

Brazil 2/      1959:2-1980:2        38.0   0.85   -0.19     0.13      0.39      -0.28                                    5          2.5     2.0       0.753
               1980:3-1997:2       357.6   0.81                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.652

Chile          1959:2-1971:3        24.7   0.34   0.05      0.04      0.29      0.11        -0.33                        6          3.7     4.0       0.324
               1971:4-1977:2       229.9   0.56                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.333
               1977:3-1997:2        19.4   0.50                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.610

Congo, Dem.    1968:2-1977:4        26.1   0.07    0.04     0.00       0.19     -0.12       -0.31   0.47                 7          5.6     6.0       0.783
Republic. of   1978:1-1997:3       281.8   0.94   -0.66     0.80      -0.67     0.56        -0.47   0.36                 7          3.5     3.0       0.656

Ghana          1963:3-1976:1        13.3   0.14   -0.10     0.29      0.16      0.13        -0.49                        6          4.2     4.0       0.524
               1976:2-1984:1        72.2                                                                                 0          0.0     0.0        0.00
               1984:2-1997:1        27.7   0.76   -0.54     0.33      0.18      -0.33                                    5          2.4     2.0       0.664

Israel         1959:2-1978:3        14.3   0.51   -0.16     0.26      0.18      -0.08       0.31                         6          3.1     3.0       0.738
               1978:4-1986:3       139.9   0.22   0.34      0.04      0.10      -0.90       0.05    0.05    -0.90        8          5.3     5.0       0.773
               1986:4-1997:2        14.1                                                                                 0          0.0     0.0       0.00

Mexico         1959:1-1981:4        10.1   0.30                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.647
               1982:1-1988:3        90.6   0.69                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.555
               1988:4-1997:4        20.6   0.53                                                                          1          1.0     1.0       0.278
                                                               Table 11. Inflation Inertia In High-Inflation Countries (concluded)



Country                  Episodes            Average                        Calculated Coefficients of Lags                                   Appropriate     Mean   Median R-squared
                                            annual                                                                                            lag length 1/   Lag     Lag
                                           inflation      α1          α2        α3        α4         α5        α6         α7         α8

Nicaragua             1959:2-1984:1             15.3     0.75        0.11     -0.01     -0.07      -0.03      0.06       0.00      0.36            8          3.4     1.0       0.847
                      1984:2-1992:1             54.3     0.89                                                                                      1          1.0     1.0       0.771
                      1992:2-1997:2             19.2     0.58                                                                                      1          1.0     1.0       0.335

Peru                  1959:2-1982:2             22.2     0.34        0.13     -1.08     0.30       -0.56      0.31                                 6          3.6     3.0       0.739
                      1982:3-1992:1            413.0     0.54        0.14     -0.11     -0.05      0.08       -0.05     -0.05                      7          2.4     1.0       0.458
                      1992:1-1997:4             19.4     0.88       -0.36     0.30                                                                 3          1.6     1.0       0.925

Sierra Leone          1961:1-1986:3             17.9     0.13       -0.01     0.09       0.43      0.34                                            5          3.8     4.0       0.478
                      1986:4-1991:4             90.0                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000
                      1992:1-1997:1             23.0                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000

Sudan                 1959:2-1989:4             16.7     0.04       -0.18     0.04      -0.02      -0.06      0.05      -0.21                      7          4.5     5.0       0.582
                      1990:1-1997:1            102.7                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000

Suriname              1959:2-1991:4              9.3     0.05        0.22                                                                          2          1.8     2.0       0.129
                      1992:1-1995:4            177.4     0.66        0.76     0.14       1.03      -0.54      -1.98                                6          4.2     4.0       0.892
                      1996:1-1998:2              8.0                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000

Uganda 3/             1981:2-1988:4             99.0                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000
                      1989:1-1997:4             19.5     0.53       -0.16     -0.11     -0.16      0.11       0.20      -0.30                      7          3.6     3.0       0.720

Uruguay 3/            1959:2-1974:4             49.2     0.39        0.37                                                                          2          1.5     1.0       0.436
                      1975:1-1997:2             56.0     0.50        0.22                                                                          2          1.3     1.0       0.457

Zambia                1988:3-1994:1            127.8                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000
                      1994:2-1997:4             31.4                                                                                               0          0.0     0.0       0.000


Source: IFS; author's calculations.
1/ Model reduction by F-tests (successively dropping lags and stopping when dropping the last is significant compared to the next to last).
2/ Last period ignored because sample size is too small.
3/ Some high- and low-inflation periods have been combined to allow sufficient sample period.
                                 Table 12. Real Variables During Stabilization

                                                        Dependent Variables
                                          Growth in          Growth in          Current            Change
                     Growth in           Real Private       Real Gross          Account            in Real
                     Real GDP            Consumption        Investment      (as % of GDP)       Exchange Rate
                        (1)                  (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)
                        -2.80                 -2.48         -17.06***             0.14             11.03**
 T-3                   (-2.67)               (-1.85)          (-3.14)            (0.11)             (2.02)
                        -1.05                -1.97             5.96               2.21               -1.88
 T-2                   (-1.01)              (-1.25)           (1.10)             (1.70)             (-0.35)
                        0.24                 0.03             -1.17               0.93               -4.39
 T-1                   (0.24)               (0.02)          (-0.22)              (0.74)             (-0.87)
                        0.71                 1.85             9.45*               0.55               -3.42
 T                     (0.68)               (1.18)            (1.71)             (0.44)             (-0.69)
                        2.07*                1.20              3.64               0.02               -8.75
 T+1                   (1.75)               (0.71)            (0.61)             (0.01)             (-1.62)
                        2.92**               2.07              7.24               -1.48              -1.52
 T+2                    (2.28)              (1.13)            (1.11)             (-1.01)            (-0.24)
                         0.77                0.67              9.99               -1.18              -4.07
 T+3                    (0.59)              (0.34)            (1.37)             (-0.74)            (-0.65)
 OECD                    0.60***             0.26              0.31               -0.04              -1.00
 Growth                 (5.45)              (1.18)            (0.42)             (-0.25)            (-1.05)
 Terms of              -0.004***            0.011*             0.024              0.015***           0.070***
 Trade                 (-4.00)              (1.83)            (1.20)             (3.75)             (3.68)
 Real                   -0.40***             -0.49***          -l.06*            -0.29**             -1.17*
 LIBOR                  (-4.00)             (-3.27)           (-2.00)            (-2.42)            (-1.92)
 Number of
 observations            428                 355               365                395                 285

 Note: T-statistics in parenthesis. The first three dependent variables are expressed in per capita terms.
Method of estimation was OLS. Significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level is indicated by one, two,
and three stars, respectively.
                      Table 13. Exchange-Rate Based Versus Non-Exchange Rate Based Stabilization

                                                                              Dependent Variables

                                   Growth in Real GDP             Growth in Real Private Consumption        Growth in Real Gross Investment

                         ERBS                Non-ERBS             ERBS               Non-ERBS               ERBS                 Non-ERBS
                          (1)                   (2)                (3)                 (4)                   (5)                    (6)

T-3                       -2.94*               -2.93**              -1.51             -3.22                  -18.87**            -16.97**
                         (-1.70)              (-2.25)             (-0.59)            (-1.74)                  (-2.04)             (-2.56)


T-2                       -0.79                -1.37               -0.49              -3.02                     4.26               6. 08
                         (-0.46)              (-1.06)             (-0.19)            (-1.58)                   (0.46)             (0.92)


T-1                        1.56                -0.60                3.28               -1.83                    2.85              -3.86
                          (0.90)              (-0.48)              (1.29)             (-0.99)                  (0.31)            (-0.59)


T                          5.34***             -1.55                8.98***            -1.48                  16.14                5.81
                          (2.90)              (-1.23)              (3.28)             (-0.80)                  (1.63)             (0.88)


T+1                        3.60*               -0.07                3.62               -2.00                    6.54              -0.74
                          (1.65)              (-0.03)              (1.20)             (-0.63)                  (0.60)            (-0.06)


T+2                        3.02                -1.04                2.65               -1.08                    5.35              -1.87
                          (1.52)              (-0.62)              (0.97)             (-0.46)                  (0.54)            (-0.22)


T+3                       -0.09                2.37                -0.90               2.98                     2.14              4. 35
                         (-0.04)              (1.35)              (-0.27)             (1.15)                   (0.02)            (0.43)


OECD growth                0.59***             0.64***             0.26                0.28                      0.38             0.46
                          (5.36)              (5.82)              (0.85)              (1.27)                    (0.50)           (0.62)


Terms of trade            -0.005***            -0.004***           0.009               0.012**                   0.023             0.026
                         (-5.00)              (-4.00)             (1.50)              (2.00)                    (1.15)            (1.30)


Real LIBOR                -0.39***             -0.36***            -0.52***            -0.44***                 -1.00*             -1.04*
                         (-3.90)              (-3.60)             (-3.47)             (-2.93)                  (-0.52)            (-1.96)


No. of observations         428                 428                     355             355                     365                365




Note: T-statistics in parenthesis. All dependent variables are expressed in per capita terms. Method of estimation was OLS. Significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level is indicated by one, two, and three stars, respectively.
                       Figure 1. Inflation, Money Growth, Seigniorage, and Fiscal Balance 1/


200                                                                                   200          6                                                                          6



                                             High inflation
                                              countries                                            4                                                                          4


150                                                                                   150                                                           High inflation
                                                                                                                                                     countries
                                                                                                   2                                                                          2




100                                                                                   100          0                                                                          0




                                                                                                  -2                                                                          -2


50                                                                                    50
                                        Low inflation
                                         countries                                                -4                                                                          -4
                                                                                                                               Low inflation
                                                                                                                                countries

 0                                                                                    0           -6                                                                          -6
                   Inflation                                 M2                                                    Seigniorage                         Fiscal Balance


 1/ High inflation countries as defined in text. Each bar is calculated by taking the average for all countries in that group for each year, and then averaged over all the
 years. 94 countries in total, each with 10 or more observations.
                              Figure 2. Inflation and Money (M2) Growth 1/
                                                1960-95 averages
LN(1+inflation/100)
1.2                                                                                                                                       1.2



 1                                                                                                                                        1



0.8                                                                                                                                       0.8



0.6                                                                                                                                       0.6



0.4                                                                                                                                       0.4



0.2                                                                                                                                       0.2



 0                                                                                                                                        0
      0                 0.2                  0.4                0.6                    0.8                   1                      1.2
                                                          LN(1+M2 Growth)

      1/ Slope of regression line is 1.115 with a t-statistic of 12.13; 94 countries in total, each with 10 or more observations.
                                           Figure 3. Seigniorage and Fiscal Balance 1/
      Seigniorage                                            1960-95 averages
(Change in high powered money in percent of GDP)
       10                                                                                                                                   10



        8
                                                                                                                                            8


        6
                                                                                                                                            6

        4

                                                                                                                                            4
        2


                                                                                                                                            2
        0



       -2                                                                                                                                   0
         -15                 -10                   -5          0            5                     10                15               20
                                                             Fiscal Balance/GDP

             1/ Slope of regression line is -0.152 with a t-statistic of -2.30; 94 countries in total, each with 10 or more observations.
                                              Figure 4. Seigniorage and Inflation 1/
      Seigniorage
(Change in high powered money in percent of GDP)
                                                         1960-95 averages
     10                                                                                                                            10




       8                                                                                                                           8




       6                                                                                                                           6




       4                                                                                                                           4




       2                                                                                                                           2




       0                                                                                                                           0
           0                   0.2                 0.4           0.6                   0.8                   1                  1.2
                                                          LN(1+Inflation/100)
  1/ Regression line is 0.806 + 9.563*LN(1+inflation/100) -4.691*(LN(1+inflation/100)^2; t-statistics on the coefficients are 2.65 and
     -1.31 respectively; 94 countries in total, each with 10 or more observations.
                                  Figure 5. Fiscal Balance and Inflation 1/
                                                      1960-95 averages
LN(1+Inflation/100)
1.2                                                                                                                                1.2



 1                                                                                                                                 1



0.8                                                                                                                                0.8



0.6                                                                                                                                0.6


0.4                                                                                                                                0.4



0.2                                                                                                                                0.2



 0                                                                                                                                 0
  -15               -10                -5               0            5                     10               15                20
                                                      Fiscal Balance/GDP

      1/ Slope of regression line is -0.010 with a t-statistic of -2.45; 94 countries in total, each with 10 or more observations.
                                  Figure 6. Macroeconomic Performance in High Inflation Countries

6                                                                                                                                             6

                       During years of
                       low inflation
4                                                                                                                                             4



2                                                                                                                                             2



0                                                                                                                                             0



-2                                                                                                                                            -2


                       During years of
                       high inflation
-4                                                                                                                                            -4



-6                                                                                                                                            -6



-8                                                                                                                                            -8
     Real per capita     Real per capita   Real per capita                        Current       Fiscal   LN(1+Inflation/100)   LN(1+devaluation/100)
                                                               Change
      GDP Growth          Consumption         Domestic                            Account      Balance
                                                           in Real Effective
                             Growth          Investment     Exchange Rate      in percent of
                                               Growth                               GDP
                                                    Table A1. Inflationary Episodes in High Inflation Market Economies

                                                                                                                                                           Twelve Months
                                                                                                       During High Inflation                              After High Inflation
                                                                                                                           Monthly Inflation Rate       Monthly Inflation Rate
                                        Date of Episode                   Duration           Cumulative            Geometric Arithmetic                 Geometric
Country                              Start            End               (In months)           Inflation             Average     Average       Highest    Average       Highest


Afghanistan                          July 1988         June 1989                   12                   109           6.3         6.5          25.6        2.9         19.8
Afghanistan                          Feb.1985           Oct. 1986                  21                   109           3.6        N.A.          3.9         1.4         6.4
Angola                               Jan. 1991         June 1997                   78           287,726,172          21.0        22.3          84.1        1.8          3.0
Argentina                            July 1974          Oct. 1991                208      3,809,187,961,396          12.4        13.5         196.6        1.4          3.0
Bolivia                            Aug. 1981           Aug. 1986                  61              5,220,261          19.5        22.1         182.8       0.7           2.4
Brazil                             Apr. 1980           May 1995                  182     20,759,903,275,651          15.4        16.1          80.7        1.7          4.4
Chile                               Oct. 1971          May 1977                   68                127,958          11.1        11.6          87.5        3.0          4.2
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                Dec. 1989           Dec. 1996                  85         88,510,051,965          27.4        32.0         250.0       N.A.         N.A.
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                  Feb.1988           July 1989                 18                    202           6.3         6.4          20.4        3.1          5.9
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                 July 1986           Dec.1987                  18                    146           5.1         5.2          16.6        5.5         20.4
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                 Oct. 1982           Jan. 1984                 16                    146           5.8         5.9          25.1       0.8           3.8
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                 Feb. 1978          Aug. 1980                  31                    317            4.7         5.8          76.5       2.8          8.4
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                Mar. 1967            Feb. 1968                 12                    101            6.0         6.1          18.2      -0.1          5.7
Costa Rica                         Sept. 1981           Oct. 1982                 14                    120           5.8         5.8          10.7       1.0           2.6
Ghana                               May 1982            Feb. 1984                 22                    243           5.8         6.0          23.4        0.3          4.9
Ghana                               Feb. 1980          Dec. 1981                  23                    257           5.7         5.7          13.2        1.3          7.9
Ghana                               May 1976            Feb. 1979                 34                    567           5.7         5.9          22.8        1.1          8.9
Guinea-Bissau                      Sept. 1986           Feb. 1988                 18                    146            5.1        5.5          25.0        4.6         12.6
Israel                             Dec. 1978           Mar. 1986                  88                109,187            8.3         8.4          27.5       1.7          3.3
Jamaica                            Apr. 1991           May 1992                   14                    124            5.9         5.9         10.2        1.1          2.5
Lebanon                            Aug. 1991           Dec. 1992                  17                    118           4.7         5.0          22.6       -0.1          1.9
Lebanon                            Mar. 1990            Feb. 1991                 12                    100           5.9         6.2          17.7        1.3         10.3
Lebanon                            Aug. 1985           Aug. 1988                  37                  2,345            9.0         9.6         50.1        4.4         14.2
Mexico                             Dec. 1985           Aug. 1988                  33                    724           6.6         6.6          15.5        1.3          2.5
Mexico                              Feb. 1982           July 1983                 18                    180           5.9         5.9          11.2        4.2          6.4
Nicaragua                           May 1984            Feb. 1992                 94        288,735,412,719          26.1        30.3         261.1        1.6          9.3
Peru                               Dec. 1986           Mar. 1992                  64             25,392,223          21.5        25.9         397.0        3.5          4.8
Peru                               June 1982           Apr. 1986                  47                  1,953            6.6         6.7         13.9        4.6          6.6
Sierra Leone                        Feb. 1989          Dec. 1991                  35                    689            6.1         6.2          19.9       2.5          5.9
Sierra Leone                       Nov. 1986           Dec. 1987                  14                    144            6.6         6.9          24.1       2.7         16.1
Somalia                             Oct. 1987          Nov. 1989                  26                    388           6.3         6.4          16.8       N.A.         N.A.
Somalia                            Mar. 1983           June 1984                  16                    140            5.6         5.8         19.6        2.7          9.0
Sudan                               Feb. 1990          June 1994                  53                  2,715            6.5        6.7          28.3       N.A.         N.A.
Suriname                           Apr. 1992            Oct. 1995                 43                  4,559            9.3        9.7          40.7       -0.3          3.3
Turkey                              May 1993           Mar. 1995                  23                    269            5.8         5.9          24.7       5.0          8.3
Turkey                             Mar. 1979           Sept. 1980                 19                    199            5.9         6.0          21.5       2.4          8.1
Uganda                              Feb. 1984          Dec. 1988                  59                  9,071            8.0         8.3         37.9        3.8          6.9
Uganda                              Feb. 1981          Apr. 1982                  15                    160            6.6         7.0          43.8       1.5          5.3
Uruguay                             June 1989          Aug. 1991                  27                    414            6.2         6.3          14.7       4.4          6.5
Uruguay                              Jan. 1974         Dec. 1974                  12                    107            6.3         6.3          16.8       4.4         11.4
Uruguay                            Dec. 1971           Sept. 1973                 22                    256           5.9         6.1          20.3       4.5          16.8
Uruguay                             Oct. 1966           Oct. 1968                 25                    336            6.1         6.2          17.9       1.2          2.7
Venezuela                            July 1995         Dec. 1996                  18                    161           5.5         5.5          12.6       N.A.         N.A.
Venezuela                           June 1988          May 1989                   12                    103           6.1         6.2          21.3        2.4          3.3
Zambia                             Aug. 1988           Mar. 1994                  68                 11,713            7.3         7.4          29.5       2.4          7.7

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics , national authorities, and IMF desk economists.
