NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAS WELFARE REFORM CHANGED TEENAGE BEHAVIORS?

Robert Kaestner
June O’Neill

Working Paper 8932
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8932

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002

Financial support for this research was provided by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The authors thank Robert Moffitt, Thomas
Deliere, Helen Levy, Diane Gibson, and seminar participants at the Harris School of Public Policy,
University of Chicago for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Robert Kaestner and June O’Neill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Has Welfare Reform Changed Teenage Behaviors?
Robert Kaestner and June O’Neill
NBER Working Paper No. 8932
May 2002
JEL No. I3

ABSTRACT
We use data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth 1979 and 1997 cohorts to compare
welfare use, fertility rates, educational attainment, and marriage rates among teenage women in the years
before and the years immediately following welfare reform. Our first objective is to document differences
between these cohorts in welfare use and outcomes and behaviors correlated with "entry" into welfare,
and with future economic and social well-being. Our second objective is to investigate the causal role
of welfare reform in behavioral change. We find significant differences between cohorts in welfare use
and in outcomes related to welfare use. Further, difference-in-differences estimates suggest that welfare
reform has been associated with reduced welfare receipt, reduced fertility, reduced marriage, and lower
school drop-out among young women who, because of a disadvantaged family background, are at high
risk of welfare receipt (relative to those at lower risk). Finally, in the post-welfare reform era, teenage
mothers are less likely to receive welfare and are more likely to live with a spouse or to live with at least
one parent than in the pre-reform era. Establishing definitively that welfare reform is responsible for these
changes among teenagers will require further investigation.

Robert Kaestner
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and Baruch College/CUNY
212-817-7958
robert_kaestner@baruch.cuny.edu

June O'Neill
Baruch College/CUNY
june_oneill@baruch.cuny.edu

Introduction
Since the passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA) in 1996, researchers have extensively studied the employment and earnings of women who
have left the AFDC/TANF rolls, and they have investigated the reasons for the marked decline in
caseloads since the mid 1990s. The effects of welfare reform, however, need not be limited to current or
former recipients. Changes in federal and state welfare policy that have made welfare receipt temporary,
and that require recipients to work, eliminated the entitlement in the AFDC program to long-term income
support for unmarried women with children. Consequently, under the new policy, potential recipients
may be discouraged from enrolling in welfare and may begin to make choices that would improve their
abilities for self-support. For example, young women from disadvantaged families who were traditionally
at elevated risk of welfare receipt may continue with schooling or avoid non-marital childbearing so as to
reduce the need for cash assistance. There is little research on the effects of welfare reform on such
behaviors among young women.1 Yet many believe that the success of welfare reform depends on
behavioral changes such as these, and the stated intention of reformers was to alter these behaviors as
evidenced by the following passage from the welfare reform act:
“Therefore, in light of this demonstration of the crisis in our nation, it is the sense of the
Congress that prevention of out-of-wedlock pregnancy and reduction in out-of-wedlock
birth are very important Government interests and the policy contained in part A of Title
IV of the Social Security Act … is intended to address the crisis.” (H.R. 3734)
The purpose of this study is to investigate whether or not the behavior of young women has
changed as the result of welfare reform. Specifically, we compare educational attainment, welfare use,
fertility rates, and marriage rates among teens in the years before and after welfare reform. Events in
teenage years such as an unwanted pregnancy or dropping out of high school may have long-lasting or
even irreversible effects. For example, having a child as a teenager is thought to curtail educational
opportunities and to reduce socioeconomic attainment in adulthood.2 O'Neill and O'Neill (1997) report

1

Three unpublished papers examine the effect of AFDC waivers on teen fertility using aggregate vital statistics:
Levine (2002), Kearney (2001), and Horvath and Peters (1999).
2
This point is the subject of some disagreement. For example, see Hayes, 1987; Hotz, McElroy and Sanders, 1999.

2

that 81 percent of women who had a birth out-of-wedlock before age 20 had enrolled in AFDC by age 30.
Further, there is an extensive literature that points to the importance of educational decisions at these ages
to adult economic status.3 In short, welfare reform could have large effects that will last into later life if it
can change teenage behaviors or outcomes that are a cause of economic dependency throughout the
lifecycle. Moreover, if welfare reform alters teenage behaviors in such a way as to make receipt of public
assistance less likely throughout life, then controversial aspects of the law such as time-limited benefits,
which are often viewed as being punitive, may have unappreciated benefits that should be considered in a
complete assessment of its effects.
Empirically, we have two objectives. The first is to document differences between cohorts’
welfare use and outcomes and behaviors such as early non-marital fertility that are correlated with welfare
use and with future economic and social well-being. The second is to investigate whether welfare reform
played a causal role in bringing about the changes observed. The central challenge for this analysis is to
form appropriate counterfactual outcomes to answer questions such as: In the absence of welfare reform,
what choices would young women have made? What would have been their social and economic status?
To address this challenge, we employ multivariate regression methods and a quasi-experimental research
design that uses information on family background to form ‘treatment’ and ‘control’ groups. Youths
from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds are at elevated risk of welfare receipt and their behavior
is the target of welfare reform. In contrast, youths from more advantaged socioeconomic backgrounds are
at low risk of welfare receipt, and changes in welfare policy are unlikely to affect their behavior. Thus,
the higher-status youths can be used as a comparison group to control for changes in behavior between
cohorts that are unrelated to welfare policy. We expand on this point below.

Background and Literature Review
Evidence abounds for two developments in the 1990s: welfare rolls have dramatically decreased,
and employment among single mothers, especially those with young children, has dramatically increased.

3

For a recent review, see Ashenfelter and Rouse, 2000.

3

Between January 1993 and June 2000, welfare caseloads fell by nearly 60 percent, while the employment
rate among women with children and no spouse present climbed markedly, especially among those with
young children (US DHHS 2000, US DOL 2000, Jencks and Swingle 2000, Kaushal and Kaestner 2001,
O’Neill and Hill 2001). Although employment among single mothers increased in the economic
expansion of the 1980s, the increase in the 1990s was far larger, and it was far larger than the increase in
employment of married mothers during the same period (e.g., Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000, O’Neill and
Hill 2001). These comparisons suggest that welfare reform, along with other policy changes in the 1990s,
increased the employment of single mothers.
Studies of women leaving welfare link the increase in employment of single mothers and the
decline in welfare rolls. These “leaver studies” typically find that about two-thirds of leavers are
employed following exits from welfare (Brauner and Loprest 1999); that they work about 30 hours per
week on average; that their employment is fairly steady; that their earnings grow with labor market
experience at a rate comparable to the rate of other women; and that family income also grows with time
following exit (Cancian et al. 1999; Corcoran and Loeb, 1999).
However, studies of welfare leavers are intended primarily to provide descriptive information on
the well-being of families leaving welfare. Leaver studies do not provide direct estimates of the effects of
welfare reform since many women who exited welfare would have done so even in the absence of reform
(Bane and Ellwood 1994). Furthermore, studies of welfare recipients or welfare leavers alone cannot
provide information about the effects of reform on entry into the welfare system, although some studies
do estimate recidivism rates. Thus, Moffitt (1999) concludes that “…welfare leaver studies have great
value but represent only one group potentially affected by welfare reform; they miss those who were
diverted or discouraged and even those families remaining on the welfare rolls (pp. 3-4).” Accordingly,
the National Academy of Sciences Panel on Data and Methods for Measuring the Effects of Changes in
Social Welfare Programs recommended that “… to consider the effects of changes in welfare policies on
the outcomes of the low-income population, it is important to study not only leavers, but also stayers and

4

potential applicants who are diverted from programs or who do not apply” (Moffitt and van Ploeg, 1999,
page 5).
With few exceptions, studies that have examined the effects of recent welfare reforms have
focused on employment and welfare use among single mothers, especially those with low levels of
education, those who are current or former welfare recipients, and those who have young children (e.g.,
Grogger 2000; Kaushal and Kaestner 2001; Schoeni and Blank 2000; Jencks and Swingle 2000, O’Neill
and Hill 2001). But a major goal of welfare reform was to change incentives in the welfare system
thought to encourage behaviors that make welfare receipt more likely. A poorly understood aspect of
reform, therefore, is whether or not it has reduced the likelihood that a woman would become initially
eligible for benefits. Of particular importance is whether or not the qualifying behaviors of young women
have changed. For example, has welfare reform lowered the incidence of non-marital birth among those
at highest risk of such births?
One might argue that the effects of recent welfare reform legislation on demographic behaviors
could be obtained by extrapolation from studies of the effect of welfare policy prior to reform. However,
research on the effects of AFDC on marriage and fertility has relied on differences over time and among
states in the level of welfare benefits, and no studies exist on the effects of the elimination of the
entitlement to benefits on demographic and schooling behaviors. In an extensive review of the literature,
Moffitt concluded that such studies have produced divergent results, and, further, that
“…the resolution of the discrepancies between these studies is important for welfare policy at
minimum because the issue of how demographic outcomes are affected by the overall level of
welfare benefits is so basic to all discussions of welfare effects. It is also relevant to many of the
reforms tested in the states in the past several years and to many of the changes enacted in the
1996 welfare legislation…More generally, the legislation is intended to reduce the welfare
caseload and to lower the overall level of welfare benefits provided to low-income populations; it
is explicitly intended to have effects on nonmarital fertility of the type with which the research
literature is concerned" (Moffitt 1998; page 75).
We intend to contribute to the literature on the effects of welfare reform in three respects. First,
we study teens, a group that is of importance for welfare reform because of the potential for welfare
reform to produce long-term benefits for this group. Second, we use a cross-cohort approach that allows

5

us to take advantage of the dramatic changes in policy that occurred in the 1990s. Specifically, we
compare cohorts who spent their teen years before welfare reform (i.e., 1979 to 1985) to those who spent
a substantial portion of their teen years following welfare reform (i.e., 1997 to 1999). Third, for each
cohort, we use longitudinal information on individuals to link outcomes and behaviors of youths to their
family backgrounds. Longitudinal data provide controls for characteristics of a youth's family
background that are strong predictors of the youth's behaviors and outcomes, including welfare use.
Information on family background has not been employed heretofore in studies of recent welfare reform.
A potential shortcoming of many existing non-experimental evaluations of welfare reform is the use of
current characteristics such as education level or the presence of young children to define "treatment" and
"comparison" groups. For example, the effects of welfare reform and other policy changes have been
estimated by comparing changes in employment of single mothers with and without children (Meyer and
Rosenbaum 1999; Kaushal and Kaestner 2001), single mothers with older and younger children (Grogger
2000), or single mothers with low and high levels of education (Schoeni and Blank 2000; Kaushal and
Kaestner 2001). However, characteristics such as education level and presence of young children are
potentially influenced by welfare reform. In contrast, a youth's family backgroundhis or her mother's
education, or whether or not the youth grew up in a single parent familyshould not be influenced by
welfare reform. Again, such characteristics provide an alternative way to classify youths as more or less
likely to be affected by welfare reform. This classification will be used first, to help identify better the
population affected by welfare reform (i.e., “treated” population), and second, to form a comparison
group to help identify the effects of welfare reform.
In summary, there is little extant research on the effect of welfare reform on entry into welfare,
and on the effect of welfare reform on behaviors of teens that are determinants of welfare eligibility and
participation. Such information should help provide a more complete evaluation of welfare reform,
particularly since the goals of reform are to deter entry into welfare and increase economic independence.

6

Data
We use data from the National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS), sponsored by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, in particular, the two cohorts of the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY79 and
NLSY97). The NLSY97 is a national probability sample of 8,984 youths, approximately half of whom
are female, born between the years 1980 and 1984 (ages 12 to 17 in 1997). Survey information for this
cohort is available for 1997, 1998 and 1999, and we select female respondents ages 17 in 1997 and ages
17 and 19 in 1998 and 1999. Nearly all years of “exposure” to the risk of welfare use or non-marital
fertility for this group are subsequent to the passage of federal welfare reform; for example, the oldest
members of the sample were 16 years old in 1996.
The NLSY79 is a national probability sample of 12,686 young adults, approximately half of
whom are female, born between the years 1957 and 1964 (ages 14 to 21 in 1979). Since 1979 the
respondents to the NLSY79 have been interviewed on a yearly or, more recently, bi-yearly basis.
Again, we limit the sample to female respondents ages 17 and 19. The teenage experiences of this cohort
are unaffected by the dramatic state and federal welfare reform efforts of the 1990s, and therefore provide
a comparison group for more recent cohorts who attained similar ages under the more restrictive welfare
policy environment. Moreover, the two NLSY survey instruments have comparable questions and sample
designs.
The NLSY surveys collected considerable retrospective and contemporaneous information from
respondents. These data allow us to measure family background and outcomes related to welfare use.
The availability of information on family background is essential for our quasi-experimental research
design. The NLSY79 has information about family structure at age 14, and parents’ education. The
NLSY97 has information about family structure at age 12, and parents’ education. However,
approximately 15 percent of the NLSY97 sample is missing information on family structure at age 12 and
for these cases, we used family structure at the time of the 1997 interview when respondents were
between the ages of 12 and 17. This family background information is used to identify young adults most
at risk of welfare participation.
7

We examine five outcomes: whether or not a young woman ever received welfare; whether or not
a young woman ever had a birth; whether or not she ever had a non-marital birth; if she was ever married,
and her current drop-out (education) status. For each outcome, we limit the sample to young women of a
specific age; for example, we examine cohort differences in non-marital births of young women aged 17,
and similarly for young women aged 19. As noted, the NLSY collects contemporaneous and
retrospective information that allows us to construct the dependent variables for most respondents.
However, the NLSY79 did not collect information about AFDC receipt prior to 1978. So for respondents
age 18 and 19 at the time of the 1979 NLSY survey, we are only able to identify whether or not they
received AFDC from age 17. This will tend to underestimate the lifetime incidence of welfare receipt for
these young women because a small fraction of these young women will have received welfare at ages 15
or 16 if they had a first birth by that age. Therefore, in our analyses of the lifetime incidence of welfare
receipt, we limit the NLSY79 sample to respondents less than 17 years old at the time of the 1979 survey.
Most of our dependent variables are cumulative probabilities, for example, the probability of ever
receiving AFDC/TANF by age 19. An alternative is to examine conditional probabilities, for example,
the probability of receiving welfare at age 19 among those who did not receive it by that age—or the
hazard rate of entry into AFDC program. We have done so in a related report (Kasetner, Korenman, and
O’Neill, 2002). However, conditional probabilities may result in biased estimates of the effect of welfare
reform because they condition on outcomes (e.g., welfare receipt) that are affected by welfare reform.
The unconditional probabilities do not suffer from this potential problem.
The NLSY contains geographic information that allows us to merge information about statespecific welfare policy and state economic conditions to individual records. Using this state-specific
information, we can characterize the welfare policy and economic conditions in the respondent’s state of
residence during her teenage years. Specifically, analyses include controls for the unemployment rate and
real value of AFDC benefits for a family of three from age 14 onward. 4 So for analyses of outcomes of

4

We assume that the state of residence does not change; so if a respondent is age 17 in 1999, we assume that her
state of residence from age 14 to age 17 is the same as that observed at age 17.

8

teens aged 17, we include the unemployment rate in her state of residence at age 14, age 15, age 16, and
age 17. We follow a similar procedure for AFDC/TANF (real) benefit levels. Note that changes in the
benefit level could be considered a result of welfare reform; however, there have been relatively few
changes in the maximum benefit level for a family with no earnings since welfare reform. Changes in
other aspects of program generosity have been much more dramatic (e.g., earnings disregards, time limits,
work requirements). We therefore regard the control for the maximum benefit level for a family without
earnings as a proxy for the generosity of benefits in a state in the pre-reform era, and as a proxy for the
generosity of welfare benefits in a state the post-reform era in the absence of welfare reform. Therefore,
to more fully characterize recent welfare reform, we construct a measure of the number of years that a
respondent’s state of residence has had time-limited benefits, since this aspect of welfare reform has been
shown to be a particularly strong predictor of employment and welfare receipt of low-income women
(Grogger 2000, Kaushal and Kaestner 2001).

Research Design and Statistical Methodology
The central challenge for any analysis of the effects of welfare reform is to construct appropriate
counterfactual outcomes that can be used to answer questions such as the following: In the absence of
welfare reform, what choices would young women and men have made? What would have been their
social and economic status? To address this challenge, we use a research design based on a pre- and posttest (intervention) with a comparison group.
Specifically, we use the following regression model to obtain separate estimates of the effect of
welfare reform for two groups of young women who differ by their risk of future welfare receipt: a highrisk (target) group—those who come from single-parent families and/or families with less-educated
parents—and a low-risk (comparison) group—those who come from two-parent families and/or families
with more-educated parents.

9

For the high − risk group :
(1) Yijt = α 0 + α 1 AGE i + α 2 RACE i + α 3 UN jt + α 4 AFDC jt + α 5 COHORT97 t + γ j + e ijt
i = 1,..., N (individuals)
j = 1,...,50 (states)
t = 1,..., T (years)
and for the low − risk group :
(2) Yijt = β 0 + β 1 AGE i + β 2 RACE i + β 3 UN jt + β 4 AFDC jt + β 5 COHORT97 t + δ j + v ijt
i = 1,..., N (individuals)
j = 1,...,50 (states)
t = 1,..., T (years)
In equations (1) and (2), Y is an indicator of one of five outcomes of interest (welfare receipt, fertility,
non-marital fertility, marriage, and school drop-out); RACE is a dummy variable(s) indicating the race
and ethnicity of the respondent (three categories); UN is the state-specific unemployment rate (lagged
values are also included), AFDC is the real value of AFDC/TANF benefits for a family of three (lagged
values are also included); and COHORT97 is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the respondent
comes from the NLSY79 (COHORT97=0) or NLSY97 (COHORT97=1). Note also that the regression
models include controls for state-effects (γ and δ), but since all states implemented reform and the
distribution of the NLSY samples is not too dissimilar between cohorts, state effects are not likely to be a
significant confounding influence.
We also estimate a model similar to equations (1) and (2) that includes a variable measuring
recent welfare reform—the number of years the state has had time-limited benefits for AFDC/TANF.
This model, for high-risk young women, is specified as follows:

10

(1a) Yijt = α 0 + α 1 AGEi + α 2 RACEi + α 3UN jt + α 4 AFDC jt + α 5 (COHORT97 t x NOTL jt ) +

α 6 (COHORT97 t x YRSTL jt ) + γ j + eijt
i = 1,..., N (individuals)
j = 1,...,50 (states)
t = 1,..., T (years)
All variables in equation (1a) have been defined except, NOTL and YRSTL. The first, NOTL, is equal to
one when a state does not have time-limited benefits for AFDC/TANF, and YRSTL measures the number
of years a state has had time-limited benefits for AFDC/TANF. Note that the parameter α 6 measures
differences in outcomes between the 1997 cohort affected by welfare reform and the 1979 cohort. The
proportion of the 1997 cohort unaffected by welfare reform is too small to use as a separate comparison
group, and therefore we simply control for differences between them and the other two groups using a
dummy variable (COHORT97 x NOTL).
In equations (1) and (1a), the identification of the effect of cohort differences, or “welfare
reform”, comes from the within-state differences in young adult outcomes before and after the
implementation of welfare reform (and conditional on measured characteristics). Therefore, most of the
pre-reform outcomes are associated with the experiences of the original NLSY79 cohort, and all of the
post-reform outcomes are associated with the NLSY97 cohort. One problem with this identification
strategy is that the effect of welfare reform may be confounded by unmeasured, time-varying factors that
affect the outcomes of interest.5 For example, the monetary return to schooling generally increased in the
late 1980s and early 1990s, and the job market improved dramatically in the late 1990s. These changes in
economic conditions may affect fertility and marriage decisions of teenage young women, and thus
outcomes of the two cohorts may have differed in the absence of welfare reform.

5

A second problem is the endogeneity of pre-PRWORA reform policies. This is a particularly difficult problem to
effectively address (see, for example, Besley and Case, 1994; Case, 1998). However, most of the variation in
welfare policy is due to federal reforms that are less likely to be endogenous.

11

To address this problem, we obtain difference-in-differences (DD) estimates of the effect of
welfare reform. The DD estimate is obtained by subtracting β 5 of equation (2) from α 5 of equation (1).
Identification in this model comes from within-state difference-in-differences. We first compute the
differences in outcomes, before and after welfare reform, for young women from families of low
socioeconomic status (SES). We carry out the same calculation for young women from families of high
SES. The difference-in-differences estimate is obtained by subtracting the first difference for the high
SES group from the corresponding difference for the low SES group. The maintained assumption of this
identification strategy is that changes over time in the behavior of young adults that are unrelated to
welfare reform are common to young adults from lower-risk and higher-risk families; also, young women
from lower-risk families are assumed to be unaffected by welfare reform. Therefore, the difference-indifferences procedure controls for general trends in behaviors and outcomes that are correlated with (but
not caused by) changes in welfare policy.
We acknowledge that the assumption underlying identification in the difference-in-differences
procedure is quite restrictive. However, we believe that the DD remains useful and estimates obtained
using this approach are preferable to simple before-and-after differences. For example, the DD will
partially account for changes in fertility and marriage that are driven by broad changes in societal values
and norms, or by changes in contraceptive technology and costs. Most importantly, the DD allows us to
assess whether or not changes before and after welfare reform in the behavior of disadvantaged young
women represents a group-specific trend, as opposed to being simply reflective of broader trends in
society, as measured by the behavior of non-disadvantaged teens.
Applying the language of experimental research to the difference-in-differences procedure, young
adults from higher-risk families represent the treatment group, and young adults from lower-risk families
represent the control group. Obviously, this classification scheme introduces some error, for example,
some young adults from low-risk families are at some risk of welfare receipt and will be affected by

12

welfare reform. However, errors of this nature should produce conservative estimates with the same sign
as the “true” parameter.
A preliminary analysis of the original cohort of NLSY79 provides some information as to the
extent of the classification error and the usefulness of our family background categories to classify young
adults into higher- and lower-risk groups. For this preliminary analysis, we selected all NLSY79 female
respondents who were aged 16 or less at the time of the 1979 interview so that we would have complete
information for ages 16 to 20. We divided this sample into six groups according to mother’s education
and family structure at age 14. We then obtained the percentage of young adult women in each of the six
family groups that had participated in the AFDC program by age 20. The results are listed in Table 1.
The figures in Table 1 illustrate that family structure at age 14 and mother’s education are
important predictors of risk of welfare receipt of young women. In fact, the figures in Table 1 indicate
that mother’s education is a particularly strong predictor of future welfare receipt of young women. Very
few women from families with mothers who had more than 12 years of education participated in welfare
by age 20. In contrast, a significant portion of women from families with mothers of low education had
received welfare by age 20.
In sum, the figures in Table 1 support the use of family background to define target and
comparison groups for the difference-in-differences procedure. Young adults from families with
characteristics associated with lower SES are at high risk of welfare receipt and are therefore the group
for which changes in welfare policy are expected to have the greatest effect. Young adults from families
with characteristics associated with higher SES are at much lower risk of welfare receipt, and changes
over time in their behaviors should be driven primarily by factors unrelated to welfare policy.
We defined teenage young women to be at high risk if, at age 14 (age 12 in NLSY97), they lived
in a family headed by a female who has 12 or fewer years of education, or in a two-parent family with a
mother who has completed fewer than 12 years of education. However, the distribution of these family
background characteristics is not stable over time. Parental education levels have increased between, say,
1982 and 1998, as has the proportion of single-parent families. Changes in parental education and marital
13

status between cohorts raise potential problems with using a classification based on these characteristics
to define risk groups for the two cohorts. Therefore, we rely on two methods to classify young women in
the 1997 NLSY cohort as “high risk” or “low risk” based on family background. One method, which we
refer to as classification on the basis of absolute risk, assigns risk according to a fixed threshold of
mother’s education level and marital status. Here we assume that the true predictor of risk of welfare
receipt is the level of mother’s education and marital status. In this case, an increase in mother’s
education between cohorts will cause a decline in the proportion of high-risk youths between cohorts, and
this method assumes that this represents a true reduction in risk. On the other hand, one might argue that
the smaller high-risk group in the later cohort is more disadvantaged. For example, if risk is determined
by mother’s relative education level (and marital status), then changes in the proportion of low- and highrisk teens will bias estimates of risk-adjusted, inter-cohort differences in outcomes. The increase between
cohorts in parental schooling may have been accompanied by a decline in the quality of education, and
therefore may not reduce the risk of adverse outcomes for children. To address this possibility, we also
assigned risk using cohort-specific criteria, which we refer to as classification based on relative risk
because the proportion classified as “high risk” is similar in the two cohorts. Specifically, the high-risk
group in the later cohort (NLSY97) consists of teens that lived with a single mother who has 13 or fewer
years of education, or from a two-parent family with a mother who completed 12 or fewer years of
education.

Descriptive Analysis
Tables 2 through 6 present descriptive statistics for the NLSY97 and NLSY79 cohorts, classified
by risk status based on family background. Data are weighted by baseline (1979 or 1997) sample
weights. Table 2 presents information about the lifetime prevalence of welfare receipt by age, cohort, and
risk status. About 60 percent of the NLSY79 cohort is classified as “high risk” (either absolute or
relative, which is the same for the 1979 cohort). As the figures in Table 2 indicate, lifetime prevalence of
welfare receipt is positively associated with age and risk (family background). Among those aged 19 in
14

the NLSY79, 5.4 percent had received welfare while only 1.3 percent of those aged 17 had received
welfare. High-risk 19 year olds had a prevalence of welfare receipt of 9.7 percent whereas low-risk 19
year olds had a prevalence of only 2.0 percent. Similar associations between welfare receipt and age, and
welfare receipt and risk, are observed for the 1997 NLSY cohort. Table 2 also shows that there has been
a decline in welfare receipt between the two cohorts: welfare receipt among the 1997 cohort is lower than
it is among the 1979 cohort. This is particularly true among high-risk young women, and when risk is
measured on a relative basis. The proportion of the NLSY97 sample classified as high-risk is only about
45 percent, according to the absolute definition of risk. This proportion increases to approximately 65
percent when the relative definition of risk is used. The latter figure is much closer to the proportion of
high-risk young women found in the NLSY79 (60%). For this reason, we tend to emphasize results based
on the relative risk classification.
Table 3, which has a similar structure as Table 2, presents sample (weighted) proportions related
to fertility—whether or not a teenager has had a child. Note that the larger sample size for NLSY79
respondents age 19 in this table reflects the fact that we have complete fertility histories, whereas we did
not have complete information on lifetime welfare use. Again, the probability of having a child is
positively associated with age and risk. Overall, there is little difference between the two cohorts’
fertility. However, when risk is measured on a relative basis, fertility has declined between the two
cohorts among the high-risk population of young women. For example, the proportion of high-risk young
women19 year olds who have had a child is 0.188 in the NLSY97 cohort, and 0.278 among the NLSY79
cohort. The difference is statistically significant. Table 3 also shows that there has been an increase in
fertility between the two cohorts among the low-risk young women, although only among 19 year olds is
the difference statistically significant. The inter-cohort decline in fertility among the high-risk population
young women, the group most likely to be affected by welfare reform policies, is suggestive of a welfare
reform effect. The inter-cohort increase in fertility among the low-risk population of young women
provides additional support for this hypothesis since it suggests that the fertility decline among the highrisk population is not due to a general decline in fertility. Finally, in Table 3, it is clear that the method
15

for classifying young women into low- and high-risk groups matters. The use of absolute criteria to
assign risk suggests little change in fertility, whereas the use of relative criteria suggests the pattern
described.
For many policymakers, particularly the authors of PRWORA, non-marital fertility is a key
indicator of social progress or decline. Table 4 presents the descriptive information for this outcome. As
was the case for the other outcomes, non-marital fertility is strongly related to age and family background.
In general, there has been a significant increase in non-marital fertility between cohorts. Since the figures
in Table 3 show that fertility has remained fairly constant, the increase in non-marital fertility must be the
result of a decrease in marriage. Before confirming this fact, it is worth noting that there appears to be a
divergence between inter-cohort differences among low- and high-risk groups. Non-marital fertility has
greatly increased between cohorts among the low-risk population of young women, but has increased
more modestly between cohorts among the high-risk group. This is particularly true when risk is
measured on a relative basis.
Table 5 shows the inter-cohort decline in marriage inferred from Tables 3 and 4. This decrease
has been significant, and is evident for both low- and high-risk young women. There is some evidence
that the decline in marriage has been greater among high-risk than low-risk young women; marriage rates
have fallen by approximately 60 to 70 percent for high-risk young women and only about 50 percent for
low-risk young women.
The last descriptive table presents figures on drop out rates. A person is considered to be a drop
out if she is not enrolled in school as of May 1 and does not have a high school degree. The figures in
Table 6 reveal that there has been a significant decline in dropping out between cohorts. The high-risk
group, however, accounts for the entire decline; among low-risk young women, there has been little
change between cohorts in the proportion dropping out.
In summary, Tables 2 through 6 show that there are significant differences in welfare use and
outcomes related to welfare use between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 cohorts. Among high-risk young
women, defined on the basis of a relative risk criterion, welfare use declined, fertility declined, marriage
16

rates declined, and dropout rates declined. There was no change in non-marital births for this group, as
the decline in fertility was offset by a decline in marriage among those who had children. Among lowrisk young women (relative definition), there was a decrease in marriage and an increase in non-marital
births. One caveat is that these findings are sensitive to how risk is defined, particularly in the case of
fertility. Nonetheless, the figures in Tables 2 through 6 are suggestive that the behavior of disadvantaged
teenage young women has been affected by welfare reform. In the next section, we put this hypothesis to
a more rigorous test by adjusting the cohort differences observed in Tables 2 through 6 for cohort
differences in sample composition (age, race/ethnicity), economic conditions, AFDC/TANF benefit levels
and state-specific factors.

Adjusted Differences and Difference-in-Difference Estimates
In this section, we present ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of equations (1) and (2) for the
high- and low-risk groups, respectively, and difference-in-difference estimates obtained from the
estimates of these two equations. We present estimates from several specifications of equations (1) and
(2): a simple model that adjusts for age, race, and ethnicity; a model that adjusts for these factors plus
unemployment rate and real AFDC/TANF benefits; and finally, a model that adds controls for state
effects to the previous specification. We also present estimates of equation (1a), which adds to the model
a variable for the number of years a state has had time-limited benefits. Standard errors for all models are
constructed taking account of potential non-independence and clustering by state (Bertrand, Duflo and
Mullainathan, 2002).
We continue to divide the sample into two subsamples: young women age 17 and young women
age 19.6 This choice is consistent with the figures in Tables 2 through 6, which indicated differences in
the presence and magnitude of cohort differences by age. Intuitively, we may expect welfare reform to
have different effects by age—for example, older teens are more independent and government policy may

6

We also obtained estimates for the sample at ages 16 and 18. Results were similar to those reported for ages 17
and 19, respectively.

17

have more influence on their behavior than on the behavior of younger young women who are less mature
and who may be influenced more by family environment. On the other hand, compared to younger
teenagers, a higher proportion of older teenagers will have spent some their early teenage years in a prewelfare-reform environment.
Table 7 presents the ordinary least squares regression estimates for young women age 17. The
top panel presents estimates for high-risk young women, and the bottom panel presents estimates for the
low-risk population. Difference-in-differences (DD) estimates are presented in Table 8. Each row
(model) of the table presents estimates from a different model specification. Row 1 lists estimates of
cohort differences in outcomes from models that hold age, race and ethnicity constant; row 2 adds
controls for unemployment rate (and lags), and real AFDC/TANF benefits (and lags); and row 3 adds
state dummy variables. Rows 4 and 5 allow the effect of cohort to differ by whether or not the state of
residence has time-limited benefits and the number of years this policy has been in effect.
Estimates in row 2 of the top panel of Table 7 indicate that between 1979-84 and 1997-99 there
has been a decline in welfare receipt, fertility, marriage and drop out rates among high-risk young women
aged 17, although only estimates related to marriage and dropping out are statistically significant. The
estimate associated with welfare receipt has a p-value of 0.15. Estimates in row 2 also indicate a
statistically significant increase in non-marital births between these periods. The magnitudes of the
estimates are quite large; for example, a 2.7 percentage point decrease in birth rates represents an
approximate 25 percent reduction (using the NLSY79 mean as the reference). In relative terms, the
cohort differences in marriage implied by estimates in row 2 are even larger. Similarly, the effect
associated with welfare use is large; a 1.4 percentage point decrease in welfare receipt represents an
approximate 50 percent decline between cohorts. The relatively large standard errors associated with the
estimated effect of reform on welfare use may be reflective of several aspects of the analysis including the
infrequency of this outcome, the small sample size, and the fact that standard errors account for clustering
at the state level (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2002).

18

Estimates are sensitive to model specification. Adding state effects, as in row 3, greatly affects
the estimates of cohort differences in welfare use and fertility. The estimates in row 3 suggest that there
are no cohort differences in welfare receipt and fertility among high-risk young women but that nonmarital childbearing has increased, and marriage and school drop out have decreased. Worth mentioning,
however, is the fact that estimates in row 3 are affected by collinearity problems that increase standard
errors and make it difficult to separate the effect of welfare reform from effects of other variables (e.g.,
macroeconomic conditions) with marked cohort differences. To illustrate the magnitude of this problem,
we regressed the cohort dummy variable on the other control variables used in the model of row 3. The
R-square statistic associated with this regression was 0.84. This suggests that there may not be sufficient
independent variation to identify cohort differences with much precision. We also note that adding state
dummy variables alone (i.e., dropping state welfare benefit and unemployment controls) produces
estimates that are similar to those in row 1. This result is not surprising because cohort and state are not
highly correlated.7
In rows 4 and 5, we present estimates of the effect of time-limited benefits; specifically, the
number of years since time-limited benefits have been in place. This specification adjusts for length of
different degrees of exposure to welfare reform policies among the members of the 1997 cohort. These
estimates are similar to those in rows 2 and 3, as would be expected since a large portion of the NLSY97
cohort live in states with time-limited benefits. The magnitudes of the estimates differ mainly because of
the unit of measurement. However, the estimate of the effect of time-limited benefits on welfare use in
row 4 is -0.012 when evaluated at the mean (3.0) and statistically insignificant, and somewhat smaller
than the estimate in row 2.
The bottom panel of Table 7 presents estimates for the low-risk group. In general, these estimates
suggest that for this group, fertility and to a lesser extent drop out rates have increased, and the marriage

7

Note that there is much within-state variation in both unemployment rates and welfare benefits, but not much
variation in state of residence across cohorts.

19

rate has decreased between cohorts. As was the case for the high-risk group, estimates are sensitive to
model specification—row 3 estimates differ from those in rows 1 and 2.
As noted above, estimates of cohort differences and time-limited benefits in Table 7 do not
control for unmeasured factors that affect the outcomes of interest and that may have varied between
1979-84 and 1997-99. One method of addressing this issue is to obtain difference-in-differences (DD)
estimates in which cohort differences for the low-risk group are subtracted from cohort differences for the
high-risk group. If the unmeasured factors that affect the outcomes of interest have a similar effect on the
low- and high-risk groups, then the DD will be a better estimate of the effect of cohort differences for the
high-risk group—the group affected by welfare reform. Table 8 contains the DD estimates.8
Estimates in rows 2 in Table 8 suggest a significant decline in welfare use, fertility, marriage, and
drop out rates between cohorts pre- and post-welfare reform for young women aged 17. Similar findings
are revealed by the estimates in row 4 for time-limited benefits, but in this case, estimates indicate
somewhat smaller declines in welfare use and fertility, and they are not statistically significant. In rows 3
and 5, only estimates related to the marriage rate and drop out rate remain statistically significant, but as
noted, the estimates in rows 3 and 5 are obtained under statistical circumstances (multicollinearity) that
make it difficult to estimate reliable effects. Generally, the estimates in Table 8 indicate that many of the
cohort differences among high-risk young women aged 17 are not simply the result of general trends that
affect all young women, but rather are specific to the high-risk group. This provides support for the
hypothesis that welfare reform, which is targeted at the behavior of high-risk young women, may have
had an impact. Specifically, welfare reform may have resulted in lower fertility, less use of welfare, and
less dropping out of school among young women age 17, as well as less marriage and higher rates of nonmarital fertility. We note that cohort differences in drop out rates and marriage are large, perhaps
implausibly so in the case of drop out rate. For these outcomes the DD procedure may not be adequately
measuring broad trends since few low-risk (non-disadvantaged) young women dropped out or married

8

Standard errors of the difference-in-difference estimates are obtained under the assumption that the estimates in
Table 7 have zero covariance.

20

prior to or after welfare reform, although we do observe a significant decline in marriage for low-risk
young women.
Table 9 presents the results for young women age 19. Estimates in rows 2 and 4 of the top panel
indicate that among high-risk young women, welfare use, fertility, marriage rate and drop out rate have
decreased between 1979-84 and 1997-99, and pre- and post-welfare reform (as measured by time-limited
benefits). Estimates of change in welfare use are not statistically significant (p-value=0.15), but they are
relatively large. For example, a 3.0 (row 2) percentage point decline in welfare use among this group
represents an approximately 30 percent decline. In rows 3 and 5, estimates lead to a different conclusion;
in this case there are no cohort differences in welfare use or fertility, and nonmarital fertility may have
increased. As noted, estimates in rows 3 and 5 are plagued by collinearity and standard errors of the
estimates are relatively large (nearly twice the size of those in row 2). Again, collinearity makes it
difficult to reliably detect cohort differences, or pre- and post-welfare reform differences. The bottom
panel of Table 9 presents estimates for the sample of low-risk young women age 19. In this case,
estimates in rows 2 and 4 indicate cohort and pre- and post-welfare reform differences that are in stark
contrast to those for high-risk young women. Estimates indicate that welfare use and fertility have
increased between 1979-84 and 1997-99, pre- and post-welfare reform. In addition, estimates of cohort
differences in rates of marriage and drop out are negative, as was the case for high-risk young women, but
smaller in magnitude, and the estimated effects on drop out are not statistically significant.
Table 10 formalizes the difference-in-difference estimates just alluded to. Estimates in rows 2
and 4 of Table 10 indicate that there has been a decrease in welfare use, fertility, and rates of marriage
and drop out between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 cohort, and pre- and post-welfare reform. Estimates in
row 2 of Table 10 even suggest a significant decline in non-marital fertility. The estimates are large in
magnitude—in the range of 30 to 50 percent—and in nearly all cases statistically significant. These
estimates show that there has been a group-specific trend in these outcomes between 1979-84 and 199799, and they are consistent with a welfare reform effect. Estimates in row 4 suggest similar effects, but
are somewhat smaller when evaluated at the mean number of years that time-limited benefits have been
21

effect. Finally, estimates in rows 3 and 5, however, call for more caution. Only one of these estimates is
statistically significant, and the estimated effect on welfare use has reversed sign. We have noted the
collinearity problem associated with these estimates.
Some estimates in Tables 7 through 10 are suggestive of a significant decline in welfare use. An
important question raised by this finding is whether welfare use is falling because behaviors have changed
so that young women are less likely to need welfare (e.g., non-marital teen birth rates have fallen), or
because welfare take-up among the “would-be” eligible has fallen. We have provided a partial answer to
this question because we have reported estimates that also indicate a decline in fertility and, among 19
year olds, non-marital fertility. This pattern suggests that the decline in welfare use is partly the result of
a decline in eligibility.
To answer the question of whether or not there has been a decline in take-up among eligible
young women, we examine welfare use and living arrangements for young women who have had a birth.
These estimates should shed light on the question of whether or not take-up among eligible women has
been affected by welfare reform. Estimates are presented in Tables 11 and 12 for young women aged 17
and 19, respectively. We limit the sample to mothers from high-risk families, as the number of births to
young women from low-risk families was too small to carry out meaningful analysis. Estimates in row 2
of Table 11 indicate that there has been a significant decline in welfare take-up between cohorts among
young women aged 17, although not all estimates are statistically significant. The large standard errors
reflect the relatively small sample size—approximately 300 in Table 11. Focusing on row 2 of Table 11,
estimates suggest that the welfare take-up rate is approximately 10 percentage points, or approximately 50
percent, lower among the 1997 cohort than among the 1979 cohort.
In contrast to the results for 17 year olds, estimates in Table 12 suggest that the welfare take-up
rate is approximately equal among young women aged 19 in the NLS97 and NLSY79. There is some
evidence of a decline in current welfare use among this group, but the estimated effects in row 2 and 4 of
table 12 are not statistically significant, even though they are quite large in magnitude. Moreover, there is
no evidence of an inter-cohort decline in ever receiving welfare. The sample size for this analysis is
22

substantial—approximately 800 young women—so large standard errors are not caused by small samples.
In sum, estimates in Table 12 suggest little change in inter-cohort welfare take-up among young women
of this age.
If young women aged 17 are having births as teenagers and not getting welfare, how are they
surviving? A partial answer to this question is found in Table 11. Estimates in Table 11 suggest that
fertility, marriage, living with parents, and welfare use are all highly related. The most dramatic change
between the two cohorts is the enormous jump in the proportion of teen mothers who live with a parent
and do not receive welfare; an increase of 32 percentage points (row 2), or a near doubling. The
proportion of young mothers living with a spouse and off of welfare, decreased 27 percentage points (row
2). It is tempting to conclude from the evidence in Table 11 that the inter-cohort decline in welfare takeup is the result of a greater reliance on family resources and a substitution of family for public resources.
But, estimates in Table 12 also suggest that mothers aged 19 are more likely to be living with a parent and
not on welfare, and less likely to be living with a spouse and not on welfare, despite the lack of a marked
decline in welfare take-up among this group.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have described changes after welfare reform in welfare use and in behaviors
related to the future use of public assistance. Our analysis focused on young women aged 17 and 19.
Critical decisions related to schooling and fertility are made in the teen years that are thought to have
lasting effects upon economic status. The ability of welfare reform policies to alter behaviors among this
group is considered a key to the long-term success of welfare reform.
We find evidence that welfare reform has been associated with reduced welfare receipt, reduced
fertility, reduced rates of marriage, and lower rates of dropping out of high school among young women
at high risk of welfare receipt. In addition, we find some evidence that welfare reform is associated with
reduced non-marital fertility among older high-risk teenagers.

23

Evidence of lower welfare use among teens implies that the widely noted decline in the welfare
caseload is not solely a matter of an increase in the rate of leaving welfare or a decline in recidivism
(perhaps because of work requirements and time limits), but also because of a decline in the rate of initial
entry.9 We explored whether the decline in welfare entry is explained by lower take-up among the wouldbe eligible, or a decline in qualifying behaviors (fertility, marriage, and non-marital fertility), and we
found some evidence for both. Although political conservatives and liberals may debate whether
declining take up of welfare among poor teen mothers is desirable, liberals and conservatives would
probably agree that behavioral changes that reduce the need for welfare would be preferable to decreased
take-up among poor teenage mothers.
The pattern of welfare use appears to vary by age. Among 17 year olds, the decline of welfare
use is accounted for by a reduction in take-up of benefits among high-risk teen mothers. There was no
evidence of change in their “qualifying behaviors” such as reduced non-marital fertility. Among 19 year
olds, in contrast, there is little evidence of a decline in take up (ever use) among mothers, but there is
some evidence of a decrease in non-marital fertility, which would make them less likely to qualify for
welfare. Still, the evidence indicates that “current” welfare use among 19-year-old mothers has fallen.
The combination of reduced “current” use with constant “ever” use suggests that welfare reform may
have shortened durations of use among 19 year-old mothers.
If teen mothers are less likely to use welfare, how are they getting by? There is evidence that
welfare reform has been associated with a substantial increase in living at home (i.e., living with at least
one parent) among teen mothers, so that family resources appear to have been substituted, at least to a
degree, for public resources.10 However, the evidence on this point was not definitive, and it further
research needs to document whether or not these changes represent continuations of ongoing trends or
appear to be more abrupt changes roughly coincident with welfare reform. Nevertheless, whether
causally related to welfare reform or not, data on living arrangements clearly help describe how
9

We present hazard models for initial welfare entry in Kaestner, Korenman, and O’Neill 2002.

24

disadvantaged teen mothers are surviving without welfare. Whether increased living with a parent is a
development that will prove beneficial to teen mothers and their children, and to the grandparents and
other family members, remains a subject for future research.
Our results are somewhat sensitive to the model specification, but particularly to the simultaneous
inclusion of controls for state fixed effects and state unemployment rates and welfare benefits. Our
analysis of this issue points to a multicollinearity problem. In particular, the results were not especially
sensitive to adding either state fixed-effects (not shown in the tables) or state welfare benefits and
unemployment rates. Therefore, our preferred results (upon which we base our conclusions) are those
from “model 2”, which includes controls for age, race, and ethnicity, family background (high or low SES
group, defined on the basis of parental education and family structure), and state unemployment rates and
welfare benefit levels, but which excludes state fixed effects. The sensitivity of results to the inclusion of
state fixed-effects in models than include controls for state policy and economic characteristics is,
unfortunately, typical of the AFDC/TANF literature (see Moffitt 2002), and accounts in part for the broad
range of research results in that literature.
Finally, because data are currently available to follow the 1997 cohort only through the teen
years, we are unable to consider longer-term effects of welfare reform on behavior. For example, welfare
reform may have changed only the timing of non-marital fertility; the 1997 cohort may have reduced rates
of teen non-marital fertility but elevated rates of non-marital fertility in their twenties. Whether a change
in fertility timing induced by welfare reform would ultimately improve long-term economic status
remains an open question (e.g., Hayes 1987; Geronimus 1996; Hotz et al. 1999).

10

Welfare reform is also associated with reduced chances that a teen mother will live with a spouse, but this
proportion was small even in the earlier cohort.

25

References
Ashenfelter, O. and C. Rouse. 2000. Schooling, intelligence and income in America. In K. Arrow, S.
Bowles, and S. Durlauf, eds. Meritocracy and economic inequality. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bane, M.J.and D.T. Ellwood. 1994. Welfare realities. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bertrand, Marrianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. How much should we trust
difference-in-differences estimates? NBER WP 8841. March.
Brauner, Sarah and Pamela Loprest. 1999. Where are they now? What states' studies of people who left
welfare tell us. The Urban Institute Series A, No. A-32. May.
Cancian, Maria, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan, Daniel Meyer, and Barbara Wolfe. 1999. Work,
earnings, and well-being after welfare: What do we know? In Sheldon H. Danziger, ed. Economic
conditions and welfare reform. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Corcoran, Mary and Susana Loeb. 1999. Will wages grow with experience for welfare mothers? Focus
20(2): 20-22.
Geronimus. A.T. 1997. Teenage childbearing and personal responsibility: An alternative view. Political
Science Quarterly. 112(3):405-430.
Grogger, Jeff. 2000. Time limits and welfare use. NBER Working Paper 7709. May.
Hayes, C. ed. 1987. Risking the Future: Adolescent Sexuality, Pregnancy and Childbearing. Washington
D.C. National Academy Press.
Hill, M. Anne and June O'Neill. 1993. Underclass behaviors in the United States: Measurement and
analysis of determinants. Center for the Study of Business and Government, Baruch College/CUNY.
Horvath, Ann and Elizabeth Peters. 1999. Welfare waivers and nonmarital childbearing. Unpublished
manuscript, Cornell University.
Hotz, V.J., S. W. McElroy and S.G. Sanders. 1999. Teenage childbearing and its life cycle consequences:
Exploiting a natural experiment. NBER WP 7397. October.
Jencks, Christopher and Joseph Swingle. 2000. Without at net: Whom the new welfare law helps and
hurts. The American Prospect vol. 11, no.4, January 23.
Kaestner, Robert, Sanders Korenman and June O’Neill. 2002. The Effect of Welfare Reform on Welfare
Use, Fertility, and Marriage of Disadvantaged Teenage Girls,” Final Report to The Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation United States Department of Health and Human Services.
Kaushal, Neeraj and Robert Kaestner. 2001. "Immigrant and Native Responses to Welfare Reform."
NBER Working Paper No 8541. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kaushal, Neeraj and Robert Kaestner. 2001. "Welfare to Work: Has Welfare Reform Worked?" Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 20(4), 699-719.

26

Kearney, Melissa Schettini. 2001. “Is there an effect of incremental welfare benefits on fertility behavior?
A look at the family cap. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Levine, Phillip. 2002. “The impact of social policy and economic activity throughout the fertility tree.
Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, Wellesley College.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2000. Making single mothers work: Recent tax and welfare
policy and its effects. NBER WP 7491. January.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 1999. Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the labor
supply of single mothers. NBER Working Paper 7363, September.
Moffitt, Robert A., Ed.1998. Welfare, the family, and reproductive behavior: Research Perspectives.
Washington, D.C. : National Academy Press
Moffitt, Robert A. 1999. The effect of pre-PRWORA waivers on AFDC caseloads and female earnings,
income, and labor force behavior. In Sheldon H. Danziger, ed. Economic conditions and welfare reform.
Kalmazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute.
Moffitt, R. A. 2002. The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program. NBER Working Paper
8749. January.
Moffitt, Robert A. and Michele Ver Ploeg, Eds. 1999. Evaluating welfare reform: A framework and
review of current work. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
O'Neill, David and June E. O'Neill. 1997. Lessons for welfare reform: An analysis of the AFDC caseload
and past welfare-to-work programs. Kalamazoo, MI.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
O'Neill, June E., L.J.Bassi and D.Wolf. 1987. The duration of welfare spells. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 69(2):241-248)
O’Neill, June E. and M. Anne Hill. 2001. Gaining ground? Measuring the impact of welfare reform on
welfare and work. Civic Report No. 17. Manhattan Institute.
Schoeni, Robert F. and Rebecca M. Blank. 2000. What has welfare reform accomplished: Impacts on
welfare participation, employment, income, poverty and family structure. NBER Working Paper 7627,
March.
US DHHS. 2000. Admistration for Children and Families, http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/tables.htm,
June 6, 2000. Accessed June 16, 2000.
US DOL. 2000. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment characteristics of families in 1999.
http://stats.bls.gov/newsrels. June 15, 2000. Accessed June 19, 2000

27

Table 1
Relationship of Family Background to Respondent Welfare Use
Respondent’s Family Structure
at Age 14, Mother’s Education

One-parent, < 12 Yrs. Educ.
One-parent, =12 Yrs. Educ.
One-parent, >12 Yrs. Educ.
Two-parent, < 12 Yrs. Educ.
Two-parent, =12 Yrs. Educ.
Two-parent, >12 Yrs. Educ.

Number of
Observations

Percentage of Respondents
Ever to Receive AFDC by
Age 20

307
155
60
611
539
206

26.7
20.6
1.7
13.6
6.9
1.9

Source: NLSY79

28

0.097
(N=1485)

0.025
(N=1533)

High Risk

0.020
(N=1057)

0.003
(N=1080)

Low Risk

0.043
(N=736)

0.043
(N=736)

0.005**
(N=1980)

0.005**
(N=1980)

All

0.053**
(N=500)

0.075
(N=363)

0.008**
(N=1279)

0.011**
(N=929)

High Risk

0.029
(N=228)

0.023
(N=365)

0.001
(N=689)

0.001
(N=1039)

Low Risk

1997 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1997 and 1999

Notes:
1. Weights are baseline interview sample weights.
2. Observations included in 1979 cohort are aged 17 or less at baseline.
3. High, absolute-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 14, mother has 12 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has fewer than 12
years of education.
4. In 1997, high relative-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 12, mother who has 13 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has 12
or fewer years of education. Absolute and relative risk groups are the same for 1979 cohort.
5. Asterisks (**) next to a number indicate that it is statistically (p<0.05) different from the corresponding 1979 figure.

Relative Risk

Absolute Risk

Age 19
0.054
(N=2549)

0.013
(N=2620)

Absolute Risk

Relative Risk

All

Age 17

1979 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1979 and 1984

Sample-Weighted Proportions (Unweighted Sample Counts)

Table 2
Ever Received Welfare (AFDC/TANF) by Age and Risk Status

29

0.278
(N=2343)

0.109
(N=1533)

High Risk

0.085
(N=1811)

0.023
(N=1080)

Low Risk

0.167
(N=736)

0.167
(N=736)

0.059
(N=1983)

0.059
(N=1983)

All

0.188**
(N=505)

0.240
(N=367)

0.083**
(N=1281)

0.113
(N=931)

High Risk

0.128**
(N=229)

0.114
(N=367)

0.025
(N=690)

0.024
(N=1040)

Low Risk

1997 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1997 and 1999

30

Notes:
1. Weights are baseline interview sample weights.
2. Observations included in 1979 cohort are aged 17 or less at baseline.
3. High, absolute-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 14, mother has 12 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has fewer than 12
years of education.
4. In 1997, high relative-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 12, mother who has 13 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has 12 or
fewer years of education. Absolute and relative risk groups are the same for 1979 cohort.
5. Asterisks (**) next to a number indicate that it is statistically (p<0.05) different from the corresponding 1979 figure.

Relative Risk

Absolute Risk

Age 19
0.170
(N=4162)

0.061
(N=2620)

Absolute Risk

Relative Risk

All

Age 17

1979 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1979 and 1984

Sample-Weighted Proportions (Unweighted Sample Counts)

Table 3
Ever Had a Birth by Age and Risk Status

0.148
(N=2343)

0.064
(N=1533)

High Risk

0.035
(N=1811)

0.012
(N=1080)

Low Risk

0.142**
(N=736)

0.142**
(N=736)

0.057**
(N=1983)

0.057**
(N=1983)

All

0.157
(N=505)

0.197**
(N=367)

0.080
(N=1281)

0.108**
(N=931)

High Risk

0.112**
(N=229)

0.101**
(N=367)

0.025**
(N=690)

0.024**
(N=1040)

Low Risk

1997 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1997 and 1999

31

Notes:
1. Weights are baseline interview sample weights.
2. Observations included in 1979 cohort are aged 17 or less at baseline.
3. High, absolute-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 14, mother has 12 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has fewer than 12
years of education.
4. In 1997, high relative-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 12, mother who has 13 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has 12
or fewer years of education. Absolute and relative risk groups are the same for 1979 cohort.
5. Asterisks (**) next to a number indicate that it is statistically (p<0.05) different from the corresponding 1979 figure.

Relative Risk

Absolute Risk

Age 19
0.085
(N=4162)

0.035
(N=2620)

Absolute Risk

Relative Risk

All

Age 17

1979 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1979 and 1984

Sample-Weighted Proportions (Unweighted Sample Counts)

Table 4
Ever Had a Nonmarital Birth by Age and Risk Status

0.272
(N=2338)

0.087
(N=1532)

High Risk

0.130
(N=1817)

0.022
(N=1082)

Low Risk

0.077**
(N=736)

0.077**
(N=736)

0.009**
(N=1970)

0.009**
(N=1970)

All

0.084**
(N=495)

0.085**
(N=359)

0.011**
(N=1272)

0.015**
(N=922)

High Risk

0.062**
(N=225)

0.069**
(N=361)

0.004**
(N=686)

0.004**
(N=1036)

Low Risk

1997 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1997 and 1999

32

Notes:
1. Weights are baseline interview sample weights.
2. Observations included in 1979 cohort are aged 17 or less at baseline.
3. High, absolute-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 14, mother has 12 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has fewer than 12
years of education.
4. In 1997, high relative-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 12, mother who has 13 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has 12
or fewer years of education. Absolute and relative risk groups are the same for 1979 cohort.
5. Asterisks (**) next to a number indicate that it is statistically (p<0.05) different from the corresponding 1979 figure.

Relative Risk

Absolute Risk

Age 19
0.192
(N=4163)

0.051
(N=2621)

Absolute Risk

Relative Risk

All

Age 17

1979 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1979 and 1984

Sample-Weighted Proportions (Unweighted Sample Counts)

Table 5
Ever Married by Age and Risk Status

0.255
(N=2363)

0.209
(N=1543)

High Risk

0.064
(N=1825)

0.051
(N=1084)

Low Risk

0.122
(N=767)

0.122
(N=767)

0.103**
(N=1997)

0.103**
(N=1997)

All

0.160**
(N=517)

0.219
(N=374)

0.132**
(N=1289)

0.167**
(N=922)

High Risk

0.056
(N=242)

0.055
(N=385)

0.059
(N=695)

0.060
(N=1045)

Low Risk

1997 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1997 and 1999

33

Notes:
1. Weights are baseline interview sample weights.
2. Observations included in 1979 cohort are aged 17 or less at baseline.
3. High, absolute-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 14, mother has 12 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has fewer than 12
years of education.
4. In 1997, high relative-risk group: lived in single-female headed family at age 12, mother who has 13 or fewer years of education, or two-parent family, mother has 12
or fewer years of education. Absolute and relative risk groups are the same for 1979 cohort.
5. Asterisks (**) next to a number indicate that it is statistically (p<0.05) different from the corresponding 1979 figure.

Relative Risk

Absolute Risk

Age 19
0.148
(N=4196)

0.122
(N=2634)

Absolute Risk

Relative Risk

All

Age 17

1979 Cohort, Age 17 and 19 between 1979 and 1984

Sample-Weighted Proportions (Unweighted Sample Counts)

Table 6
Drop Out Status by Age and Risk Status

Table 7
Cohort Differences in Welfare Receipt, Fertility, Marriage and Education of Young Women Age 17 by Relative Risk Status

Mode
l

Cohort Difference

Ever

AFDC/TANF

Ever Had
Birth

Ever
Nonmarital
Birth

Ever
Married

Current
Drop Out

High Risk 97 – High Risk 79
1

Adjusted Difference:
age and race/ethnicity

-0.013**
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.016)

0.029*
(0.016)

-0.069**
(0.011)

-0.081**
(0.020)

2

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

-0.014
(0.010)

-0.027
(0.022)

0.029*
(0.016)

-0.092**
(0.011)

-0.127**
(0.022)

3

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

0.002
(0.016)

0.023
(0.032)

0.077**
(0.027)

-0.104**
(0.017)

-0.102**
(0.041)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.000
(0.008)

0.018**
(0.005)

-0.025**
(0.005)

-0.026**
(0.011)

5

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, cohort, and state
Low Risk 97 – Low Risk 79

0.001
(0.003)

0.013
(0.007)

0.028**
(0.005)

-0.020**
(0.006)

-0.009
(0.013)

1

Adjusted Difference:
age and race/ethnicity

-0.001
(0.003)

0.008
(0.010)

0.017*
(0.009)

-0.011**
(0.006)

0.011
(0.017)

2

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

0.002
(0.002)

0.025
(0.017)

0.030**
(0.015)

-0.015*
(0.008)

0.021
(0.021)

3

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

0.005
(0.005)

0.009
(0.016)

0.018
(0.016)

-0.022
(0.014)

0.064**
(0.029)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

0.000
(0.001)

0.010
(0.007)

0.012*
(0.006)

-0.005*
(0.003)

0.012
(0.008)

5

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, state, and cohort

0.000
(0.001)

0.006
(0.006)

0.007
(0.005)

0.000
(0.005)

0.017*
(0.011)

Notes:
1. Model 1 includes controls for age (age in months) and race/ethnicity (3 categories).
2. Model 2 includes model 1 controls plus: contemporaneous state unemployment rate, three lags of state unemployment rate,
contemporaneous state AFDC/TANF maximum benefit level for a family of 3, and three lags of state AFDC/TANF benefit
level.
3. Model 3 includes model 2 controls plus: state dummy variables.
4. Model 4 includes model 3 controls plus: a variable measuring the number of years since state implemented time limited
benefits for welfare receipt. The effect of this variable is derived from a comparison between members of the 1979 cohort
and members of the 1997 cohort who live in states with time limited benefits. A dummy variable is included to identify
members of the 1997 cohort who live in states without time-limited benefits.
5. Robust (cluster on state) standard errors are in parentheses. ** p ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p ≤ 0.10

34

Table 8
Difference-in-Differences Estimates
Cohort Differences in Welfare Receipt, Fertility, Marriage and Education of Young Women Age 17
By Relative Risk Status

Model

Difference-in-Differences (DD)

Ever
AFDC/TANF

Ever Had a
Birth

Ever
Nonmarital
Birth

Ever
Married

Current Drop
Out

2

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC benefit level

-0.016*
(0.010)

-0.052*
(0.028)

-0.001
(0.022)

-0.077**
(0.014)

-0.148**
(0.030)

3

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC benefit level, and state

-0.003
(0.017)

0.014
(0.036)

0.059**
(0.031)

-0.082**
(0.022)

-0.166**
(0.050)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC benefit level, and cohort

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.010
(0.011)

0.006
(0.008)

-0.020**
(0.006)

-0.038**
(0.014)

5

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC benefit level, cohort, and state

0.001
(0.003)

0.007
(0.009)

0.021**
(0.009)

-0.020**
(0.008)

-0.026
(0.017)

Notes:
1.
2.
3.

Model numbers refer to those in Table 7
Standard errors of estimates in Table 8 are calculated assuming no covariance between the estimates in the top and bottom
panels of Table 7
** p ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p ≤ 0.10

35

Table 9
Cohort Differences in Welfare Receipt, Fertility, Marriage and Education of Young Women Age 19 by Relative Risk Status

Model

Cohort Difference

Ever

AFDC/TANF

Ever Had a
Birth

Ever
Nonmarital
Birth

Ever
Married

Current
Drop Out

High Risk 97 – High Risk 79
1

Adjusted Difference:
age and race/ethnicity

-0.036**
(0.017)

-0.091**
(0.022)

0.011
(0.023)

-0.186**
(0.020)

-0.103**
(0.024)

2

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

-0.030
(0.021)

-0.112**
(0.022)

0.024
(0.025)

-0.259**
(0.034)

-0.135**
(0.029)

3

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

0.030
(0.049)

0.007
(0.044)

0.094**
(0.042)

-0.167**
(0.043)

-0.074*
(0.052)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.033**
(0.006)

0.009
(0.007)

-0.081**
(0.011)

-0.041**
(0.010)

5

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, cohort, and
state
Low Risk 97 – Low Risk 79

0.007
(0.014)

-0.007
(0.014)

0.024*
(0.013)

-0.053**
(0.013)

-0.017
(0.014)

1

Adjusted Difference:
age and race/ethnicity

0.004
(0.009)

0.036
(0.022)

0.066**
(0.019)

-0.058**
(0.023)

-0.018
(0.015)

2

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

0.019
(0.014)

0.040
(0.026)

0.084**
(0.023)

-0.120**
(0.022)

-0.031
(0.019)

3

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

0.009
(0.019)

0.105**
(0.050)

0.119**
(0.040)

-0.088*
(0.047)

-0.015
(0.048)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

0.003
(0.003)

0.013
(0.009)

0.024**
(0.008)

-0.038**
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.006)

5

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, cohort, and
state

0.003
(0.004)

0.034**
(0.015)

0.032**
(0.012)

-0.022
(0.014)

-0.005
(0.013)

Notes: (see notes following Table 7)
1. For the outcome “ever AFDC/TANF”, the 1979 cohort is restricted to young women age 17 or less at baseline.

36

Table 10
Difference-in-Differences Estimates
Cohort Differences in Welfare Receipt, Fertility, Marriage and Education of Young women Age 19
By Relative Risk Status

Model

Difference-in-Differences (DD)

Ever
AFDC/TANF

Ever Had a
Birth

Ever
Nonmarital
Birth

Ever
Married

Current
Drop Out

2

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

-0.049*
(0.025)

-0.152**
(0.034)

-0.060*
(0.034)

-0.139**
(0.041)

-0.104**
(0.035)

3

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

0.021
(0.053)

-0.098
(0.067)

-0.025
(0.058)

-0.079
(0.064)

-0.059
(0.071)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

-0.011
(0.008)

-0.046**
(0.011)

-0.015
(0.011)

-0.043**
(0.013)

-0.035**
(0.012)

5

Adjusted DD:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, cohort, and
state

0.004
(0.015)

-0.041*
(0.021)

-0.008
(0.018)

-0.031
(0.019)

-0.012
(0.019)

Notes:
1.
2.
3.

Model numbers refer to those in Table 9.
Standard errors of estimates in Table 10 are calculated assuming no covariance between the estimates in the top and bottom
panels of Table 9.
** p ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p ≤ 0.10

37

Table 11
Cohort Differences in Welfare Receipt and Living Arrangements, Mothers Age 17, By Relative Risk Status
Coefficients (robust SEs) From Linear Probability Models

Model

Cohort Difference
High Risk 97 – High Risk 79

Ever
AFDC/TANF

Current
AFDC/TANF

No Current AFDC,
Live w/ Parent

No Current AFDC,
Live w/ Spouse

1

Adjusted Difference:
age and race/ethnicity

-0.121*
(0.063)

-0.166**
(0.070)

0.318**
(0.064)

-0.220**
(0.054)

2

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

-0.110
(0.076)

-0.098
(0.073)

0.320**
(0.092)

-0.268**
(0.052)

3

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

-0.006
(0.117)

-0.028
(0.123)

0.472**
(0.233)

-0.370**
(0.104)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

-0.038
(0.027)

-0.033
(0.024)

0.135**
(0.027)

-0.082**
(0.024)

5

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, cohort, and
state

-0.003
(0.030)

-0.011
(0.034)

0.147**
(0.047)

-0.108**
(0.040)

Notes:
1. Sample is limited to teenage young women who have had a child.
2. Model 1 includes controls for age (age in months) and race/ethnicity (3 categories).
3. Model 2 includes model 1 controls plus: contemporaneous state unemployment rate, three lags of state unemployment rate,
contemporaneous state AFDC/TANF benefit level for a family of three, and three lags of state AFDC/TANF benefit level.
4. Model 3 includes model 2 controls plus: state dummy variables.
5. Model 4 includes model 3 controls plus: a variable measuring the number of years since state implemented time limited
benefits for welfare receipt. The effect of this variable is derived from a comparison between members of the 1979 cohort
and members of the 1997 cohort who live in states with time limited benefits. A dummy variable is included to identify
members of the 1997 cohort who live in states without time-limited benefits.
6. Robust (cluster on state) standard errors are in parentheses. ** p ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p ≤ 0.10

38

Table 12
Cohort Differences in Welfare Receipt and Living Arrangements, Mothers Age 19 By Relative Risk Status
Coefficients (robust SEs) From Linear Probability Models

Model

Cohort Difference
High Risk 97 – High Risk 79

Ever
AFDC/TANF

Current
AFDC/TANF

No Current AFDC,
Live w/ Parent

No Current AFDC,
Live w/ Spouse

1

Adjusted Difference:
age and race/ethnicity

-0.038
(0.066)

-0.161**
(0.041)

0.214**
(0.056)

-0.317**
(0.048)

2

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment, and
AFDC/TANF benefit level

0.007
(0.074)

-0.070
(0.044)

0.188**
(0.054)

-0.405**
(0.061)

3

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and state

0.096
(0.147)

0.028
(0.074)

-0.011
(0.118)

-0.416**
(0.098)

Effect of Years Since Time Limit
4

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, and cohort

0.004
(0.026)

-0.021
(0.015)

0.064**
(0.018)

-0.129**
(0.021)

5

Adjusted Difference:
age, race/ethnicity, unemployment,
AFDC/TANF benefit level, cohort, and
state

0.020
(0.039)

0.003
(0.019)

0.023
(0.027)

-0.116**
(0.024)

Notes:
1. Sample is limited to teenage young women who have had a child. For the outcome “ever received AFDC”, the 1979 cohort
is limited to young women age 17 or less at baseline.

39

