                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE NEW ECONOMY AND THE CHALLENGES FOR MACROECONOMIC POLICY


                                         Stephen G. Cecchetti


                                         Working Paper 8935
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8935


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




This paper was prepared for the conference “The New Economy: What’s New About It?” George Bush
School of Government and Public Policy, Texas A&M University, 19 April 2002. An early version of this
paper was prepared for the Conference on "New Technologies: Consequences and Challenges for Central
Banks," Banque de France, 1-9 February 2001. I would like to thank Stefan Krause and Roisin O'Sullivan
of Ohio State; Richard Peach, Donald Rissmiller and Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York; and Guhan Venkatu of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; for assistance in helping me clarify
ideas, collect data, and construct charts. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Stephen G. Cecchetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy
Stephen G. Cecchetti
NBER Working Paper No. 8935
May 2002
JEL No. E3, E5



                                              ABSTRACT

        The accelerated introduction of information and communications technology into the economy
has created numerous challenges for policymakers. This paper describes this New Economy and then
proceeds to examine difficulties created for policymakers. The increased flexibility of the new economy
argues against trying to use fiscal policy for stabilization and creates both immediate and long-term
difficulties for monetary policy. Immediate difficulties concern the problems associated with estimating
potential output when the productivity trend is shifting. During periods of transition, it is extremely
difficult to distinguish permanent from transitory shifts in output growth, and adjust policy correctly. In
the long-term, central banks must face the prospect of a significant decline in the demand for their
liabilities, and a resulting loss of their primary interest rate policy instrument. The disappearance of the
demand for central bank money for interbank settlement seems very unlikely, and so this concern seems
unwarranted.




Stephen G. Cecchetti
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
614-292-9339
cecchetti.1@osu.edu
http://economics.sbs.ohio-state.edu/cecchetti/
           “In the new economy, many of the old classical rules of economics no
           longer apply; over the years, the U.S. has made and learned new rules all
           its own.” Time Magazine, December 31, 1958.


1. Introduction
           The new economy poses many old challenges. Computers and the internet have
reduced the cost of providing and obtaining information, but so did telephones and
televisions 50 years ago. The difficulties of integrating new technology into the
production of goods and services may be somewhat less than in the past, but the upheaval
caused by it does not seem qualitatively different from what we have seen since the
beginning of the Industrial Revolution.1 There are surely many difficult challenges, but
they are not new.


           For macroeconomic policy the story is similar. The goal of macroeconomic policy
is to assure high and stable growth with low and stable inflation. The details of how to do
this remain illusive. The job of fiscal and monetary policy makers has always been
complex, and it is surely not getting any easier. But again, this is not new. Economists
continue to argue about the potential for government tax and expenditure policies to
stabilize the economy, and the decades-long debate over the exact nature of the monetary
transmission mechanism continues. It is as impossible now to give detailed advice to
policymakers about when and by how much to adjust their instruments as it was 30 years
ago.


           Monetary and fiscal policies share the job of economic management. Unlike most
government actions, interest rates can be changed literally overnight. By contrast,
changing tax and expenditure policies usually means legislative action, making it very
slow. Monetary policy is a much better stabilization tool, while fiscal policy should
focus on building solid foundations for long-term growth. The fact that today’s economy
is more nimble in responding to shocks places these roles into even starker relief than


1
    DeLong and Summers (2001) place the most recent new economy into historical perspective.
Cecchetti         The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                1


they were a decade ago. Ensuring short-term economic stability in today’s world is the
job of the central bank, and that is where I will focus my attention.


        Ever-faster computers and telecommunications equipment have created new
challenges for central bankers. Most importantly, the economy has become naturally
more resilient over the past decade. We have seen important changes in the structure of
goods, labor and financial markets. As the economy has become more nimble in
adjusting to external shocks, policymakers must become more agile in their reactions.
The central bankers’ job has become more difficult, since they need to recognize risks
and act more quickly, but at the same time, the costs of inaction may have gone down, as
the economy seems to heal itself more rapidly.


        Even in the new economy, the primary challenges facing monetary policymakers
in their daily work are the same as they have ever been. Stabilizing prices means
forecasting inflation, which requires estimates of the sustainable, or potential, growth rate
of the economy. As if this isn’t a sufficiently daunting task, central bankers would be
helpless without some idea of how changes in their interest rate instrument will alter the
path of future output and inflation.


        Difficulties in estimating potential GDP growth have been with us since the
concept was first introduced more than 40 years ago. Over the years, trend productivity
growth has undergone occasional periods of transition when estimating future potential
output has been very difficult. In the U.S., we entered such a period in the middle 1990s,
and things have not stabilized yet. For policymakers, the problem is that it takes time to
realize that the trend rate of growth has shifted. Charts 1 and 2, which plot real GDP
growth and output per hour for the U.S. from 1980 to 2001, make this point abundantly
clear. It is nearly impossible to tell even in hindsight that the growth rate in potential
GDP rose markedly in the mid-1990s.


        The recent change in the productivity growth rate is not unprecedented. The
increase in the sustainable growth rate of the American economy is in many ways just the
Cecchetti          The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                   2


mirror image of the slowdown that came in the mid-1970s. Then, the sustainable growth
rate of the American economy fell from roughly 4% to a level closer to 2½%. Coming at
a time of substantial domestic and international turbulence, it took several years to realize
that the change had occurred.


        Beyond the difficulties created by shifts in the sustainable growth rate of the
economy, the structural underpinnings of the economy are constantly evolving. Over the
1990s we can point to three very important, and probably lasting, changes. Technology
has been used to make production more responsive to changes in product demand,
thereby reducing the level of inventories. The growth in the proportion of workers hired
on a temporary basis had given companies the ability to adjust the size of their workforce
rapidly in response to changing business conditions. And finally, innovations in finance
have helped to assure that companies and consumers have access to resources even when
times are tough.


        The evolution of the financial system poses a particularly difficult challenge for
central bankers. Since monetary policy acts initially through its impact on the balance
sheets of financial firms, the explosion of asset-backed securities has likely changed the
mechanism by which interest rate changes affect the real economy. As more borrowers
have access to primary capital markets, and fewer need banks, it may become more
difficult for the actions of central bankers to alter the future path of output and inflation.


        Reduced demand for cash and reserves, the primary liabilities issued by the
central bank, poses a second challenge to central bankers. But again, this problem is not
new. The metamorphosis of the financial system has been ongoing for decades, if not
centuries. And, as a result, the changes in the monetary transmission mechanism have
been continuous. One clear sign of this is the constant attempts to broaden the set of
financial instruments that are included in a given monetary aggregate, in the belief that
the liquidity of the new instruments are somehow equivalent to that of those that were in
the previous definition. But the connection between the elements of the central bank
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                           3


balance sheet and the monetary aggregate has never been that tight anyway, and so it is
difficult mourn the further decline in their usefulness as policy guides.


        What is new is the widespread belief that the rate of change in the financial
system has somehow increased, and so the end game, where demand for cash and
reserves have dropped to zero, may be fast approaching. My own view is that the
difficulties this poses for central bankers are still several decades off.2


        In the remainder of this essay, I will discuss both short- and long-term challenges
that the evolution of the macroeconomic structure poses for fiscal and monetary policy.
In Section II, I present evidence of the changes wrought over the past decade or so. I
focus first on the reduced cyclical volatility of U.S. growth, then on the increase in the
level of average growth, and finally on the sources of the low inflation of the last half of
the 1990s. Section III discusses the implications of these changes for fiscal and monetary
policy. In the final section, I provide some comments on my views on how information
technology will transform policy in the longer run.


2. Elements of the “New” Economy

        The United States economy has evolved significantly from what it was just twenty
years ago. Today, information technology is everywhere. Once the preserve of scientific
laboratories and the back offices of financial institutions, today semiconductors are
buried inside home appliances and automobiles. Computer chips control everything from
elevators to airplane traffic.


        The internet, initiated several decades ago by the United States Department of
Defense in an effort to link research universities together, has now grown into an
important part of domestic and international commerce. I no longer have to leave my

2
 This topic has been the subject of heated debate over the past few years. The papers on "The Future of
Monetary Policy" by Charles A.E. Goodhart, Michael Woodford, Charles Freedman and Benjamin
Freedman that have appeared in the July 2000 issue of the journal International Finance provide a
comprehensive summary of the issues.
Cecchetti         The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                4


desk to shop for and purchase books, clothes, furniture, or virtually anything else. It is
even simple to order wine, cheese and chocolate by clicking. Not only that, but I can
place my order 24 hours a day, 7 days a week while sitting in my home wearing nothing
but my underwear. This is all truly revolutionary.


        As computers became both ubiquitous and increasingly powerful, two things
happened. First, in the mid-1980s, the volatility of U.S. GDP growth declined, and then,
in 1995, the level of growth rose. Along with this came a marked fall in average
inflation. The goal of this section is to describe these changes and speculate about their
sources.


2.1 A More Stable Economy


        Using sophisticated statistical procedures, Margaret Mary McConnell and Gabriel
Perez Quiros (2000) establish that what our eyes suggest is in Chart 1 is really there.
They show that growth has been markedly less volatile since 1984 than it was in the
preceding 25 years.


        McConnell and Perez Quiros attribute the fall in aggregate volatility to a change
in the inventory behavior of durable goods manufacturers. In the past, unintended shifts
in inventory levels have been blamed for a significant part of business-cycle fluctuations.
When demand fell, manufacturers would find themselves with substantial unsold stock
and be forced to cut back on production, reducing employment and leading to an overall
economic downturn. Beginning in the mid-1980s, the inventory to sales ratio of these
manufacturers began to decline, and it continued to decline steadily through the 1990s.
Chart 3 tracks the fall for the goods producing sector from an average of 2.1 prior to 1984
to a level of 1.54 by the end of 2001. (These figures can be interpreted as number of
quarters supply on hand.) Technology has enabled companies to keep better track of
production and sales, speeding the rate at which they are able to response to changes in
demand. Techniques like just-in-time inventory control policies have reduced the
amplitude of inventory fluctuations and stabilized overall economic activity.
Cecchetti          The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy              5



          The general resilience and stability of the U.S. economy is nowhere more
apparent than in the 2000-2001 episode. This mini-recession, with a peak to trough GDP
decline of less than one-quarter of one percent, clearly demonstrates the new recuperative
powers of the U.S. economy. Moreover, Chart 3 suggests that inventory policy played an
important role. This is the only recession during which the inventory-to-sales ratio has
fallen.


          The change in inventory control policies is only one of several things contributing
to the speedy recovery from the 2001 downturn. Changes in labor and financial markets
also played a role in increasing the flexibility of the U.S. economy. On the employment
side, there has been a dramatic shift toward temporary help over the past decade. Chart 4
shows that the proportion of employees from temporary help agencies increased from
½% of total nonfarm employment in 1983 to over 2½% by 2000. At its peak in
September 2001 over 3½ million workers were temporary. Not only that, but over the
subsequent 16 months, the fall in temporary help accounted for 70% of the nonfarm
employment decline of 951,000 workers. The recession was concentrated to an
extraordinary degree in this most flexible portion of the labor force, leaving “permanent”
employees in their jobs.


          Turning to financial markets, we have seen significant innovation over the past
decade as well. Once upon a time there were two sources for borrowing: direct debt
issuance and bank borrowing. Most firms and households cannot issue marketable debt,
and so were dependent on banks for financing. Beginning with the creation of mortgage-
backed securities in the early 1970s, things started to change. Today the list of asset-
backed securities now includes home mortgages, car loans, credit card debt, student
loans, equipment leases, movie box-office receipts, and even the future revenues from
British pubs.


          Chart 5 plots total asset-backed securities (from both private and government
issuers) as a percentage of debt that was typically issued by the banking system (this
Cecchetti            The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                             6


includes loans, mortgages and consumer credit).3 Starting at close to zero in 1983, by the
end of 2001, asset-backed securities accounted for 40% of what had previously been
credit held on the balance sheets of financial intermediaries.4 This shift from bank to
marketable debt is important for two reasons. It makes financing more flexible in
response to external shocks, and it makes banks less important. The following example
demonstrates what has happened. During the winter of 2001 as the U.S. economy
slowed, the credit-rating agencies downgraded the large automobile manufacturers,
increasing their borrowing costs. Since the demand for cars was falling, this was
potentially disastrous. How were Ford, GM and DaimlerChrysler going to offer the
financial incentives needed to move the cars off of the dealers’ lots? Without high credit
ratings, it was too expensive for them to borrow directly and make the loans that were
needed to sell the cars. And yet, in the fall of 2001 automobile sales hit records highs, as
buyers were offered very attractive loans to purchase the cars. How did they do it? The
answer is that the car companies created pools of car loans and securitized them. These
car-loan-backed securities had better credit ratings – they were AAA – than the car
companies themselves!5


         This new financial intermediation – through asset-backed securities – gives us all
direct access to capital markets. By finding a broker who will put me into a pool, I now
have direct access to capital markets, and no longer have to rely on a bank. The broker
takes a fee for this service, but I don’t need to worry about the availability of bank credit.
Not only that, but I don’t have to know it is happening to me, nor do I care!


         These three changes – improved inventory control policies, the rise in the use of
temporary help and the increase in the percentage of lending that is marketable – have


3
  The data are from the Federal Reserve’s Flow and Funds. The numerator of the series is Table L125 line 1
plus L126 line 1, financial assets of federally related mortgage pools plus financial assets of private issuers
of asset-backed securities. The denominator is the sum of lines 6, 7, 8 and 9 from Table L4, credit market
debt included bank loans not elsewhere classified, other loans and advances, mortgages and consumer
credit.
4
  Estrella (forthcoming) provides a summary of the increase in asset-backed securities and its likely impact
on monetary policy effectiveness.
5
  See Greg Ip and Russell Gold “ Shock Absorbers: Lessons of Expansion Are Helping Economy Beat
Recession,” Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2002, pg. A1.
Cecchetti             The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                 7


each played a part in the improved performance of the U.S. economy. They have made
the economy more flexible in responding to unexpected events.


2.2 A Faster Growing Economy


           Turning to the increase in the level of U.S. growth, the first line of Table 1 gives
us a sense of what happened over the last quarter of the twentieth century. The table
shows raw average annual growth in business nonfarm output for the periods 1974 to
1990, 1991 to 1995, and 1996 to 1999.6 Growth in the last half of the 1990s was truly
extraordinary. The increase over the first five years of the decade is in excess of two full
percentage points at an annual rate.


           By the end of the 1990s a consensus had developed that the sustainable growth
rate of the U.S. economy had reached at least 4 percent. That is, with the unemployment
rate steady, American GDP could grow at a rate that is now 1½-percentage points higher
than it could only five years ago. Labor productivity growth had risen by the same 1½ -
percentage points and was rising at a rate of at least 3 % per year.7


           What were the sources of this astonishing performance of the U.S. economy in the
latter half of the 1990s? To get some idea we can turn to the Ohliner and Sichel’s (2000)
estimates of the sources of growth, reproduced in Table 1. From their accounting we
learn that that the 2-percentage point rise in U.S. growth had three primary sources:
higher labor inputs, higher investment in information technology capital, and increases in
multifactor productivity. The increase in labor inputs mirrored the decline in the U.S.
unemployment rate from over 5½% in 1995 to 4% five years later. What is most striking
is the importance that Ohliner and Sichel ascribe to the increase in IT investment. By
their estimates, IT investment alone accounted for 0.54 of the 2.08 percentage point rise
in growth, fully one-quarter of the increase in growth. Increased multifactor productivity
growth accounts for 0.7 percentage points of the remaining change. This is the part of the

6
    Table 1 is reproduced from Ohliner and Sichel (2000).
Cecchetti            The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                            8


change that is left unexplained by standard growth accounting. There are a number of
possible interpretations of this increase, one of which is that it represents the increased
productivity arising from the efficient use of technology in production.8


         It is worth looking at the IT data a bit more closely. Table 2 reports that, between
the first and second half of the 1990s, the growth rate in computer hardware inputs
increased from an already impressive 29% to a phenomenal average annual growth rate
of 46%. As a simple matter of accounting, this acceleration in equipment installation is
responsible for all of the increase in productivity growth attributed to information
technology.


         Digging deeper, we see that the increased growth in computer equipment
investment came from the intensification in the U.S. of computer price declines during
this period. The deflator for information technology equipment used by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) to calculate U.S. GDP went from an average of about -15% in
the first half of the decade of the 1990s to an average of nearly -25% in the second half.
If, from 1995 to 1999, the hardware deflator had continued to decline at the more modest
-15% rate, then U.S. growth would have averaged between 0.25 and 0.50 percentage
points less than it was.9 The clear implication is that a significant share of the increase in




7
  At this writing in early 2002, disagreements had resurfaced and estimates of the sustainable growth rate
ranged from 3 to 4 percent.
8
  Before continuing, it is worth pointing out that Robert Gordon has looked at these same numbers and
come to somewhat different conclusions. Gordon makes two points. First, he notes that evaluation of the
changes in the productivity trend requires careful treatment of cyclical factors. From this he concludes that
this accounts for part, but not all of the acceleration of the late 1990s. Second, Gordon’s analysis shows
that the productivity growth increase is concentrated in the durable manufacturing sector. That is, the
improvement in productive efficiency has not been shared across the entire economy, but has been entirely
in less than one-tenth of the economy (measured by employment). See Gordon (2000).
9
  It is important to note that in the U.S., the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) employs hedonic
adjustments, which incorporate improvements in processing speed and memory, for example, directly into
the construction of price indices. Furthermore, because these adjustments have become more important in
recent years and they are not made in most European countries, the differences have increased. During the
first half of the 1990s German and U.S. computer price deflators showed roughly equivalent declines. It is
over the past five years that the two have diverged significantly, with the German deflator showing a
decline of less than 10% on average.
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                               9


the American productivity growth rate is a consequence of measured improvements in the
quality of computer hardware installed by businesses.10


         Before turning to the recent inflation record, it is worth digressing briefly to bring
up the possibility that we are overinvesting in information technology equipment. After
the Nasdaq finished its slow motion crash in mid-2001, newspapers and magazines were
cluttered with pictures of surplus computers piled in warehouses. This “refuse” came
from bankrupt internet companies that had been able to obtain financing because of the
bubble in the Nasdaq. Because it was too cheap to obtain financing, the economy
invested too heavily in computers. Since investment in IT equipment was so big a part of
the new economy productivity acceleration, if it was unjustified then the measured
increase in growth was a mirage.


         Overinvestment in IT equipment may be more than just a one-time problem
arising from a stock “bubble”. The possibility comes from what I think of as the dark
side of network externalities. A network externality arises when the usefulness of a
product to you depends on how many other people have it. If you have the only fax
machine, it is useless. But if everyone has a fax machine, that is a different story. The
same is true of computer software. I am typing this document using Microsoft Word
2000 version 9.0.3821 SR-1. I don’t really know what all of that means, but I do know
that if I send the document to someone using a sufficiently antiquated version of
Microsoft Word that this document will not display or print properly. In other words, to
take advantage of the network externality that comes from using this word processing
software, we all have to keep our software sufficiently up to date. This means more than
buying updates. As we have all learned, updates are designed to run on the newest,
fastest, more memory-intensive, machines and so the upgrading of the software often
forces us to buy new hardware quite frequently – probably more frequently than we really
need!

10
  I have argued elsewhere that the computers generate monopoly rents for the producers that need not be
shared with the users, and so the economic benefits generally may accrue to the individuals (and countries)
that are making chips and IT hardware. This has two implications. First, aggregate improvements in
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                         10


        I believe the GDP numbers produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, but if
we are replacing our computers too frequently investment and growth may be
overestimated. This will show up mainly in the price deflator, as the true quality of
computers may not be increasing as fast as the official estimates suggest.


2.3 Lower Inflation

        Beyond the increase in productivity growth, a second important aspect of recent
experience in the U.S. has been the behavior of inflation. Through the latter half of the
1990s, inflation in the U.S. was both low and falling.


        Chart 6 plots the 12-month changes in headline inflation as measured by the All-
Items Consumer Price Index (CPI) and two measures of core inflation, the CPI excluding
food and energy, and the Median CPI.11 Inflation in the U.S. dropped steadily throughout
the 1980s and into the 1990s, hitting a low in 1999. But the most striking fact about this
picture is the pattern over the latter part of the 1990s. Here we see that both the headline
CPI and the two core measures actually fell as growth was rising. During this entire
period, the vast majority of analysts inside and outside of the government were
forecasting that inflation would be one-half to one percentage point higher than it turned
out to be. Only in the last 12 to 18 months has inflation begun to rise to levels in excess
of 2½%.


        How can we account for the recent inflation experience? There are several
explanations. The most obvious is that in the late 1990s, the U.S. economy experienced
two beneficial supply shocks that reduced inflation. These came in the form of the
restructuring of the system for the delivery of medical care and the reduction of oil prices.
Chart 7 reports the 12-month change in the consumer price index for medical care
commodities and services. As the data clearly show, inflation in medical costs declined


productivity will flow to the computer makers, and second that the productivity growth increases will
accrue to the countries that produce computers.
11
   The Median CPI is computed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and is available on their web
site, http://www.clev.frb.org/Research/index.htm#cpi. The computation is based on work that first
appeared in Bryan and Cecchetti (1994).
Cecchetti        The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                11


significantly throughout the 1990s, falling from nearly 10% at the beginning of the
decade to a low of 2½% in late 1997. But through the latter half of the 1990s, medical
care cost inflation remained below 4% per year.


        Turning to oil prices, Chart 8 reports the price level of West Texas Intermediate
crude oil. Through 1998, oil prices fell from $25 per barrel at the beginning of the year,
to a low of just over $10 by the end of the year. This significant reduction in energy
prices had a clearly beneficial effect on the U.S. economy, helping to both raise growth
and lower inflation.


        Has the advance of information technology changed the inflation process itself?
While its possible to argue that the product markets have become more competitive, as it
is now easier to sample the prices of many suppliers at lower cost, there is no reason to
believe that inflation has changed in any material way. The internet, and the low cost of
communicating prices to potential customers has certainly improved the efficient
operation of the price system in allocating resources, but it has not changed the way in
which overall price inflation occurs. The new economy has affected inflation in the same
way that it has influenced output – by making short- and medium-term forecasting more
difficult. The difficulty in forecasting inflation and growth over the medium term is the
primary challenge for policymakers posed by the new economy for monetary
policymakers, and I take that up next.


3. Macroeconomic Policy in the New Economy

    The two pillars of modern macroeconomic policy are the government’s tax and
expenditure decisions and the determination of short-term interest rates by the central
bank. In the past we have thought of fiscal and monetary policy as sharing responsibility
for short-term stabilization and having somewhat different roles in insuring long-term
growth. Does the new economy imply a new macroeconomic policy as well? Things
have certainly changed. Let’s see how.
Cecchetti         The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                  12




3.1 Fiscal Policy


        Over the past 50 years we have come to think of fiscal policy as an important
source of stimulus during a general slowdown. People turn to their elected officials for
help, demanding that they set things right with new programs that bring some
combination of lower taxes and higher government spending. Payments to the
unemployed and lower income tax bills create a social safety net that automatically
stabilizes modern market-based economics. We believe that this reduces the overall
amplitude of cyclical downturns while at the same time insuring that the burden is not
overly concentrated on the unlucky few.


        But when things start going bad, the natural reaction is to want to do something,
and in the fiscal arena that means discretionary tax and expenditure programs tailor-made
for the problem at hand. These can work. But just because something can work, it does
not follow automatically that it will or that it is the right thing to do. There have always
been flaws with discretionary fiscal policy, and the more flexible goods, labor and
financial markets of the new economy have only made these worse. The problem is that
fiscal policy is both slow and hard to do sensibly. Look at a few facts.


        Most recessions are short, lasting a year or less. The longest recession in the US
after the Second World War lasted 16 months. Furthermore, because data are only
available with several months lag, a recession is often half way through before there is
consensus that a recession has started.


        Timing presents a considerable challenge. I know of no government that has an
agreed-upon economic stimulus legislation waiting to be implemented. In fact, given both
the shifting environment and the changing cast of characters, such a thing is both
economically undesirable and politically inconceivable. Instead, someone has to write
new legislation every time a recession comes along. This takes several months even
under the best of circumstances. The most recent example is instructive. Serious
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                       13


Congressional efforts to pass stimulus legislation in 2001 began only after September 11,
six months after the recession “officially” started, 12 and were completed in early March
2002, when economic recovery was already underway.13


        As if that were not enough, policies take time to have any impact. Even after
legislative action is complete, changes in taxes do not increase individual consumption or
corporate investment immediately. By the time the spending starts, the chances are the
coming boom will be in full swing.


        The main problem is with the substance of economic stimulus packages.
Economists do not write economic stimulus packages, politicians do! And fiscal stimulus
is one place where economics and politics collide. Economists prefer policies that focus
attention on getting a few important people to do something they were not planning to do
while avoiding paying for others to do what they would have done anyway. Temporary
incentives to spur investment and income tax reductions for the less well off who will
spend what they get are good examples. Politicians, by contrast, look for programs that
reward the largest number of people possible in order to win support and ensure re-
election.


        The Bush administration's decision in 2001-2002 to try to sell a capital gains tax
reduction as part of their anti-recession program is a particularly egregious example of an
expensive proposal that will have virtually no impact on the problem at hand. I guess
reducing the tax burden on some wealthy people when they chose to sell appreciated
stock might lead them to buy a few more Mercedes and BMWs, but I’m not exactly sure
what it has to do improving the prospects for short-run economic growth. The proposal to
cut the taxes big companies pay on past profits is another example. I do not hold
opportunism against elected public officials, but we all need to recognize that it exists.
We elect politicians to do things that are popular. Economic slowdowns, when some
people are suffering and the rest are worried, play to their worst instincts.

12
  The official arbiter of recessions, the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee, could have easily picked
an early beginning for the recession, as employment and production seem to have peaked in late 2000.
Cecchetti               The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy            14


            The fact that the economy has become more flexible in adjusting to shocks has
made all of these problems worse. To the extent the economy’s natural recuperative
powers are improved, there is now even less time to get the job done. This increases the
odds that any legislatively-based stimulus program will come on line too late to do what
was intended. Add to this the fact that markets, through mechanisms like asset-backed-
securities and temporary help, have made it easier to circumvent roadblocks put up by
governments trying to distort economic incentives, and many things look even more
pointless.


            All of this means that discretionary fiscal policy is a poor stabilization tool. While
it might be possible to design economically sensible stimulus legislation, we need to
realize that it will not be enacted. Instead, legislators should focus their attention on
building solid foundations for long-term growth. This means creating structural tax and
spending policies that encourage investment, innovation and hard work. Eliminating the
corporate income tax and the individual tax on capital gains may be good long-term
policy actions, but that is what should be debated. In the meantime, the new economy
has made fiscal policy an even worse stabilization tool than it was a decade ago.


3.2 Central Bank Policy


            The changes wrought by the advances of the last decade pose both immediate and
long-run challenges for the operations of central banks. In the short term, these are really
just the same old problems that monetary policymakers have faced for decades:
stabilization requires distinguishing transitory from permanent shifts in productivity
growth. The long-term threat is rather different. There, central banks are threatened by
the possibility that the disappearance of the demand for the monetary base – the thing
only they can supply – will render their policy tools impotent. We will consider each of
these in turn.




13
     At this writing, the dating of the end of the recession was not yet official.
Cecchetti               The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                            15


Immediate Challenges


           The objective of most of the central banks of the world is to stabilize inflation
about some low level while maintaining growth at near its sustainable rate. One way of
expressing this is that monetary policy seeks to minimize a weighted average of inflation
and output variability. Variability is usually measured as the squared deviation from the
target. In the case of inflation, there is general agreement that target levels should be in
the range of zero to two percent per year. The exact value depends on a number of
considerations that are likely to be unique to the conditions within the region that the
central bank operates as well as the manner in which inflation is measured.14 The
problem is the target for output, where policymakers require an estimate of the
sustainable rate of growth, or potential output.


           In practical terms, the difficulty is that central bankers should react differently to
transitory movements in productivity than to permanent ones. If a productivity shock is
transitory, then policymakers will attempt to stabilize output about its permanent growth
path, allowing prices to deviate somewhat from their long-run target path. By contrast, if
productivity growth shifts permanently, then the appropriate policy response is to
stabilize inflation while allowing output to move to its new long-run growth path.


           Telling the difference between changes in productivity growth that are temporary
and those that are not has proven to be extremely difficult. To see the point, first look
back to Chart 2 where I have plotted output per hour in the nonfarm business sector and
ask how long it would take to tell that the second half of the 1990s is different from the
first half. In hindsight we can see it. But to do their job, the FOMC needed to divine
this change in 1997! Our good fortune is that they were able to see the productivity
acceleration in its early stages.


           Private sector economists as a group failed to realize that the sustainable growth
rate of the economy had risen. Chart 9 is a plot of the log of GDP together with a series

14
     See Cecchetti (2001b), for a detailed discussion of this, and other issues regarding policy objectives.
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                16


of consensus forecasts from the Blue Chip survey. For each quarter, the chart shows the
forecast out several years. For example, for the first quarter of 1996, I plot the actual data
point, plus the forecast for the next few years. The actual level of GDP follows a path
that is steeper than the forecasts throughout the period, meaning that the forecasters
consistently underestimated growth. The systematic underestimates of the growth rates
were a clear sign that forecasters were slow to learn that a significant part of the
productivity acceleration was permanent.


        The continuous underestimates of GDP growth were accompanied by a series of
overestimates of future inflation. Chart 10 plots the log of the consumer price index
together with the series of forecasts. Until oil prices began to rise in early 1999,
professional forecasters were consistently overestimating future levels of inflation. (Core
inflation forecast errors continued to be positive through the end of the decade.)
Interestingly, the combination of the real GDP and inflation forecast errors suggest that
forecasts of nominal GDP were approximately correct.


        It is interesting to note that if we were to collect data for the latter half of the
1970s, we would be able to produce very similar charts, although the labels would be
switched. That is, forecasts of GDP would have been consistently too high, and forecasts
of inflation would have been systematically too low.


            But the problem of estimating trend growth extends beyond the tumultuous
periods of the late 1970s and late 1990s. Athanasios Orphanides (1998) has compared
real time estimates (i.e. those used by a putative inflation forecaster) for 1980 to 1992 of
the output gap in the United States with subsequent revisions, and arrives at astonishing
conclusions. During this period, the real time estimates of the gap (measured as output
minus potential output divided by potential) averaged -3.99 % with a standard deviation
of 3.46. Subsequent revisions in measures of both actual and potential output led to
changes in the estimated gap such that by 1994 the revised figures for the 1980-1992
period implied a gap of only -1.64 % with a standard deviation of 2.44! In other words
the revised gap was on average 2.35 percentage points lower than the real time estimates,
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                         17


which presumably were used in the preparation of inflation forecasts and as inputs into
the formulation of monetary policy at the time.


        Turning to monetary policy, we can look to the work of Jordi Galí to help us to
understand the challenges posed by shifts in trend productivity. Galí (2000) compares the
behavior of inflation following a move in productivity in the Volcker-Greenspan period
(1979-1999) with that in the pre-Volcker (1954-1979) period. He finds that during the
1980s and 1990s, a negative productivity shock left inflation unchanged, while in the
earlier period, inflation rose significantly. The explanation for this is that the FOMC of
the 1960s and 1970s did a poor job of distinguishing transitory from permanent changes
in growth, and tried to keep a decline in productivity from affecting output. The result
was inflation. In the more recent period, with an increased focus on inflation, the FOMC
has not made the same mistakes.


        Overall, the message is clear. During periods when the productivity growth trend
is changing, central bankers face challenges that are more daunting than the usual ones.
Failing to react to a decline in productivity growth, as the U.S. did in the 1970s, can
result in an extended episode of higher than desired inflation, which is then costly to
eliminate. Alternatively, a central bank that tightens policy when faced with a permanent
increase in its economy’s sustainable rate of growth risks not allowing the growth to
occur in the first place. In the end, though, the challenge is to figure out as quickly and
accurately as possible the trend growth rate of productivity.15


Long-term Challenges


        While technological progress poses clear short-run and medium-run challenges
for monetary policy, they can all be studied and discussed using the now common



15
  It is interesting to note that the debate over the distribution of increased U.S. growth between its
permanent and transitory components continues in the form of trying to cyclically adjust productivity.
Robert Gordon (2000) suggested that a significant part of the acceleration has been cyclical. As we emerge
from the 2000 mini-recession we are on the verge of knowing.
Cecchetti           The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                          18


vocabulary of central bankers. We talk about the impact of the change in an interest rate
instrument on output and inflation as transmitted through the financial system.


         But when we think about the long-run challenges posed by technological advance,
we must think critically about the nature in which the transmission mechanism will
change. Will the central bank continue to be able to control an interest rate? How will
they do it? What will the consequences of changes in the system of financial
intermediation be for system stability?16


         These are all difficult questions, and they have elicited a variety of answers over
the past few years. At the heart of the issue is whether technological advance will
ultimately eliminate completely the private sector demand for central bank liabilities.
Today, this demand is split between two groups. First, there is the demand for currency
to be used in daily transactions by individuals, and second, financial intermediaries
demand reserves for their daily clearing operations through the payments system that is
maintained by the central bank. In some countries, intermediaries hold reserves to meet
regulatory requirements, but in most instances, this demand is being eliminated by
technological advance and so I will ignore it here.17


         Monetary policy operates by adjusting the level of the central bank's liabilities. If
the demand for these liabilities goes to zero, then the leverage of policymakers will
disappear as well. But is the time approaching when individuals will no longer hold
currency and financial firms will no longer hold central bank reserves? Let us take each
of these in turn.


         First, consider the demand for currency. The claim is that privately issued store-
value cards and the like will replace the functions of officially issued paper money.

16
   These questions are in addition to the ones raised by the change in the financial intermediation system.
Estrella (forthcoming) discusses how the increase in securitization has decreased the effectiveness of
monetary policy. He estimates a rather dramatic decline in the interest elasticity of GDP growth.
17
   The U.S. is a case in point, where very few banks are bound by their reserve requirements. Regional
banks hold ATM cash and money center banks hold clearing balances in the Federal Reserve accounts that
both exceed their respective required reserve levels.
Cecchetti         The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                   19


Currency provides finality, security, and anonymity in transactions. Surely, we will want
all of these and so any adequate substitutes will need to have all of these characteristics.
It is difficult to conceive of privately issued substitutes with all of these. Specifically, the
risk-free nature of central bank liabilities is something that private money will have a
very difficult time emulating.


        To see the point, think of the example of stored-value cards issued by a telephone
company. These exist in many countries, are easy to purchase, and convenient to use.
The cards have value because they can be exchanged for phone-company provided
services, something that is in nearly universal demand.


        Can we imagine the cards, or their electronic equivalent, replacing central bank
liabilities in the payment and settlement of transactions? There are several reasons to be
skeptical. First, there is the fact that the government is unlikely to accept payment of
taxes in telephone company liabilities. This alone is probably enough to sustain the
existence of central bank money. But beyond that, there is the fact that the probability of
phone company default is likely substantially higher than that of the central bank.
        But even in the absence of actual default, the phone company can partially default
by inflating the price of its services. This possibility means that it is unlikely that phone
company "money" will always trade at par.18 Central bank money has no such problem.
The central bank can always guarantee that a dollar is one dollar.


        In fact, the private issuer need not actually threaten bankruptcy to partially default
on its liabilities. If, as in the case of the phone company, the "money" is backed by
services rendered by the issuer, then raising the price of the services is partial default on
the nominal value of the money. While central banks surely have defaulted on the value
of their liabilities through aggregate inflation, a credible commitment to price stability is
now the norm.
Cecchetti            The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                                20


         Information technology may well eliminate demand for central bank issued paper
currency. But if the central bank adapts and issues e-money, then the official e-money
seems very likely to dominate that of all private issuers.


         It is worth pausing to comment on the demand for cash for illegal and
underground transactions. Some people have noted that so long as this demand remains,
monetary policy will retain its efficacy. But if the only remaining demand for currency
were to come from drug dealers and the Mafia, surely we would all agree that the proper
policy response would be to eliminate its issuance.


         This brings us to the demand for central bank reserves used in the payments
system. We have already reached the point in most central bank systems where the intra-
day demand far exceeds the overnight demand for these balances. In the U.S., for
example, the overnight level of clearing balances is now well below $10 billion.
Meanwhile, the gross level of daily transactions on the Fedwire exceeds $2 trillion.
During any given day, cumulative overdrafts of banks that are executing these clearings
can easily exceed $40 billion at any given instant. The overdrafts arise from the timing
mismatch of incoming and outgoing payments at the largest banks, and attract a charge of
less than 50 basis points at an annual rate (measured by the minute). But the point is that
this system is very heavily used, and it runs largely on intra-day credit.


         The details of these payments systems, including charges for intra-day credit and
remuneration for overnight balances, differ. But several things look as if they are similar.
In particular, the payments system run by the central bank usually entails some form of
subsidization. This can be in the form of the provision of intra-day credit, or the implicit
guarantees, or the network externalities of letting everyone connect for a nominal (or
zero) charge. Given the existence of the central bank's payment system and the use of
central bank liabilities in clearing, it seems that the demand for reserves is likely to
continue long into the future. Since the leverage of monetary policy is a consequence of

18
  If you believe that this is far-fetched, consider the example of the California energy utility Pacific, Gas
and Electric during the year 2000. At the beginning of the year, PG&E bonds were very high grade. By
Cecchetti            The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy            21


the central bank being the monopoly supplier of these reserves, my prediction is that the
leverage to influence economic activity will continue long into the future.


4. Conclusion

         The rapid advance of information and communication technology has brought
with it changes in virtually every sector of the economy. This new economy is growing
more quickly and is more stable than the old one. I have argued that these changes have
been the result of a series of changes to the structure of production, labor markets and
financial intermediation. Using new ideas and technologies, firms are now able to
manage their inventories of goods more accurately and so need less of them, temporary
workers increase the flexibility of the labor force, and the increased reliance on asset-
backed securities to finance credit has made us less dependent on banks.


         The improved recuperative powers of the new economy mean that policymakers
must change the way that they do their jobs. I have argued that fiscal policy, never a
particularly good stabilization tool, should now focus exclusively on providing a
foundation for long-term stable growth. The job of short-term policy adjustments should
be left to central bankers. They are not only independent from the political
considerations that make it difficult for legislators to do the right thing, but they can
respond quickly to changed economic conditions. But I have emphasized that the New
Economy poses particularly difficult challenges for monetary policymakers for several
reasons. First, the changes in the financial sector may well have blunted the impact of
monetary policy. Interest rate changes affect growth and inflation through the banking
system. As banks have become less relevant to credit creation, monetary policy may well
have become less effective. The second challenge comes from the fact that it appears to
have become more difficult to differentiate between transitory and permanent shifts in
productivity growth. When the trend is shifting around, as it has been for some years
now, historical patterns are a poor guide to the future making a central banker’s job even
more difficult. It is worth noting that to the extent that structural changes have made the

the end of the year, the firm was nearly bankrupt.
Cecchetti         The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                22


economy more stable, monetary policy is less important than it once was – and the risks
from policy mistakes are also smaller.


        In considering the long-run impact of information and communication technology
on monetary policy, the concern is over the potential disappearance of the demand for
central bank liabilities. Since monetary policy acts through changes in the quantity and
interest rate charged for central bank liabilities, if the demand evaporates, monetary
policy goes with it. My conclusion is that perfect substitutes for all of the functions of
central bank money are extremely unlikely to arise, and so the central bank will retain
some leverage.


        We can only hope that each new day continues to bring with it a new economy
and that the challenges of the future are as pleasant as those of the recent past have been.
Cecchetti        The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy             23


References
Bryan, Michael F. and Stephen G. Cecchetti, “Measuring Core Inflation,” in Monetary
       Policy, N. Gregory Mankiw, ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
       NBER, 1994, 195—215.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., “Contagion and the New Economy” Financial Times, 3 January
      2001 (a).

___________, “Monetary Policy: Objectives and Rules,” Oxford Review of Economic
      Policy, 16 (Winter 2001) (b).

DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers, “The `New Economy’: Background,
      Historical Perspective, Questions and Speculations,” in Economic Policy for the
      Information Economy, Proceedings of the Symposium Sponsored by the Federal
      Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2001, pg. 11-46.

Estrella, Arturo, “Securitization and the Efficacy of Monetary Policy,” Economic Policy
        Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, forthcoming.

Freedman, Charles, "Monetary policy implementation: past, present and future -- Will the
      advent of electronic money lead to the demise of central banking?” International
      Finance, 3 (July 2000) 211-227.

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Decoupling at the margin: The threat to monetary policy from
      the electronic revolution in banking." International Finance, 3 (July 2000) 261-
      272.

Galí, Jordi “The Conduct of Monetary Policy in the Face of Technological Change:
        Theory and Postwar U.S. Evidence,” paper prepared for the conference on
        Stabilization and Monetary Policy: The International Experience,' Banco de
        Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 15 November 2000.

Goodhart, Charles A.E., "Can central banking survive the IT revolution?" International
      Finance, 3 (July 2000) 189-209.

Gordon, Robert, J. “Does the ‘New Economy’ Measure up to the Great Inventions of the
      Past?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (Fall 2000) 49-74.

McConnell, Margaret Mary and Gabriel Perez Quiros, "Output Fluctuations in the United
     States: What has changed Since the Early 1980s?" American Economic Review
     90 (December 2000) pg. 1464-1476

Ohliner, Stephen D. and Daniel A. Sichel, "The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s:
       Is Information Technology the Story?" Unpublished manuscript, Board of
       Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2000.
Cecchetti       The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy        24

Orphanides, Athanasios, "Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information," Finance
      and Economics Discussion Paper 1998-50, Board of Governors of the Federal
      Reserve System, November 1998

Woodford, Michael, "Monetary policy in a world without money", International Finance,
     3 (July 2000) 229-260.
Cecchetti             The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                    25



      Table 1: Contributions to Growth of Real Nonfarm Business Output,
                                 1974 to 1999
                                        1974-90                 1991-95                   1996-99
    Growth of Output                      3.13                    2.82                      4.90

    Contributions from
    Information Technology                0.51                    0.54                       1.08
       Hardware                           0.28                    0.24                       0.62
       Software                           0.11                    0.23                       0.31
       Communications
                                          0.12                    0.07                       0.15
         Equipment
    Other Capital                         0.85                    0.44                       0.76
    Labor Hours                           1.15                    0.82                       1.51
    Labor Quality                         0.22                    0.44                       0.31
    Multifactor Productivity              0.44                    0.57                       1.25

    Growth Rate of Inputs
      Hardware                            31.4                    17.5                       36.0
      Software                            13.2                    12.8                       13.1
      Communications
                                           7.7                     3.6                       7.1
        Equipment
    Source: Ohliner, Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel, “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s:
    Is Information Technology the Story?” February 2000.

                                     Table 2
                              The Change in the 1990s
                       (Average Annual Percentage Growth)
                                  1991-1995           1996-1999
Nonfinancial Corporate Business
      Labor Productivity            1.61                3.55
      Unit Labor Costs              1.36                0.52
      Unit Non-Labor Costs          0.75               -0.50

Real Investment in
       Computer Hardware*                         29.0                    45.9

Prices of Computer Hardware                      -14.8                   -23.4
*
National Income and Product Accounts Basis.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product Accounts
Cecchetti                         The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                                                                       26



                                           Chart 1: Real GDP Growth
       4-quarter percent change
 10




  8



  6



  4



  2




  0
                                                                                                              1984

 -2




 -4
   1958     1960    1962   1964    1966   1968    1970   1972     1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986     1988    1990   1992    1994   1996   1998   2000




                          Chart 2: Growth in U.S. Real Output per Hour,
                                     Nonfarm Business Sector
      4-quarter percent change
 6


 5


 4


 3


 2


 1


 0


 -1


 -2


 -3
  1979             1981           1983           1985           1987        1989         1991          1993           1995           1997          1999          2001
Cecchetti                          The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                                                                             27



                Chart 3: Inventory-to-Sales Ratio: Goods Sector
       Ratio (number of quarters of supply)
 2.3



 2.2
                                                                                                              Pre-1984
                                                                                                              average = 2.1
 2.1



 2.0



 1.9



 1.8

                                                                                                              1984
 1.7



 1.6


                                                                                                                                                                      1.54
 1.5
   1959     1961    1963    1965    1967      1969   1971    1973   1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989     1991     1993   1995    1997   1999    2001




                           Chart 4: Help Supply Services Employment
          Percent of total employment
 3.0




 2.5




 2.0




 1.5




 1.0




 0.5




 0.0
    1982             1984            1986             1988            1990          1992           1994           1996               1998            2000           2002
Cecchetti                             The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                                                              28



                                      Chart 5: Asset-Backed Securities as a
                                         Percentage of Total Liabilities
         Percent
 45


 40


 35


 30


 25


 20


 15


 10


  5


  0
  1983                  1985                 1987           1989              1991         1993          1995             1997          1999          2001




                                              Chart 6: U.S. Consumer Prices,
                                              Headline and Core Measures*
      12-month percent change
 12




 10




  8




  6




  4




  2




  0
  1980               1982             1984           1986          1988          1990      1992        1994        1996          1998          2000     2002
                                                    Median CPI            CPI: All Items    CPI: All Items Excluding Food and Energy

      * : Based on current methods.
Cecchetti                   The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy                                                              29



                   Chart 7: U.S. Consumer Prices: Medical Care
      12-month percent change
 14



 12



 10



  8



  6



  4



  2



  0
  1980           1982       1984         1986         1988          1990          1992          1994        1996        1998           2000   2002

                                CPI-U: Medical Care          CPI-U: Medical Care Commodities           CPI-U: Medical Care Services




                           Chart 8: Domestic U.S. Spot Oil Prices:
                            West Texas Intermediate Crude Oil
      Dollars per barrel
 40




 35




 30




 25




 20




 15




 10
  1982            1984          1986         1988            1990          1992          1994          1996          1998             2000    2002
Cecchetti                                            The New Economy and the Challenges for Macroeconomic Policy           30




                                                          Chart 9: Blue Chip Forecasts of
                                                             Real GDP Relative to Actual
                                            9.2
                                            9897
                                                                                June 2000 Forecast
      Log Levels, Scale in Levels




                                            8955
                                            9.1



                                            8103
                                              9



                                            7332
                                            8.9



                                            6634
                                            8.8
                                                   1995      1996       1997        1998        1999         2000   2001




                                                          Chart 10: Blue Chip Forecasts
                                                            of the CPI Relative to Actual
                                            5.2
                                             181

                                                                                        June 2000 Forecast
             Log Levels, Scale in Levels




                                           5.15
                                             172




                                            5.1
                                             164




                                           5.05
                                             156



                                              5
                                             148
                                                   1995      1996       1997        1998        1999         2000   2001
