                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ESTIMATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF STRUCTURAL PARAMETERS IN THE
                    PRESENCE OF MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA


                                           Russell W. Cooper


                                          Working Paper 8941
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8941


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by Russell W. Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimation and Identification of Structural Parameters in the Presence of Multiple Equilibria
Russell W. Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 8941
May 2002
JEL No. E1, E3, E6, J7, Z13



                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper studies quantitative implications of model economies that exhibit multiple equilibria.
The goal is to assess two interrelated issues. First, do economies with multiple equilibria have falsifiable
predictions? Second, is identification possible in economies that exhibit multiple equilibria? Put
differently, are these economies observationally equivalent to economies with unique equilibria? We
raise these questions within a general framework and then study a series of examples to determine how
the existing literature has addressed them.




Russell W. Cooper
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rcooper@bu.edu
         Estimation and Identiﬁcation of Structural Parameters in the
                                     Presence of Multiple Equilibria

                                                   Russell W. Cooper∗
                Department of Economics, Boston University, Boston, MA. 02215, USA
                                                     rcooper@bu.edu

                                                        May 6, 2002



                                                           Abstract

             This paper studies quantitative implications of model economies that exhibit multiple equilibria. The
          goal is to assess two interrelated issues. First, do economies with multiple equilibria have falsiﬁable
          predictions? Second, is identiﬁcation possible in economies that exhibit multiple equilibria? Put diﬀer-
          ently, are these economies observationally equivalent to economies with unique equilibria? We raise these
          questions within a general framework and then study a series of examples to determine how the existing
          literature has addressed them.



1        Overview
There are now a plethora of examples of economies which exhibit multiple equilibria. These examples ex-
ist (even thrive) in almost all aspects of economics: business cycle theory, open economy macroeconomics,
game theory, growth theory, income distribution, industrial organization, labor, etc. The popularity of this
approach indicates that the multiple equilibrium perspective provides insights into a variety of economic ob-
servations. In some cases, these models have been used, often informally, as a basis for policy interventions.1
     But, to many economists, model economies that exhibit multiple equilibria are viewed as poorly suited for
economic analysis. In particular, it is sometimes claimed that these models have no testable implications and
                                2
thus cannot be falsiﬁed.            Further, due to the multiplicity they are supposedly not useful for comparative
static exercises that underly policy analysis: with multiple equilibria, it is not clear how policy variations
will eﬀect outcomes, absent a selection mechanism.
    ∗I   am grateful to the NSF for ﬁnancial support and the Bernard Caillaud and Hubert Kempf for the opportunity to present
these ideas at the September 2001 ADRES Conference. I thank my discussants, Stéphane Grégoir and Franck Portier, as well as
seminar participants for their insightful comments and questions. I am also grateful to Victor Aguirregabiria, Simon Gilchrist
and Andrea Moro for many discussions on this topic.
  1 Included here would be explicit policies such as deposit insurance, government provided guarantees, numerous discussions

of currency crises and debates about the nature of aggregate ﬂuctuations that rely, in part, on ﬂuctuations in conﬁdence.
   2 See, for example the discussion in Woodford (1987) and the comments in Aiyagari (1995) on these points.




                                                               1
     For those economists who think that allowing multiplicity is a useful (essential) way to confront reality,
these arguments provide a challenging critique. For those who want to dismiss the multiple equilibrium
perspective these are powerful arguments. Either way, we ought to evaluate them. That is the purpose of
this paper.
     More precisely, the goal is to make progress on answering two questions that bear on the ability of models
with multiple equilibria to confront data:

     • Can a model with multiple equilibria be rejected?

     • Can the parameters of a model with multiple equilibria be identiﬁed?

While clearly related, these are intended to be two diﬀerent questions. The ﬁrst takes as given a model
economy with multiple equilibria and asks whether there are observations that could falsify the model. The
second question considers a larger set of economies (that includes the model with multiple equilibria) and
asks whether the parameters of the model can be identiﬁed.
     The approach we take is to examine a series of examples from various branches of economics.3 At one level,
these examples indicate the usefulness of models of multiple equilibria in an informal way: the researcher
has some observations which motivate the consideration of a model with multiple equilibria. But, our goal
is to go further by examining how these examples of multiple equilibria have been used to confront data.
                                                                                                                             4
Thus we are forced to address the issue of identiﬁcation in models economies with multiple equilibria.
     The ﬁrst part of this essay provides a general framework for the discussion of these issues.5 In addition,
some abstract examples, drawing on Jovanovic (1989) and Bryant (1983), are presented to ﬁx ideas. In
the second part of the essay, we examine a variety of applications to better understand how researchers are
coping with identiﬁcation issues when evaluating models of multiple equilibria.6



2      Abstract Formulation of the Problem
While many applications studied below are dynamic, the basic themes of this essay can be adequately
conveyed in a static formulation. We use this structure to discuss multiple equilibria and then estimation.
This section concludes with some examples.


2.1        Theory
Following Cooper and John (1988), consider a game played by a large number of agents. Each agent chooses
an action e from a compact, convex subset of . The payoﬀ of the agent is given by σ(e, E; X, Θ) where E is,
    3 Of   course, theorems would be preferred but we start with examples to explore the themes.
    4 Identiﬁcation   is vital for the design of welfare improving interventions. However, in some cases, we may be interested in
the presence of multiple equilibria alone.
   5 This structure follows Cooper and John (1988) and focuses on strategic complementarities as a basis for multiple symmetric

Nash equilibria. Of course, multiple equilibria may arise in other games in which there are strategic substitutes, though these are
not symmetric equilibria. Further, it is understood the multiple equilibria may also arise in fairly standard general equilibrium
models as well as dynamic economies, such as overlapping generations models.
  6 Of course we have chosen a select set of examples for this purpose. There are many more in the literature.




                                                                 2
say, the average of the actions chosen by other players in the game, X is the realized value of an exogenous
variable that is common to all agents and Θ is a vector of parameters characterizing the payoﬀs of the agent.
Assume that σ(e, E; X, Θ) is continuously diﬀerentiable and strictly concave in e. The agent’s optimization
problem generates an unique optimal response given by e = φ(E; X, Θ), a reaction function. This is shown
in Figure 1.


   e


                                                          ❃
                                                              φ(e; X, θ)




 ❄                                                             ✲ ✲
                                                                ✻E


                                                 Figure 1: Policy Function




   Given that all agents have identical payoﬀs, we focus on the set of symmetric Nash equilibria deﬁned by

                                               ξ(X, Θ) = {e|e = φ(e; X, Θ)}.

Assume that the set of Nash equilibria ξ(X, Θ) is non-empty for all values of (X, Θ).7
   Note though that the equilibrium need not be unique. As argued in Cooper and John (1988), a neces-
sary condition for multiple symmetric Nash equilibria is strategic complementarity: e = φ(E; X, Θ) is
increasing in E.8 For the purposes of our discussion here, the issue is not conditions for multiplicity per se
but rather the implications of multiplicity for the estimation of the parameter vector Θ and for evaluating
how well the model ﬁts observations.
   This quantitative analysis requires the speciﬁcation of a mapping from the set of equilibria into a time
series (or panel) of outcomes. One common approach is to assume the exists of a random variable (a
sunspot), observed to all agents, selects from the set of Nash equilibria. This is often viewed as extrinsic
uncertainty in that this random variable does not inﬂuence anything fundamental to the problem, it simply
inﬂuences beliefs.
  7 See    Cooper (1999) for more details on conditions such that this set is nonempty.
  8 As    is understood, these strategic complementarities also can magnify and propagate shocks.




                                                                3
    Let Π(X, Θ) represent the set of probability distributions over the set of equilibria, ξ(X, Θ). A sunspot
process is given by a π ∈ Π such that π speciﬁes the likelihood of observing each equilibrium in ξ(X, Θ).9
Of course, this sunspots approach brings a lot of “coordination” to a problem of coordination and is thus
somewhat unappealing. Instead, one might imagine a more elaborate process by which individual agents’
beliefs dictate their actions and those beliefs then evolve as a function of history. Alternatively, as discussed
in Jovanovic (1989), one might look more generally at the restrictions imposed by the set of Nash equilibria
without any selection from that set.


2.2        Estimation
Suppose that a data set is generated by this “economy” consisting of D = (et , Xt ) for t = 1, 2, ...T..10 The
problem for the applied economist is to use Z to infer something about Θ and about the sunspot process.
Denote by Θ+ the expanded parameter set that includes both the primitive parameters Θ and those that
describe the sunspot process.11 We discuss two approaches: method of moments and maximum likelihood.


2.2.1      Method of Moments

Let MT be a set of moments calculated from this data set.12 Further, let M (Θ) be a mapping from the
parameters of the coordination game to a set of moments calculated from a simulated data set that, like D,
includes observations on economy eﬀorts and the exogenous variables. We denote this data set, contingent
on Θ+ as {D(Θ+ )}. To create this simulated data set, imagine generating a sequence of exogenous variables,
X, and, for a given Θ+ , generating a sequence of equilibrium actions, perhaps through a sunspot process to
select from the set of Nash equilibrium. Calculating a set of moments from this simulated data set creates
M (Θ+ ).
    Then one approach to estimation solves:


                                         minΘ+ (MT − M (Θ+ )) W (MT − M (Θ+ ))                                                (1)

where W is a square weighting matrix and MT − M (Θ+ ) is the diﬀerence between the actual and the
simulated moments. When the model is exactly identiﬁed (the number of elements in θ+ equals the number
of moments), then W is immaterial. But, if the model is overidentiﬁed (the number of elements in Θ+ is
less than the number of moments), then the choice of W is important for eﬃciency.
   9 The   sunspot process need not put positive probability on all equilibria. These restrictions may be imposed by the researcher
a priori.
  10 In the applications, we will discuss further the nature of observables to the researchers versus the private agents. As all

shocks are common and all agents are identical, there is no additional information contained in a panel as long as the agent’s
choice are part of a symmetric Nash equilibrium. We assume for now that this is indeed the case. Carlsson and van Damme
(1993) argue that in economies with heterogeneous agents due to incomplete information, there may be a natural selection from
the set of equilibria.
  11 If for example, the sunspot process follows a ﬁrst-order Markov process, then Θ+ would include the elements of the transition

matrix characterizing the sunspot process.
 12 At this point we are not that precise about which moments are here. Details on that important issue follow below.




                                                                 4
      This is a good point to be a bit more precise about the implications of identiﬁcation and multiplicity of
equilibria. Suppose, that M (Θ) is a one-to-one function: for each value of Θ the model generates a unique
set of moments and for each value of the moments, there is only one value of Θ that could generate that
value.13 In that case, there is clearly only one value of Θ that could generate the observed moments. Clearly,
the minimization problem in (1) produces a consistent estimate of Θ.14 This case is illustrated in Figure 2.15



                                                                                  Figure 2: Just Identiﬁcation

  P
     ✻
   1...................................................................................


                                                                           M (θ)
P ∗..................................................
                                                 ..
                                                  ..
                                                   ..
                                                    ..
                                                     ..
                                                      ..
                                                       ..
                                                        ..
                                                         ..
                                                          ..
                                                           ..
                                                            .                        ✲
 0                                             θ∗                                         θ




The problem of identiﬁcation arises when there are multiple values of Θ that can match the observed
moments. Note that here the model is identiﬁed locally (there is not a problem of local ﬂats) but there is
no global identiﬁcation. In other cases (examples are given below), the identiﬁcation problem may be local.
This is shown in Figure 3.
      In the case of multiple equilibria: for a given Θ, there are multiple moments that can be generated.16
So, M (Θ) is not a function. This is logically distinct from the standard identiﬁcation problem. But, it does
turn out, that some models may exhibit both multiple equilibria and also have identiﬁcation problems. This
case is shown in Figure 4.
      As we shall see, in some cases when the sunspot variables are added to Θ to create Θ+ , an identiﬁcation
problem arises. Importantly, this depends, among other things, on the moments selected. Though the un-
derlying sunspot may not be observed by the econometrician, variations in the transition matrix may have
observable implications and thus the sunspot process may be identiﬁed. Still, a key issue in the identi-
ﬁcation is the discrimination between two sources of variations in observable economic variables: sunspots
and fundamental shocks (X).17
  13 Note  that here we are excluding the sunspot variables from Θ as we are assuming there is a unique equilibrium.
  14 See the discussion and references in Gourieroux and Monfort (1996) and Hansen (1982).
  15 This ﬁgure and the others that follow are taken from joint work with Jérôme Adda.
  16 Note again that the domain here is θ.
  17 This is an identiﬁcation problem: can we jointly estimate the probability distributions of both fundamentals and sunspots?




                                                                                               5
                                                                            Figure 3: Non Identiﬁcation

        P
         ✻
      1 ...................................................................................


                                                                                  .. M (θ)
     P ∗ ..........................................................................
                             ..
                              ..                                                   ..
                               ..                                                   ..
                                ..                                                   ..
                                 ..                                                   ..
                                  ..                                                   ..
                                   ..                                                   ..
                                    ..                                                   ..
                                     ..                                                   ..
                                      ..                                                   ..
                                       ..                                                   ..
                                        ..                                                   ..
                                         .                                                    .. ✲
                                          ∗
      0                    θ1                                                    θ2∗               θ




P
                                                                           Figure 4: Multiple Equilibria




                                                                                                           M(θ)
P*




                                                                                                                  θ




                                                                                                       6
2.2.2       Maximum Likelihood

A second approach is to consider the estimation of parameters through a maximum likelihood procedure.18
In the usual case of a linear regression model, y = Xβ + ε, we make an assumption about the distribution
of the errors.19 we then express the likelihood of the data as a function of the parameters (β) of the model
and proceed to the maximization of the likelihood function.
    In the presence of multiple equilibria, maximizing a likelihood function is not as easy.20 First, economies
that generate multiple equilibria are inherently nonlinear so that simple linear representations may be inad-
equate. Second, the sunspot variables reappear as a type of latent variable, observable to private agents but
not to the researcher.
    Suppose we have the data set D and wish to write down the likelihood of an observation for a particular
year, (et , Xt ).21 Partition Xt into two components, (Xt1 , Xt2 ) and assume that while Xt is observed by
private agents, only Xt1 is observable to the researcher. So, Xt2 plays the role of the error term in the linear
regression. Then, the likelihood of observing (et , Xt1 ) is:

                                    LΘ (et , Xt1 ) = qLL        1                      1
                                                       Θ (et , Xt ) + (1 − q)LΘ (et , Xt ).
                                                                              H
                                                                                                                             (2)

Here, q represents the probability of the pessimistic sunspot (superscript L) variable and (1 − q) is the
probability of optimism (superscript H). For each realization of the sunspot variable, there is a distinct piece
of the likelihood function.22 Eﬀectively, these branches of the likelihood function calculate the probability
of observing (et , Xt1 ) conditional on the sunspot variable.
    The likelihood function thus integrates over the two random variables not observed by the researcher. The
ﬁrst is the sunspot variable. The second is Xt2 , the part of Xt that only agents observe. Thus, LjΘ (et , Xt1 ),
for j = H, L is the probability of Xt2 taking a value so that we would observe (et , Xt1 ), given that the sunspot
takes value j.
    With this construction, the likelihood of the sample is then:
                                                                                       
                                                               1                      1
                                   LΘ (D) =         qLL
                                                      Θ (et , Xt ) + (1 − q)LΘ (et , Xt ) .
                                                                             H
                                                                                                                             (3)
                                                t

Maximization of this likelihood will lead to estimates of the underlying parameters of the payoﬀ functions
as well as to estimates of q. Essentially, the probability of the optimistic sunspot variable is determined by
the likelihood function putting weight on each of two regimes (optimism and pessimism) so as to maximize
the likelihood of observing D.
  18 Iam grateful to Stéphane Grégoir, Simon Gilchrist and Paul Ruud for discussions on this material.
  19 Note that the method of moments does not need any such assumption.
  20 See Breshnahan and Reiss (1991) for a discussion of problems with maximum likelihood estimation in games with multiple

equilibria and illustrations in an entry game.
  21 Once we have a likelihood for a single observation we can quickly generate a likelihood function for the entire sample given

that the shocks are assumed to be iid. If they are not, then the likelihood is slightly more complicated.
  22 See Bisin and G.Topa (2002) for an alternative approach that puts all the weight in the likelihood function on the most

likely equilibrium and thus does not utilize an explicit sunspot process.




                                                                7
2.3      Examples
Here we illustrate these issues by building upon an example from Jovanovic (1989). Consider a game played
by two agents, i = 1, 2. Each agent can choose to participate in an activity: xi = 1 indicates participation
by agent i and xi = 0 means no participation. If the agent chooses not to participate, then agent i receives
a payoﬀ of zero: σi = 0. If agent i chooses to participate, then the payoﬀ is given by:


                                                         σi = λx−i − µ                                       (4)

where x−i is the action taken by the other agent. Here λ is a parameter that we are seeking to estimate
and µ is a random shock to the value of participation (assume that it is a common shock). Suppose that
µ is uniformly distributed on [0, 1] so there are no parameters of this distribution to estimate. If λ is
positive, the model exhibits a strategic complementarity: the value of participating is higher if the other
agent participates.
   In fact, this complementarity is suﬃciently strong that it is always an equilibrium for neither agent to
participate. That is, if x−i = 0, then the best response of agent i is to set xi = 0 as well regardless of the
realized value of µ.
   But, for some values of µ, there is also an equilibrium with participation.23 In particular, if λ ≥ µ,
then x1 = x2 = 1 is a Nash equilibrium. Still, even when λ ≥ µ, the equilibrium with x1 = x2 = 0 exists.
The equilibrium in x1 = x2 = 1 clearly Pareto dominates the one with x1 = x2 = 0. A coordination
failure occurs when λ ≥ µ and the equilibria with x1 = x2 = 0 is observed. This is a form of social but not
individual ineﬃciency.
   Suppose that a researcher observes a time series of actions chosen by the two agents: D = (x1t , x2t ) for
t = 1, 2, 3, ...T .24 The goal of the researcher is to estimate the single parameter that governs the interaction
between the agents, λ. Knowing λ is important for determining if there are coordination problems and also
in designing remedies. Can the researcher estimate λ?
   Here the issue of equilibrium selection is important for identiﬁcation. For example, suppose that agents
in this economy are very pessimistic about the participation of the other agent. This pessimism leads
them never to participate, regardless of the realization of µ. In this Nash equilibrium, the time series of
participation decisions will clearly not be informative about λ : identiﬁcation is not possible.
   Alternatively, suppose that agents are optimistic so that in the event of multiple equilibria, agents par-
ticipate. In this Nash equilibrium, x1 = x2 = 1 will be observed whenever λ ≥ µ. The researcher will then
observe a fraction of the time series in which agents participate and a fraction in which they do not. Given
the assumption that the distribution of µ is uniform on [0, 1], the maximum likelihood estimate of λ will
equal the fraction of observations in which x1 = x2 = 1.
   Finally, suppose that if there are multiple equilibria (λ ≥ µ), then agents will participate with probability
q. Then observed participation rates yield an estimate of the product qλ but not the individual terms.
Nonetheless, in this case the researcher can determine whether a complementarity is present and thus whether
 23 There   is also a mixed strategy equilibrium.
 24 So   here the unobserved variable to the researcher but not to the private agents is µ.




                                                                8
there is a potential for coordination failure.
    A second example draws upon the eﬀort game presented in Bryant (1983). This example, with a contin-
uum of symmetric Nash equilibria, illustrates the severity of the identiﬁcation problem.
    Suppose there are I agents each setting a level of eﬀort (ei ) for i = 1, 2, ..I in the interval [0, 1]. Suppose
that payoﬀs are given by:


                                            σ(ei , e−i ) = amin(e) − ei                                         (5)

where e is the vector of eﬀort levels by the I agents so that min(e) is the lowest eﬀort level and a is a
parameter. If a > 1, then there is a continuum of Nash equilibria indexed by the level of eﬀort in [0, 1].
Of course, ei = 1 for all i is the Pareto dominant equilibrium and thus any eﬀort level short of this is a
coordination failure.
    The issue though is what this model allows us to identify from observations. Suppose that the researcher
observes the average level of eﬀort in this economy. In equilibrium, of course, this average level is the same
as the equilibrium level. Absent a mechanism for selection, for a given value of a > 1, any level of activity
could be an equilibrium. Further, and more importantly for identiﬁcation, the set of equilibria does not vary
with the parameter a, as long as it exceeds unity. Thus this example illustrates a case where the moment
predicted by a model may not even be locally unique: identiﬁcation is not possible. Note though that this
example is special in that the multiplicity is extreme: none of the equilibria are locally unique.


3     Financial Intermediation and the Great Depression
To illustrate these issues in an explicit example, we consider the economy explored in Cooper and Corbae
(2001). One point of that exercise was to explore whether a model of multiple equilibria based upon a
complementarity in the intermediation process could match certain features of the Great Depression. Here
we focus on a simple parametric example taken from that paper.
    The Cooper and Corbae (2001) overlapping-generations economy had a number of key ingredients:

    • Heterogeneous households that lived for two periods; working in youth and consuming in both youth
      and old age

    • two stores of value: money and “bank” deposits

    • intermediaries with ﬁxed costs of operation that are borne by the agents joining the intermediary

    • ﬁrms that hire workers using funds borrowed from the intermediary

    The key to the multiplicity of equilibrium is the endogenous market participation of the households.
In one equilibrium, many households participate in intermediated activity thus increasing the returns to
participation for all agents. In another equilibrium, many households hold money as a store of value.
Consequently, the household who do join the intermediary bear relatively large ﬁxed participation costs.
Cooper and Corbae (2001) construct sunspot equilibria by randomizing across these two steady states. They
are able to match some of the prominent features of the Great Depression in their parameterized economy.


                                                         9
3.1    Households
The key to the model is the household’s choice between holding money and joining the intermediary. Due to
the presence of the ﬁxed cost of operation, the return to joining the intermediary is an increasing function
of the number of other agents in this coalition. Thus, as in Bryant (1987) and Weil (1987) there is a
complementarity in the intermediation process. This complementarity can generate multiple equilibria: if
many (few) of agents join the intermediary then the ﬁxed costs borne by each household is relatively low
(high) and thus (not) joining the intermediary is optimal.
   A household of generation t has preferences given by:
                                                  
                                              n1+γ                  
                                     ln ct −
                                          t    t
                                                      + βEt ln ctt+1                                      (6)
                                              1+γ

The labor supply decision of a household is simply
                                                               1
                                                    nst = wt γ .                                          (7)

Note that this decision is independent of any intertemporal rates of return.
   Given a real wage (wt ) and real return on savings (rt ), households choose to either hold money as a store
of value or join an intermediary. If a household joins the intermediation coalition, they incur a ﬁxed cost of
τ and earn a marginal of rt . The loan supply for this household is:
                                                  β(α − τt )     1+γ

                                          lt =               + φwt γ                                      (8)
                                                    1+β
where φ = βγ/[(1 + β)(1 + γ)] and α is the endowment. If a household holds money, then labor supply is
again given by (7) and money demand is:
                                                        βα     1+γ

                                           mt =            + φwt γ .                                      (9)
                                                       1+β
   Cooper and Corbae (2001) assume three types of households. Let type i have endowment level αi and let
Ai be the fraction of this type where α1 < α2 < α3 . Let Hi be the fraction of households with endowment
level equal to or bigger than αi and let µ(αi ) be the mean endowment level for these households. Estimation
of this simple income distribution is an important element in matching observations of the Great Depression.


3.2    Firms
Firms have access to a production technology that converts labor input in period t into period t+1 output.
Assume that the production function for a representative ﬁrm is f (n) = Ψnξ so that labor demand is
                                                                   1−ξ
                                                                      1
                                                       ξΨ
                                           ndt   =                         .                             (10)
                                                   wt (1 + rt )
Note that labor demand depends on the interest rate as ﬁrms must borrow to ﬁnance their wage payments.
   Cooper and Corbae (2001) assume two types of ﬁrms: type j has ﬁxed costs of production kj and Fj is
the fraction of ﬁrms with costs equal to or less than kj , where k1 < k2 . As ﬁrms borrow to ﬁnance wage
payments, their loan demand is wt ndt .


                                                          10
3.3     Multiple Steady States and Sunspots
A steady state equilibrium is characterized by a wage rate, an interest rate and a price level such that
all agents (households and ﬁrms) behave optimally and all markets clear. For this example, there may be
multiple steady states. The ﬁrst is an optimistic equilibrium: type 1 households hold money while types
2 and 3 join the intermediary and all ﬁrms produce. The second is a pessimistic equilibrium: only type 3
households join the intermediary and only type 1 ﬁrms produce.
   A stationary sunspot equilibrium indexes all the equilibrium prices and quantities by an extrinsic (sunspot)
variable (θ) that determines which of the equilibria will arise in a given period. Cooper and Corbae (2001)
argue that their model has two steady states. Given this, they construct a two-state sunspot equilibrium
where the states are denoted optimism (θ = θo ) and pessimism (θ = θp ). Let the sunspot variable follow a
ﬁrst order Markov process and let Π be a 2x2 transition matrix for θ. An element of Π is given by:

                                       Π(i, j) = P r(θt+1 = θj |θt = θi )                                 (11)

   We ﬁrst discuss the set of steady states and then consider sunspots. For the economy outlined above,
the equilibrium interest rates and wages (as functions of (Hα∗ (θ), Fk∗ (θ))) satisfy:
                                                                                     γ+1−ξ
                                                                                        1+γ
                                                              1+β
                                                               β    (1 − φHα∗ (θ))
                          1 + r(θ) = Ψξ(Fk∗ (θ))1−ξ                                                     (12)
                                                                µ(α∗ (θ)) − Γ

and
                                                                      1+γ−ξ
                                                                          γ
                                               Ψξ(Fk∗ (θ))1−ξ
                                        w(θ) =                                                            (13)
                                                 1 + r(θ)
   From these expressions, an equilibrium with high household participation at intermediaries (optimism)
will imply, from (12), low interest rates because the fraction of agents participating in loan activity (Hα∗ )
and the ﬂow of loans (µ(α∗ )) will both be large. The eﬀect on interest rates may be oﬀset by higher ﬁrm
participation (Fk∗ ). From (13), wages will rise from the increased labor demand induced by the fall in
interest rates and higher ﬁrm participation.
   To guarantee that these conjectured asset market participation patterns are optimal requires a check
on the participation decisions of the diﬀerent households and ﬁrms. The expressions for interest rates and
wages can be used to solve for the equilibrium choices of households and hence their expected lifetime utility.
Recall that ∆(θ) is the diﬀerence in utility between making loans and holding money. For this example,
                                                            
                                                      τ (θ)
                            ∆(θ) = (1 + β) ln 1 −              + β ln (1 + r(θ))                     (14)
                                                    α + ω(θ)
where                                                         
                                                         γ                1+γ
                                          ω(θ) =                   w(θ)    γ
                                                        1+γ
and τ (θ) = Γ/Hα∗ (θ). From (14), we see the cutoﬀ property for asset market participation: given (w(θ), r(θ),
τ (θ)) only agents with suﬃciently large endowments will join the intermediary since the utility diﬀerential
is increasing in α.
   The optimistic equilibrium with household types 2 and 3 joining the intermediary coalition arises if (14)
is positive for endowment levels α2 and α3 . This condition is evaluated with τ = Γ/Hα2 , using Hα2 and


                                                         11
µ(α2 ) to determine interest rates and wages. In an optimistic equilibrium, we must also check that both ﬁrm
types make positive proﬁts. Similarly, the conditions for the pessimistic equilibrium can be checked as well.
    If these conditions hold, then the economy displays multiple steady states, indexed by θ. In eﬀect, the
multiple steady state correspond to a particular sunspot transition matrix, Π with ones on the diagonal.
But, there are generally other sunspot equilibria in the neighborhood of this extreme transition matrix.25
With the preferences assumed in the example, introducing sunspots will only inﬂuence the asset market
participation decisions. In each of the steady states constructed above, all of the asset market participation
decisions were strict inequalities. Therefore, a Π matrix with elements near one on the diagonal will not
change these decisions either.
    Thus, it is easy to construct sunspot equilibria in the neighborhood of these two steady states. Let Πoo
and Πpp denote two critical transition probabilities. Then by the arguments above (formalized in Cooper
and Corbae (2001), there will exist sunspot equilibria for any Π as long as Πoo ≥ Πoo and Πpp ≥ Πpp .
    Of course, these equilibria depend on the parameters of preferences, technology and the sunspot process.
We turn to estimation now.


3.4       Parameterization
Let Θ+ be the list of parameters that include:

    • household parameters: (γ, β)

    • wealth distribution

    • ﬁrms parameters: (ξ, Ψ)

    • distribution of ﬁrm’s ﬁxed costs

    • ﬁxed cost of intermediation: Γ

    • the transition matrix for the sunspot variable, Π

    The value of Θ+ is chosen to minimize the distance between actual and simulated moments. This
procedure will produce consistent estimates of Θ+ . For their exercise, Cooper and Corbae (2001) only
estimated the household income distribution and the veriﬁcation costs as these were key to the multiplicity
of equilibria. Of course, in principle, the estimation could have been broadened to estimate more parameters
and more moments.26
    Cooper and Corbae (2001) assume that the U.S. was in an optimistic equilibrium pre-1929 and then was
in a pessimistic equilibrium over the 1930-33 period. This is necessary for the calibration since the only
source of ﬂuctuations is in the sunspot process. So, the estimation essentially chooses parameters to match
  25 As   these models are built around strategic complementarity, the sunspots are in the neighborhood of the steady state. This
contrasts with the conditions for sunspot equilibria in overlapping generations models, as in Azariadis (1981), as the connection
to deterministic cycles, as in Azariadis and Guesnerie (1986), is not present.
  26 Further, the model could include more shocks and thus be more capable to match other moments.




                                                                12
moments for the two steady states outlined above.27 In each case, the participation decisions are checked to
guarantee that the multiplicity exists for the particular parameterization.
   The moments chosen, under optimism and pessimism, were: real interest rates, currency/deposit ratios,
deﬂation, output growth and velocity growth. These moments were selected for their salience in the ongoing
discussion over the Great Depression.28
   Tables 1 and 2 present the predictions of this economy, based upon the estimated (household income
distribution) and calibrated (all others) parameter values given there. Cooper and Corbae compare steady
states of the model against observations before (optimism) and during (pessimism) the Great Depression.29

                                                         Table 1
                                                Steady State Values
                        Variable           Optimism (model,data)          Pessimism (model,data)
                   real interest rate %            (8.6, 7.4)                   (10.1, 11.3)
               currency/deposit           (0.079, 0.086)             (0.233, 0.227)
    Parameters: Γ = 0.0055, [k1 = 0, k2 = 0.06], F1 = 0.95, γ = 0.05, [α1 = 0.23, α2 = 0.25, α3 = 12],
                               [A1 = 0.36, A2 = 0.55], β = 0.9, ξ = 0.9, φ = 1.11.


                                                         Table 2
                                       % Change: Optimism to Pessimism
                                             Variable           (model,data)
                                             deﬂation              (61, 33)
                                            production          (−11, −36)
                                              velocity          (−65, −35)
                                          ∆loans/output         (−12, −10)
                                            real wages           (−0.6, −9)

   From Table 1, the estimated model is able to match the currency/deposit ratio is higher in the pessimistic
steady state, rising from 0.079 to 0.233. It rose from 0.086 to 0.227 in U.S. data. The interest rate on loans
rises from 8.6 to 10.1% while in U.S. data the real ex post return on short term government debt increased
from 7.4% in 1929 to 11.3%. The model is unable to match the movements in the loan/deposit ratio
principally because our banks have no other assets to hold.
   From Table 2:

   • real output does not fall as much in the model as it does during the Great Depression. This reﬂects
     the absence of other factors such as real investment and inventory changes that may have magniﬁed
     these eﬀects.

   • consequently, the model predicts too much deﬂation relative to observation
 27 Asdiscussed below, this is suﬃcient to solve for a sunspot equilibrium.
 28 Therewere therefore 6 parameters estimated from 7 moments: the parameters were overidentiﬁed.
 29 A more recent version of that analysis introduces money growth into the model.




                                                           13
    • the model predicts a fall in loans relative to output but not in the loan/output ratio. This is consistent
         with observations

    • given that labor supply is so ﬂat, wages do not vary much.

    One very interesting element in the example is that the ﬁxed cost is only about 1% of deposits. Still, this
small ﬁxed cost can produce multiple equilibria due to the swing in the middle class whose asset holdings
change across the two steady states.
    In a sunspot equilibrium constructed by randomizing in the neighborhood of the two steady states, the
movements of the variables across the states are given in Tables 1 and 2. Subject to there being a sunspot
equilibrium, labor supply and savings decisions, given the special preferences assumed in this example, are
independent of the sunspot process.
    In fact, one can calculate how much persistence in each state is necessary to have a sunspot equilibrium.
This is of interest since one suspects that pessimism is not close to a permanent state. For our example, we
can support a sunspot equilibrium in which Πoo ≥ 0.99 while Πpp ≥ 0.5. Thus the pessimistic state need
not be very persistent though the optimistic state is fairly persistent and thus switches to pessimism (such
as a Great Depression episode) are relatively infrequent.
    So, returning to the theme of this paper, is this an example of success in the ”estimation” of a model built
upon multiple equilibria? At one level, it certainly is since the mapping from parameters to observations
(simple moments) allowed us to determine some of the key parameters of interest. Certainly there are
parameters that we did not estimate but there is nothing in the procedure per se that limits the estimation
in that way. The model, as noted above, is (informally) quite far from observation: we would reject the
overidentiﬁed model.30
    On the key issue of identiﬁcation, note that in fact Cooper and Corbae were unable to go beyond
restricting the sunspot process to an interval. Again, it appears that this is a consequence of the functional
forms they choose in the analysis since real decisions on labor supply and savings appear to be insensitive
to real returns. So, perhaps in a model with richer preferences, the sunspot process could be more precisely
estimated from observations on consumption, employment and even asset prices.
    A ﬁnal point concerns a competing model. It might be possible to construct a model that has a unique
equilibrium with ﬂuctuations driven by real shocks to a banking technology. That model may appear to
be observationally equivalent to the one constructed by Cooper and Corbae. Yet, at least informally, the
response of the economy to conﬁdence building measures by the Roosevelt Administration in the mid 1930s
lends some additional support in favor of the sunspot perspective.



4     Aggregate Fluctuations with Technological Complementarities
Similar issues of identiﬁcation arise in stochastic business cycle models in the presence of technological
complementarities, see Bryant (1983), Benhabib and Farmer (1994), Baxter and King (1991) and Cooper
 30 Of   course the model also does not allow any ﬂuctuations conditional on a regime and hence is clearly at odds with
observations on that basis. One might add other sources of ﬂuctuations, such as TFP shocks.



                                                            14
(1999). In these models, the production function for a representative ﬁrm includes some measure of aggregate
production. The idea is to introduce a complementarity into the production process so that high levels of
activity in other ﬁrms implies that a single ﬁrm is more productive as well.31 Let y represent the output at
a given ﬁrm, Y be aggregate output, k and n the ﬁrm’s input of capital and labor respectively. Consider a
production function of:
                                                         y = Ak α nφ Y γ                                                     (15)

where A is a productivity shock that is common across producers. Here γ parameterizes the interaction
between producers. If γ is positive, then there is a complementarity at work: as other agents produce more,
the productivity of the individual agent increases as well. This production function can be imbedded into a
stochastic growth model. Consider the problem of a representative household with access to a production
technology given by (15). As all agents are identical and all shocks are common, the representative house-
hold will accumulate its own capital, supply its own labor and interact with other agents only due to the
technological complementarity. Thus the household solves:
                                                             ∞
                                                             
                                                     maxE          β t u(ct , lt )                                           (16)
                                                             t=0

subject to:

                                                  lt + nt   =    1                                                           (17)
                                                  ct + it   = yt                                                             (18)
                                                    kt+1    = kt (1 − δ) + it                                                (19)
                                                       yt   =    Aktα n1−α
                                                                       t   Ytγ                                               (20)

    In this optimization problem, the individual household takes Yt as given. In a symmetric equilibrium,
yt = Yt . As in Baxter and King (1991), this equilibrium condition is neatly imposed through the ﬁrst-
order conditions when the marginal products of labor and capital are calculated. From the set of ﬁrst-order
conditions, the symmetric equilibrium can be analyzed through by approximation around a steady state.32
    The distinguishing feature of this economy from the traditional RBC model is the presence of the tech-
nological complementarity, γ. We focus our discussion on estimating this parameter either directly by
estimation of (15) or by inferring it from the equilibrium.


4.1        Production Function Estimation
Cooper and Haltiwanger (1996) discuss evidence on estimates of γ from a variety of sources. Cooper and
Johri (1997) provide estimates of both contemporaneous and dynamic production complementarities.
    A key element in this exercise is, of course, identiﬁcation. In particular, how can a researcher distinguish
variations in output and productivity that arise from a common shock from those that arise endogenously
  31 The   presence of the complementarity is of interest as a means of propagating and magnifying shocks and also as a basis for
multiplicity.
 32 Of course, there is the issue of which steady state in the event there is more than one. In these papers, there is generally a

unique steady state. The multiplicity arises from the presence of a continuum of paths converging to a steady state.


                                                                15
through the production complementarity? The key is to ﬁnd variables that are independent of the technology
shocks (A) but are correlated with output movements. Naturally, one turns to policy interventions for this
purpose.
    In equilibrium, there is an identiﬁcation problem that can be seen directly from (15). Imposing yt = Yt
and taking logs, (15) becomes:

                                                 lnAt      α            φ
                                        lnyt =        +         lnnt         lnkt                                    (21)
                                                 1−γ    (1 − γ)      (1 − γ)
Clearly, there is no way to identify the three parameters characterizing the technology from the two regression
coeﬃcients.
    Baxter and King (1991) estimate γ by imposing constant returns to scale α + φ = 1. Using demand side
instruments, they estimate γ of about .33.
    Cooper and Johri (1997) estimate a version of (21) that includes both contemporaneous and dynamic
interactions in the production function. Their data is a panel at the two-digit level and they exploit sectoral
variation in their estimation. They use monetary innovations as instruments and ﬁnd evidence of both
contemporaneous and dynamic complementarities. In particular, when constant returns to scale to own
inputs is imposed, Cooper and Johri (1997) estimate γ = .24 and a dynamic complementarity of .32.


4.2        Equilibrium Analysis
Instead of focusing on the production function parameters alone, one can instead estimate parameters through
the equilibrium of the model, as in Farmer and Guo (1995). In some cases, the production complementarity
can be large enough that multiple equilibria arise as described in Benhabib and Farmer (1994) and Farmer
and Guo (1994).33 Here multiplicity arises in the form of multiple paths converging to a locally stable
steady state rather than multiple steady states. Given this indeterminacy, sunspots can be used to select
the transition path. These economies are of interest as well since they illustrate the estimation of a dynamic
sunspot equilibrium.
    The economy studied by Farmer and Guo (1995) adds taste shocks to the optimization problem of
the individual household in (16). The model thus contains two types of fundamental shocks (tastes and
technology) as well as sunspots (eﬀectively Euler equation errors). They reduce the equilibrium analysis to
a system of stochastic diﬀerence equations and then estimate these using instrumental variables.
    Farmer and Guo (1995) ﬁnd:

    • support for the conditions for sunspot equilibria: the labor demand curve is positively sloped and
          steeper than the labor supply curve.

    • Euler equation (demand) shocks are important

    • parameter estimates: increasing returns to scale in labor alone though private return not estimated
  33 For   the analysis of Baxter and King (1991) and Cooper and Johri (1997), the steady state was unique and saddle path
stable.




                                                             16
    These results seem quite favorable to the sunspots approach. But a couple of points of caution are in
order.
    First, the model is estimated with errors to the Euler equation. While one interpretation of these errors
has to do with the existence of a sunspot equilibrium, Farmer and Guo are appropriately cautious at this
point. This shock could in fact reﬂect a number of sources of variation that included in their structural
model, such as variations in government spending and shocks to the intermediation process.34 Thus, there
is a diﬃcult identiﬁcation problem that remains in order to complete the argument that ﬂuctuations are
driven by conﬁdence alone.
    Second, the results on the relative slopes of labor supply (negative) and labor demand (positive) are, to
say the least, rather unorthodox. The positively sloped labor demand reﬂects increasing returns at the social
level.35 Clearly further evaluation of these results, relative to those found in the labor literature, seems in
order.



5      Wage Inequality and Multiple Equilibria
Labor economics must confront the observation of wage inequality. In the U.S., there is considerable re-
search eﬀort in understanding the earnings inequality between blacks and whites. The possibility, raised in
the theoretical work on signalling is that the wage inequality, as well as other diﬀerence in labor market
experience, may reﬂect the multiplicity of equilibria rather than fundamental diﬀerences between groups.
    To see how this may happen, we discuss informally the equilibria outlined in Coate and Loury (1993).
Suppose that ﬁrms have to assign workers to either a simple or a complex task. Workers prefer to be assigned
to the complex task (perhaps reﬂecting higher wages or more prestige). Firms want to assign only qualiﬁed
workers to the complex task. Workers become qualiﬁed for the complex task by becoming educated (working
hard at school) though at a cost that is distributed across the workers (a proxy for ability). The problem is
that ﬁrms are unable to observe the education of the workers. Instead, they observe a noisy signal of worker
qualiﬁcation. As underlying worker quality is not observable, diﬀerences in wages and job assignments will
reﬂect the markets perception of the average ability of workers, given education attainment.
    It is then possible to construct equilibria in which workers from one group (call it group A) invest less
than workers from another group (B) simply because the perceived returns to education are lower for group
A workers. Given this choice by workers in group A, a ﬁrm will assign that worker to the complex task iﬀ
that worker ”scores” higher on a test of qualiﬁcation than a worker from group B. So, in equilibrium, the
returns to education are indeed lower for group A than for group B. Essentially, the fact that few workers
in group A decide to acquire human capital pulls down the return to that investment: a ﬁrm will interpret
a good signal as luck rather than the outcome of training.
    These models of job assignment (and even ones with more elaborate structures for wage determination)
  34 See   Cooper and Ejarque (2000) for a stochastic growth model with intermediation shocks and Ingram, Kocherlakota, and
Savin (1994) for maximum likelihood estimates of a stochastic growth model including intermediation and technology shocks.
  35 Whether this is the same as increasing returns at the private level which is often found is not clear since the private returns

to labor is not estimated.




                                                                17
can have multiple equilibria. In fact, there is a close link between discrimination and multiplicity brought
out in this discussion. If there is discrimination in the sense that otherwise identical groups are treated
diﬀerently in equilibrium, then there must be multiple equilibria. In the example above, assuming that the
fundamentals of the two groups are the same, one could simply switch the labels of the two groups and thus
construct an equilibrium in which the returns to education are lower for group B than for group A.36
   Thus an interesting research question is whether observed time series variation in the black-white wage
gap in the U.S. may reﬂect movements across equilibria rather than changes in fundamentals. Moro (2001)
addresses this question.


5.1     Model
Here we outline the model used by Moro and then turn to its empirical implementation given the possibility
of multiple equilibria.37

   • Workers

      There are two groups of workers which are identical except for a (pay-oﬀ irrelevant) label. For con-
      creteness we call them black and white workers since the empirical evidence is about this form of wage
      inequality. Workers can either invest in human capital (train) or not. Investment is costly (c) and this
      cost is distributed across the workers. Further, workers diﬀer in underlying ability. These diﬀerences
      in ability and the cost of investment in human capital are not independent: the cost of training is
      lower for high ability workers. Workers care about the returns to their labor (the wage) less the cost
      of training. The wage, as discussed below, reﬂects this signal of ability. Thus the key to motivating a
      worker to train is the diﬀerential between the wages received in the tasks they may be assigned to.

      After making a training decision, workers are tested. These test scores are observable to the ﬁrms and
      along with the workers’ group identity are used to determine wages and task assignment.

   • Firms

      There are many ﬁrms in the market. They hire workers and assign them to tasks. Like the Coate and
      Loury (1993) model, there are two tasks. The ﬁrst (simple job) does not require any training. The
      second (complex job) does require training. Firms are unable to observe the ability of workers and are
      also unable to observe the training of workers. Instead, they observe a signal which reﬂects the workers
      training: a worker that trains is more likely to obtain a higher signal. This signal is used by ﬁrms to
      set wages and to determine the task of the worker.

   • Equilibrium

      Firms hold certain beliefs about the workers and use them to assign workers to tasks and to pay them.
      The labor market is assumed to be competitive so that wages in the two tasks equal expected marginal
 36 Though   as discussed by Moro and Norman (2001) these arguments linking multiplicity to discrimination often exploit
separability (in production,for example) across the groups of agents.
  37 See Moro and Norman (2001) for a more detailed discussion of a closely related model.




                                                             18
      products, conditional on both the signal and the worker type. The equilibrium revolves around the
      determination of critical test scores that determines the assignment of a worker. If a worker scores in
      excess of this critical score, then he/she is assigned to the complex task. Else, the worker is assigned
      to the simple task.

      As in the simpler model of Coate and Loury (1993), the key to the multiplicity of equilibria is the
      implications of prior beliefs for ﬁrms’ decisions on assignment of workers. If ﬁrms believe that the
      fraction of workers who are training is low, then workers will not perceive any gains to training: good
                                                                  38
      test results will rationally be viewed as good luck.


5.2     Estimation
Moro estimates the model using cross sectional data on wages of black and white workers.39 The key to the
estimation is the mapping from the structural parameters to wage distributions. Then, having observations
of wages, the parameters can be estimated.
    In a ﬁrst stage, Moro estimates: the parameters of the testing technology, the cut-oﬀs on the tests and
the prior beliefs of ﬁrms about the fraction of qualiﬁed workers in each group from observations on wage
data. He ﬁnds (in each of the three cross sections of data)

* the fraction of blacks investing is less than that of whites

* the threshold signal for blacks exceeds that for whites

* the model captures the relative wage distributions quite well

    Given these estimates, the second stage estimates the distribution of training costs across the work-
ers as well as the distributions of skills in the two groups. Essentially the identiﬁcation here is achieved
by equilibrium restrictions: construct the distribution of costs such that the observations are part of an
equilibrium.
    Moro then searches for other equilibria. He concludes that there were multiple equilibria in one of the
three years but that the economy selected the equilibrium with lowest diﬀerentials in wages and investment.
    This is a very diﬀerent approach to studying multiple equilibria. Eﬀectively, Moro estimates a model
assuming that the outcome is from a particular equilibrium and then, through functional forms, searches for
other equilibria. One concern with this approach stems from considering this procedure in a setting where
there are indeed multiple equilibria. How can we guarantee that an adequate approximation around one of
them (assume it is linear!) will necessary ﬁnd other equilibria?


6     Social Interactions
The complementarities that underlie the basic model of Cooper and John (1988) also appear in a growing
literature on social interactions. The basic idea is that each agent has a reference group (e.g. a neighbor-
 38 Moro   (2001) does not supply conditions for multiple equilibria. Moro and Norman (2001) supply intuition and a formal
structure.
  39 Importantly, available data on human capital investment and job assignments is not used in the estimation.




                                                             19
hood, a peer group) that inﬂuences his/her behavior. For example, the agent may desire to ”conform” to
the behavior of others and thus will tend to mimic their actions. This creates a strategic complementarity:
a single agent has an incentive to mimic the actions of others.40 Here though the strategic complemen-
tarity is associated with an interaction in preferences rather than in technology (Bryant (1983)) or trading
opportunities (Diamond (1982)).
   Empirically, there is evidence of correlated behavior across groups of agents. The diﬃcult part of empirical
studies is determining whether these correlations reﬂect common variations or some form of social interaction.
This section begins with a review of a basic model and then turns to estimation.
   As Manski (1993) states it:

         This paper examines the ”reﬂection” problem that arises when a researcher observing the dis-
         tribution of behavior in a population tries to infer whether the average behavior in some group
         inﬂuences the behavior of the individual that comprise the group.[pg. 532.]


6.1       Manski’s Model
Suppose that individual behavior is given by:

                                                y = α + βE(y | x) + z  η + µ                                              (22)

where the y denotes an outcome of individual choice (school achievement), x are attributes of an individual’s
reference group (school peer group), z and µ are individual attributes where z is observable and µ is not
observed to the researcher.
   The individual behavior depends on the group through the term E(y | x).41 Thus a key parameter is β.
The determination of the individual choice is part of a social equilibrium as long as β = 0. To solve for the
average level of performance given (x, z), use (22) to obtain

                                             E(y | x, z) = α + βE(y | x) + z  η.                                          (23)

Integrating this over z, the source of variation across individuals, yields:

                                          E(y | x) = α + βE(y | x) + E(z  | x)η.                                          (24)

Given the assumed linearity in (22), as long as β = 1, there is a unique equilibrium of:

                                                           α                η
                                             E(y | x) =       + E(z  | x)                                                 (25)
                                                          1−β              1−β
This expression can then be used in (22) yielding:

                                                 α                βη
                                           y=       + E(z  | x)     + zη + µ                                             (26)
                                                1−β              1−β
 40 Akerlof    (1997) presents an informal overview of this approach to social interactions.
 41 It   is easiest to think of x here as an indicator variable of group membership so that E(y | x) simply measures the average
value of y across the members of group x.




                                                               20
The social interaction is parameterized by β which determines the response of the individual to variations in
the mean behavior of the reference group. But, a regression based upon this equilibrium will not necessarily
determine all of the parameters uniquely: there is potentially an identiﬁcation problem.42
    The intuition parallels that given in the discussion of (21). In that case, the own returns to factor input
were impossible to distinguish from production function interactions given aggregate observations. Here, we
see that given observations on group and not individual decisions, disentangling social interactions from the
individual’s response to common sources of variation is not possible. In some cases though, observations on
individual choices (again in parallel with the production function estimation) may facilitate identiﬁcation.
    Take, for example, the outcome of students in a high school. Suppose that the average achievement of
these students is quite high. Does this reﬂect the ”productive atmosphere” created by the interaction of
these students or does it reﬂect ”good luck” of having a great teacher in common? What types of natural
experiments and data would allow us to identify the interactions?
    Manski (1993) presents certain conditions under which identiﬁcation is possible in (26). Clearly, if
E(z  | x) and z are independent, then the two coeﬃcients obtained from (26) will enable a researcher to
distinguish β from η. Otherwise, identiﬁcation will not be possible. If E(z  | x) does not vary across
the reference groups, then this term is constant and β cannot be estimated even from a cross section of
individuals. To appreciate the importance of individual variations, suppose that individuals in a reference
group had the same value of z. Then again, it is not possible to distinguish β from η.


6.2        Binary Choice: Brock and Durlauf
Brock and Durlauf (2000) study related models in which the binary choice of an individual depends on the
choices of others, as in the participation complementarities in Cooper (1999). Brock and Durlauf consider
the binary choice model:
                                            maxωi ∈{−1,1} V (ωi , Zi , µei (ω−i ), 6i (ωi ))               (29)

where ωi is the choice of agent i, Zi is a vector of exogenous variables that inﬂuences the preferences of these
agent across the alternatives, µei (ω−i ) represents the beliefs of the agent over the binary choices of others
and 6i (ωi ) is an agent/choice speciﬁc shock.
    Thus the model of choice is similar to the binary choice models found in other parts of economics with
one additional feature: the returns to a particular choice depends on the choices of others. Of course, in
this general form the nature of this interaction is not clear. A strategic complementarity is present if the
likelihood an agent selects a particular action is higher if ”others” select that same action. By ”others” we
mean agents whose choice inﬂuence the payoﬀs to the agent whose behavior we are studying. As in the
  42 In   fact,Manski makes this point even stronger with a more complex model:

                                              y = α + βE(y | x) + E(z | x) γ + z  η + µ                   (27)

where E(µ | x, z) = x δ. The shocks (µ) may be correlated across individuals.
  Substituting this equilibrium into (27) implies a reduced form model of:
                                                      α              γ + βη       δ
                                     E(y | x, z) =       + E(z | x)        + x     + z  η.               (28)
                                                     1−β              1−β        1−β
Here it is very diﬃcult to identify beta.


                                                                  21
discussion of Manksi’s model and in the discussion of the production complementarity model, determining
the appropriate reference group is an important open issue in this literature.
    Brock and Durlauf (2000) propose speciﬁcation of utility as:
                                                                                  Jij
                         V (ωi , Zi , µei (ω−i ), 6i (ωi )) = u(ωi , Zi ) − Ei              (ωi − ωj )2 + 6i (ωi )           (30)
                                                                                        2
                                                                                 j=i

where Jij is a weight that agent i places on the (expected) choice of j. A simple model would have Jij = J
iﬀ j is in i s reference group. Then J would be added to the key parameter in estimation of the social
interactions eﬀect.
    Brock and Durlauf (2000) describe the estimation of this model once structure is placed on the errors
(e.g. a logistic speciﬁcation). Importantly, there is the issue of the treatment of the expectations terms.
One approach is to think of these as additional regressors. A second, along the lines explored above, is
to supplement the model of choice with a rational expectations restrictions on the expectations of agent i.
Brock and Durlauf (2000) follow this approach as well though they use the variables that reﬂect the social
interaction as regressors rather than solving for them as part of an equilibrium.43
    Not surprisingly, many of the same identiﬁcation problems arise in the binary choice framework as in
Manski’s model. However, Brock and Durlauf (2000) argue that variations in the equilibrium selected across
”neighborhoods” can provide a basis of identiﬁcation.



7         Conclusion
This paper began with the often expressed concern that models build upon multiple equilibria, despite their
intuitive appeal, were incapable of confronting data. The point of this paper was to argue, through selected
examples, that in fact progress has been made to use observations to estimate (some) parameters of these
models and to falsify these models.
    Note that the empirical approach described here rests upon versions of simulated method of moments
and/or maximum likelihood. This emphasis does not imply that alternative means of model evaluation
should not be considered. For example, there may be certain experiments initiated by government action
(the introduction of deposit insurance, aspects of the National Industrial Recovery Act, as in Cooper and
Haltiwanger (1993)) where the response of the economy reveals the resolution of strategic uncertainty.
    Of course, a paper of this type must miss some important aspects of the ongoing research on this topic.
Unfortunately, the paper lacks any discussion of work on experimental coordination games. In that research,
the dynamics of learning through the interaction of player is quite rich and may ultimately provide the basis
for the empirical evaluation of models of learning and selection. Further, recent results on coordination
games with private information, are unfortunately excluded for consideration.
  43 In   the discussion of the Manski model we solved for the equilibrium values of the groups means and then substituted them
back into the agents choice. The same issues arise in the estimation of production functions. Using plant level data, for example,
one can use sectoral or aggregate output as a regressor and with appropriate instruments obtain consistent estimates.




                                                                  22
References
Aiyagari, R. (1995): “Comments on Farmer and Guo’s ”The econometrics of Indeterminacy: An Applied
  Study”,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staﬀ Report 196.

Akerlof, G. (1997): “Social Distance and Social Decisions,” Econometrica, 65(5), 1005–1027.

Azariadis, C. (1981): “Self-Fulﬁlling Prophecies,” Journal of Economic Theory, 25, 380–96.

Azariadis, C., and R. Guesnerie (1986): “Sunspots and Cycles,” Review of Economic Studies, 53(5),
  725–37.

Baxter, M., and R. King (1991): “Production Externalities and Business Cycles,” Federal Reserve Bank
  of Minneapolis, Discussion Paper 53.

Benhabib, J., and R. Farmer (1994): “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 63, 19–41.

Bisin, A. Moro, A., and G.Topa (2002): “The Empirical Content of Models with Multiple Equilibria,”
  mimeo, New York University.

Breshnahan, T., and P. Reiss (1991): “Empirical Models of Discrete Games,” Journal of Econometrics,
  64, 57–81.

Brock, W., and S. Durlauf (2000): “Interactions Based Models,” NBER, Technical Working Paper no.
  258.

Bryant, J. (1983): “A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 97, 525–29.

           (1987): “The Paradox of Thrift, Liquidity Preference and Animal Spirits,” Econometrica, 55,
  1231–36.

Carlsson, H., and E. van Damme (1993): “Global Games and Economic Selection,” Eca, 61, 989–1018.

Coate, S., and G. Loury (1993): “Will Aﬃrmative Action Policies Eliminate Negative Stereotypes?,”
  American Economic Review, 83(5), 1220–1240.

Cooper, R. (1999): Coordination Games: Complementarities and Macroeconomics. Cambridge University
  Press.

Cooper, R., and D. Corbae (2001): “Financial Collapse and Active Monetary Policy: A Lesson from
  the Great Depression,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis: Staﬀ report 289, forthcoming, Journal of
  Economic Theory.

Cooper, R., and J. Ejarque (2000): “Financial Intermediation and Aggregate Fluctuations: A Quanti-
  tative Analysis,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 4, 423–447.


                                                  23
Cooper, R., and J. Haltiwanger (1993): “Autos and the National Industrial Recovery Act: Evidence
  on Industry Complementarities,” QJE, 108, 1043–72.

           (1996): “Evidence on Macroeconomic Complementarities,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  77, 78–93.

Cooper, R., and A. John (1988): “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 103, 441–63.

Cooper, R., and A. Johri (1997): “Dynamic Complementarities: A Quantitative Analysis,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 40, 97–119.

Diamond, P. (1982): “Aggregate Demand management in search equilibrium,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 90(5), 881–894.

Farmer, R., and J. T. Guo (1994): “Real Business Cycles and the Animal Spirits Hypothesis,” Journal
  of Economic Theory, 63, 42–72.

           (1995): “The econometrics of Indeterminacy: An Applied Study,” Carnegie Rochester Series on
  Public Policy, 42.

Gourieroux, C., and A. Monfort (1996): Simulation-Based Econometric Methods. Oxford University
  Press.

Hansen, L. P. (1982): “Large Sample Properties of Generelized Method of Moments Estimators,” Econo-
  metrica, 50, 1029–1054.

Ingram, B., N. Kocherlakota, and N. Savin (1994): “Explaining Business Cycles:A multiple-shock
  aproach,” JME, 34, 415–28.

Jovanovic, B. (1989): “Observable Implications of models with Multiple Equilibria,” Econometrica, 57,
  1431–38.

Manski, C. (1993): “Identiﬁcation of Endogenous Social Eﬀects: The Reﬂection Problem,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 60(3), 531–42.

Moro, A. (2001): “The Eﬀects of Statistical Discrimination on Balck-White Wage Inequality: Estimating
  a Model with Multiple Equilibria,” mimeo.

Moro, A., and P. Norman (2001): “A General Equilibrium Model of Statistical Discrimination,” mimeo.

Weil, P. (1987): “Increasing Returns and Animal Spirits,” American Economic Review, 79, 889–94.

Woodford, M. (1987): “Three Questions about sunspot equilibria as an Explanation of Economic Fluc-
  tuations,” American Economic Review, 77(2), 93–98.




                                                    24
