NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOMEOWNERSHIP IN THE IMMIGRANT POPULATION

George J. Borjas

Working Paper 8945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8945

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002

This research was funded by the Research Institute for Housing America. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Homeownership in the Immigrant Population
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 8945
May 2002
JEL No. J1, R2

ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the determinants of homeownership in immigrant households over the
1980-2000 period. The study finds that immigrants have lower homeownership rates than natives and that
the homeownership gap widened significantly during that period. The differential location decisions of
immigrant and native households, as well as the changing national origin mix of the immigrant
population, helps explain much of the homeownership gap. The evidence also indicates that the growth
of ethnic enclaves in major American cities could become an important factor in increasing immigrant
demand for owner-occupied housing in many metropolitan areas.

George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

2
HOMEOWNERSHIP IN THE IMMIGRANT POPULATION
George J. Borjas
I. Introduction
The social, demographic, and economic changes initiated by the resurgence of large-scale
immigration to the United States are of historic proportions. In 1970, 4.8 percent of the U.S.
population was foreign-born. By 2000, there were 28.4 million foreign-born persons in the
United States, pushing the foreign-born share to over 10 percent [24]. Moreover, because of the
decline in the birthrates of native families, immigration now accounts for nearly half of the
growth in population. In short, immigration inevitably plays an increasingly important role in
determining demographic and economic trends in the United States.1
Although some observers have argued that the resurgence of immigration may offset the
decline in the demand for owner-occupied housing that may occur as the baby boom ages [7, 17],
the studies that examine the economic performance of immigrants suggest that the link between
immigration and housing demand may not be as straightforward as it seems. For instance, there
exists a large gap between the wages of immigrant and native workers. In 1998, the typical
immigrant worker earned 23 percent less than the typical native worker. Moreover, a great deal
of research has documented that immigrants who arrived in the 1980s and 1990s are relatively
less skilled—and have correspondingly lower wages—than immigrants who came in earlier
waves [2]. Finally, the wages of immigrant and native workers tend to converge, but slowly. As a
result, the immigrant waves that arrived in the 1980s and 1990s may have a 10 to 20 percent
wage disadvantage over much of their working lives. All of these trends imply that a much more

1 The resurgence of large-scale immigration has generated a large literature that analyzes the economic
impact of immigration, focusing particularly on the labor market consequences [4, 11]

3
careful study of homeownership in the immigrant population is required before one can assess
how immigration will affect the aggregate demand for owner-occupied housing.2
This paper uses data drawn from the 1980 and 1990 U.S. Censuses and the 1998-2000 the
Current Population Surveys (CPS) to provide a comprehensive empirical study of the
determinants of homeownership in the immigrant population. The analysis addresses two related
questions. First, what are the trends in homeownership rates in the immigrant population?
Second, which are the key factors that drive these trends?
It turns out that two variables—which been somewhat neglected in earlier studies of
immigrant homeownership—play a central role in determining differences in homeownership
rates between the immigrant and native populations: The national origin of immigrants and the
residential location choices made by different immigrant groups. It is well known that different
national origin groups experience very different socioeconomic outcomes and that different
groups cluster in different localities. The empirical analysis reported below shows that these two
variables are responsible for many of the key trends in immigrant homeownership rates in the
past two decades, explaining why immigrant households are less likely to own their homes than
native households and why the “homeownership gap” widened substantially since 1980. The
evidence presented in this paper also suggests that the continuing growth of ethnic enclaves in

2

Earlier studies of homeownership in the immigrant population include Alba and Logan [1], Coulson [8],
Krivo [14], Myers and Lee [18, 19], and Myers, Megbolugbe, and Lee [20]. Many of these studies focus on
documenting the trends in the demand for owner-occupied housing in the immigrant population—and in comparing
homeownership rates between immigrants and natives. Myers and Lee [18] and Myers, Megbolube, and Lee [20],
for example, apply the econometric framework developed in the labor market literature to examine if the newer
immigrant arrivals have different rates of homeownership than earlier immigrant waves, and to determine the rate at
which a given immigrant cohort moves into owner-occupied housing. These studies typically find that more recent
immigrant waves have somewhat lower homeownership rates than earlier waves, but that the immigrant population
experiences relatively fast assimilation into homeownership. The important question of whether immigration affects
housing prices in the localities where immigrants cluster remains unexplored. An important exception is Saiz [22],
who investigates the impact of the Mariel flow of Cuban immigrants in 1980 on rental housing prices in Miami.

4
American cities could increase demand for owner-occupied housing in immigrant communities
in the years ahead.

II. Descriptive Statistics
This section describes the basic trends in the demand for owner-occupied housing in the
immigrant and native populations over the 1980-2000 period. The empirical analysis uses data
drawn from the Public Use Microdata Samples of the 1980 and 1990 decennial U.S. Census, and
the 1998-2000 Annual Demographic Files of the CPS.
The unit of observation is the household. A household is classified as an immigrant
household if the head of the household was born outside the United States and is either an alien
or a naturalized citizen; all other households are classified as “native” households.3 The study is
restricted to households that do not reside in group quarters and that live in one of the
identifiable metropolitan areas in the Census or CPS data.4 The household head must be at least
18 years old to be included in the analysis. I extracted a 1/100 random sample of native
households and a 5/100 random sample of immigrant households from each of the two decennial
Censuses. To increase the sample size in the CPS data, I pooled the data available in the 1998,

3

I experimented with alternative definitions of the immigrations status of the household. For example, I
used a more stringent definition of an “immigrant household” as a household where all persons are foreign-born.
This alternative definition leads to results that are quite similar to those reported in this paper.
4

Restricting the analysis to households residing in identifiable metropolitan areas affects relatively few
households in the immigrant population. In 2000, for example, 94.2 percent of the immigrant households resided in
these metropolitan areas, as compared to 75.2 percent for native households.

5
1999, and 2000 surveys. For descriptive convenience, I will refer to these pooled data as the
“2000” CPS data.5
Table 1 summarizes the key trends revealed by these data. Homeownership rates are
lower among immigrant households than among native households. Further, the homeownership
gap between the two groups widened substantially between 1980 and 2000, with much of the
widening occurring during the 1990s. In particular, the rate of homeownership among immigrant
households declined during this period, at a time when homeownership rates increased steadily
among native households. In 1980, for example, 51.2 percent of immigrant households owned
their homes. This fraction fell to 49.9 percent in 1990, and to 47.4 percent by 2000. In contrast,
the rate of homeownership for native households increased from 63.2 percent in 1980 to 67.2
percent by 2000. Put differently, the 12-percentage point gap in homeownership rates that
existed between immigrants and natives in 1980 grew to a 20-point disadvantage by 2000.6
Table 1 also reports homeownership rates for various immigrant waves throughout the
1980-2000 period. The observed trends in homeownership rates for the various immigrant
cohorts yield two key findings that will be explored further below. As in Myers and Lee [19], the
data suggest that immigrant households experience a high rate of assimilation into
homeownership. Consider, for instance, the homeownership rate of the immigrants who arrived

5 The three CPS extracts contain roughly the same number of observations. I constructed household
weights for the pooled sample by assuming that the total number of weighted households in each of the CPS
calendar years was exactly equal to one-third of the total number of weighted households in the pooled sample.
6

Because much of the widening in the homeownership gap occurred between 1990 and 2000, some of the
pattern could arise because of a data comparability problem: the 1990 homeownership rates are calculated using
Census data while the 2000 rates are based on CPS data. It turns out, however, that there is a significant widening of
the homeownership gap even when one considers only the trend contained in the CPS files. Prior to the mid-1990s,
the CPS conducted occasional surveys that reported the immigration status of households. In general, the
homeownership rates reported in the June 1988 CPS Supplement are quite similar to those reported by the 1990
Census. In 1988, the homeownership rate for native households was 63.6 percent, while the homeownership rate for
immigrant households was 50.3 percent (as compared to 64.2 and 49.9 percent in the 1990 Census, respectively).

6
between 1975 and 1979. In 1980, shortly after their arrival, only 19.5 percent of the immigrant
households in this cohort owned their homes. By 1980, the cohort’s ownership rate had increased
to 45.7 percent, and by 2000 it had increased further to 56.4 percent. It is evident, therefore, that
homeownership rates rise substantially over time for specific immigrant cohorts. Of course, this
increase must be contrasted with the rise in homeownership experienced by comparably aged
native households in order to determine if there is rapid assimilation into homeownership.
Nevertheless, the data seem to suggest that there may well be a great deal of assimilation.
Second, it seems that more recent immigrant waves tend to have lower homeownership
rates than earlier waves. This finding, of course, mirrors the well-known result of declining
relative skills for successive immigrant waves, where it is typically found that later immigrant
waves have relatively lower educational attainment and wages than earlier immigrant waves,
holding constant the number of years the worker has resided in the United States. To illustrate,
the 1980 Census indicates that 35.9 percent of the immigrants who had been in the country
between 5 and 10 years (i.e., the 1970-74 arrivals) owned their homes. In contrast, the 1990
Census reveals that only 30.6 percent of the immigrants who had been in the country between 5
and 10 years owned their homes, and the 2000 CPS reveals that 26.4 percent of those who have
been in the country between 5 and 10 years owned their homes. Over a 20-year period, therefore,
the homeownership rate of immigrant households who have been in the country between 5 and
10 years fell by almost 10 percentage points.

The difference in the homeownership rate between these two data sets is not statistically significant for either native
or immigrant households, and is not significant even within narrowly defined year-of-arrival immigrant cohorts.

7
Measuring Cohort Effects and Assimilation
The intercensal tracking of immigrant cohorts conducted in Table 1 does not provide a
complete description of the extent of assimilation into homeownership that actually takes place
in the immigrant population. The intercensal comparison of a sample of immigrants who are
aged 18 or above is contaminated by the fact that later Censuses include a number of persons
who migrated as children. It is likely that immigrant children do not experience the same process
of assimilation into homeownership as immigrants who entered the country as adults. Therefore,
a better description of the assimilation experience of an immigrant cohort requires that the
analysis also control for age at migration. In effect, one can then compare how an age-adjusted
immigrant cohort performs relative to natives who are at the same stage of the life cycle. Myers
and Lee [18] introduced this notion into the housing literature by conducting a “double-cohort”
analysis of homeownership rates in the immigrant and native populations, which accounts for
both calendar year of arrival and age-at-migration when tracking immigrant cohorts across
Censuses.
Table 2 summarizes the descriptive evidence on assimilation for these narrowly defined
immigrant cohorts over the 1980-2000 period. It is clear that tracking specific age groups across
Censuses reveals the existence of sizable assimilation effects into homeownership in the
immigrant population. Consider, for example, the sample of immigrants who arrived in the
United States between 1975 and 1979 and who were 25-34 years old in 1980 (so that most
household heads in this sample migrated as young adults). In 1980, just after entry, the
homeownership rate for this group of immigrant households was 16.5 percent. By 1990, the
homeownership rate for this cohort had risen to 53.1 percent, a remarkable rise during the first
ten years in the country, and increased further to 68.3 percent by 2000. In contrast to the 52-point

8
rise in homeownership rates experienced by this immigrant cohort, the homeownership rate of
natives who were aged 25-34 in 1980 increased from 49.8 percent in 1980 to 76.8 percent in
2000, a 27-point increase. In short, the young immigrants who arrived in the late 1970s
experienced a remarkable degree of assimilation into homeownership. It seems as if
homeownership is an important part of the “offer” of political, cultural, and economic benefits
that draws immigrants to the United States.
The remaining rows of Table 2 show the same rapid assimilation into homeownership for
most immigrant cohorts, particularly those who arrived in the country in their 20s and 30s. Not
surprisingly, the rate of assimilation is not as fast—although it is still sizable—for immigrants
who entered the country at an older age. Consider, for instance, the experience of immigrants
who arrived between 1985 and 1989 and who were 45-54 years old at the time of arrival. The
homeownership rate for this cohort increased “only” from 25.4 to 40.5 percent between 1990 and
2000. Nevertheless, this 15-point rise in homeownership rates is substantial when compared with
the 4.6 percentage point rise exhibited by comparably aged native households over the same time
period, from 76.2 to 80.8 percent.
Finally, the descriptive data in Table 2 shows that cohort effects, with more recent
cohorts having lower homeownership rates, remain important even after controlling for age-atmigration. Consider, for example, the experience of the immigrants who have been in the United
States fewer than five years and who are relatively young (25 to 34 years old) at the time of
entry. The homeownership rate for this group of young arrivals was 16.5 percent in 1980, 12.2
percent in 1990, and 10.0 percent in 2000, a drop of 6.5 percentage points.7 In contrast, the group

7

A potential data problem arises when one compares the homeownership rates of the “most” recent
immigrants across data sets. Table 2 defines this cohort as immigrants who arrived between 1975 and 1979 in the
1980 Census; 1985 and 1989 in the 1990 Census; and 1995 and 2000 in the pooled 2000 CPS. Because the pooled

9
of native households aged 25-34 had a homeownership rate of 49.8 percent in 1980 and 46.7
percent in 2000, a much slower decline than that observed among comparably aged immigrant
cohorts. In short there is a persistent decline in homeownership rates across successive
immigrant cohorts, both in absolute terms and relative to the trends in homeownership observed
in the native population.
It is important to note that there is one crucial difference between the homeownership
trends revealed by Table 2 and the assimilation and cohort effects that have been measured in
studies of immigrant skills or labor market performance. Although both sets of results indicate
that more recent waves perform relatively worse than earlier waves along some basic economic
dimension, the two sets of findings differ in one fundamental way: There is a significant amount
of assimilation into homeownership, but there is relatively little assimilation in wages or in skill
accumulation. It would be of great interest to determine why this important difference in the
assimilation experience arises. Unfortunately, there has been relatively little study of the
variables that determine the rate of wage convergence between immigrants and natives. As a
result, the available evidence provides little hint as to the underlying factors that facilitate or
hamper the economic progress of immigrants.

National Origin Differences in Homeownership Rates
Studies that examine the trends in immigrant economic performance in the United States
have often emphasized the importance of national origin in generating many of these trends [3].
The national origin mix of the immigrant population is an important part of any attempt to
understand aggregate trends for two reasons. First, there are huge differences in skills and
2000 CPS consists of the 1998, 1999, and 2000 surveys, these pooled data cannot provide a representative sample of
persons who migrated between 1995 and 2000.

10
economic performance across national origin groups in the United States, with groups that
originate in the industrialized countries performing better in the U.S. labor market than groups
originating in less-developed countries. For example, immigrants from El Salvador or Mexico
earn 40 percent less than natives, while immigrants from Germany or the United Kingdom earn
30 to 40 percent more [4, p. 1686]. Second, there has been a substantial “redistribution” of
admissions, away from the traditional European countries and towards less-developed countries
in Asia and Latin America. Over two-thirds of the legal immigrants admitted during the 1950s
originated in Europe or Canada, 25 percent originated in Latin America, and only 6 percent
originated in Asia. By the 1990s, only 14 percent of the immigrants originated in Europe or
Canada, almost half originated in Latin America, and 31 percent originated in Asia. In view of
these trends, therefore, it is not surprising that the changing national origin mix of immigrants
can “explain” a large part of the decline in relative wages across successive immigrant waves.
The first four columns of Table 3 document the huge differences in educational attainment
and log of household income across national origin groups in 1990. Mean years of schooling
range from 8 years for immigrants originating in Mexico or Portugal, to about 15 years for
immigrants originating in such diverse countries as India and the United Kingdom. Similarly,
immigrants from El Salvador or Mexico have household income that is 30 percent lower than
that of native households, while immigrants from the United Kingdom have 6 percent higher
household income, and immigrants from India have 38 percent higher household income.
Moreover, these differences cannot be attributed to the fact that some national origin groups have
lived in the United States for longer periods. The data reported in Table 3 also shows that there is
substantial dispersion in both educational attainment and household income even among
immigrants who have been in the country more than 10 years.

11
In view of these huge differences in skills and household income among immigrant groups,
it is not surprising that there are also huge differences in homeownership rates among national
origin groups. The last two columns of Table 3 document some of these differences. In 1990, the
homeownership rate was 78.8 percent for Italian immigrants, 70.5 percent for German
immigrants, 56.5 percent for Chinese immigrants, 38.4 percent for Mexican immigrants, 17.3
percent for Salvadoran immigrants, and 14.2 percent for immigrants from the Dominican
Republic. Moreover, as the last column of the table shows, these differences cannot be dismissed
as reflecting the possibility that some groups have, on average, spent a longer time in the United
States and hence have had more time to assimilate. The national origin differences in
homeownership rates remain strong and significant even among immigrants who have been in
the United States at least 10 years. For instance, even after 10 years in the United States, the
homeownership rate of immigrants originating in Canada (70.6 percent) is more than 50
percentage points larger than the homeownership rate of immigrants originating in the
Dominican Republic (18.4 percent).
The huge national origin differentials in homeownership rates raise a number of interesting
issues that will be explored in what follows. In particular: What factors explain the sizable
national origin differences in tenure choice? To what extent does the changing national origin
mix of the immigrant population account for the aggregate decline in homeownership rates
observed between 1980 and 2000? And do ethnic enclaves—which may capture a crucial
interaction between national origin and the geographic location of immigrants—speed up or slow
down the move to owner-occupied housing by immigrant groups?

12
Geographic Clustering of Immigrants
It is well known that immigrants and natives tend to live in different places. Table 4
illustrates the extreme geographic clustering that exists in the immigrant population. In 1990,
32.5 percent of the immigrant population lived in only three metropolitan areas (Los Angeles,
New York, and Miami). In contrast, only 9.1 percent of the native population was clustered in
the three largest metropolitan areas housing natives (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago).
Not surprisingly, there are sizable differences in homeownership rates across
metropolitan areas, for both immigrant and native households. In 1990, the homeownership rate
for immigrants in Los Angeles was only 39.1 percent, while the homeownership rate for
immigrants in Chicago was 55.5 percent. In contrast, the homeownership rate for natives in Los
Angeles was 55.3 percent, while the homeownership rate for natives in Chicago was 63.2
percent.
The extreme geographic clustering of immigrants—and the fact that homeownership rates
vary dramatically across metropolitan areas—may be a particularly important determinant of the
homeownership gap between immigrant and native households. In particular, even a superficial
look at the data reported in Table 4 suggests that a relatively large number of immigrants tend to
live in metropolitan areas where even native households have low homeownership rates. For
example, the two metropolitan areas with the largest immigrant populations in 1990 were Los
Angeles and New York (accounting for 27.4 percent of all immigrant households). It turns out,
however, that the homeownership rate in these two metropolitan areas is relatively low even for
native households—55.3 percent in Los Angeles and 37.9 percent in New York—far below the
national average of 64.2 percent. As a result, it seems likely that part of the homeownership gap
between immigrants and natives can be attributed to the fact that many immigrants just happen to

13
live in areas that have relatively low homeownership rates—for reasons that may have much
more to do with the structure of the housing market and housing costs in these areas, rather than
with the specific disadvantages faced by immigrant households.
The extreme geographic clustering of immigrants is likely to play an important role in
determining demand for owner-occupied housing for yet another reason. In particular, not only
are immigrants—as a group—clustered in a few geographic areas, but different types of
immigrants tend to be clustered in different places. A disproportionately large number of
Mexican immigrants, for instance, reside in Los Angeles; a disproportionately large number of
Cuban immigrants reside in Miami, and a disproportionately large number of immigrants from
the Dominican Republic reside in New York. This geographic sorting of the immigrant
population has given rise to the large ethnic enclaves that are a prominent characteristic of major
American cities.
It is likely that the enclave economy alters the incentives for homeownership. After all,
the enclave changes economic opportunities as well as provides a clustering of persons who
share the same preferences and attitudes as the immigrants, thus perhaps affecting the value of
the amenities that the local area has to offer. Section IV will examine the empirical impact of the
ethnic enclave on homeownership rates in the immigrant population.

III. Determinants of the Homeownership Gap
A voluminous literature examines tenure choice in the United States [12, 13, 21]. This
literature has shown that household income, credit constraints, labor market conditions, and
housing prices play a crucial role in determining the household’s tenure choice. In addition, the
literature documents that many socioeconomic variables, such as educational attainment,

14
household composition, race, and ethnicity, are important determinants of homeownership rates.
I adopt the basic model used in this literature to examine the determinants of the homeownership
gap between immigrants and native. In particular, consider estimating the following linear
probability model separately in each cross-section data set:

(1)

Hit = Xit βt + δt Iit + εit ,

where Hit indicates the homeownership status of household i at time t (set to one if the household
lives in owner-occupied housing, and zero otherwise); X gives a vector describing the
socioeconomic background of the household (described below); and Iit equals one if the
household is an immigrant household, and zero otherwise. For computational convenience, I use
the linear probability model throughout the study. The regression models will often have large
numbers of observations (in the hundreds of thousands) and contain many standardizing
variables (over 400 regressors). I estimated somewhat similar models using the logistic
specification in smaller, randomly drawn samples, and obtained numerically similar results. The
linear probability specification implies that the coefficient δt gives the difference in
homeownership rates between immigrants and natives at time t after adjusting for differences in
the characteristics X between the two groups.8 Since the regression in (1) is estimated separately

8 Because of the rotation sampling used by the CPS, 50 percent of the observations can theoretically appear
in two consecutive March surveys. In practice, the fraction of observations that can be matched across years is
considerably lower [16]. The regressions reported below do not adjust the standard errors of the regression
coefficients estimated in the 2000 cross-section for the correlation that this sampling methodology imparts in the
residuals. To check the reliability of the evidence, I estimated some of the regression models on a sample of
household heads that could not be matched across CPS surveys, ensuring that there were no repeat observations for
the same household. The regression coefficients were quantitatively similar, and the key effects discussed in this
paper remained statistically significant.

15
in each cross-section, the trend in the parameter δt will indicate if the adjusted homeownership
gap is narrowing or widening.
Table 5 presents summary statistics describing differences in a large vector of
background socioeconomic characteristics between immigrants and natives in the various
samples. It is clear that immigrants and native households differ in fundamental ways:
immigrant households, for instance, have lower household income (about 18 percent lower in
2000), are larger (by about .7 persons per household), have more children (.3 more children per
household), and are more likely to contain both spouses (51 percent of native household heads
are married, spouse present, as compared to 58 percent of immigrant households).
It turns out, however, that these differences in socioeconomic characteristics do not play
an important role in determining the homeownership gap between immigrants and natives. Table
6 summarizes the evidence. The first row of the table reports the unadjusted differences in
homeownership rates, while the remaining rows use alternative specifications for the regression
model in (1). The second row reports the coefficient δ after the regression controls for the
detailed vector of socioeconomic variables summarized in Table 5, including the age, sex, and
educational attainment of the household head; the household’s log income; the number of
persons and children in the household; and dummy variables indicating if the head is married
spouse present, or married spouse absent.9 The data reveal a surprising fact: differences in these
socioeconomic variables between immigrants and natives explain relatively little of the gap in
homeownership rates. In 2000, for example, the unadjusted gap is 19.7 percentage points, and

9

The full regressions (not shown in the table) suggest that the standardizing variables typically have the
expected impact on homeownership. Homeownership rates are higher in high-income households or in households
where the head is highly educated, and are lower in households headed by a woman or a by relatively young person.

16
falls to only 16.4 percentage points even after controlling for this extensive set of differences in
socioeconomic background between the two populations.10
However, the third row of Table 6 shows that there is one important variable—which has
not been widely stressed in earlier studies—that explains a larger part of the homeownership gap:
the difference in the residential location choices made by immigrant and native households. As I
documented earlier, the rate of homeownership varies systematically across cities (e.g.,
homeownership rates are low in New York City and high in San Jose). These metropolitan area
differences probably have little to do with immigration, and may be attributable to differences in
the structure of the housing market or to regional differences in housing costs. One can easily
control for these differences in homeownership rates across metropolitan areas, regardless of
their source, by simply including a vector of almost 300 metropolitan area fixed effects in the
vector X. Table 6 shows that including a vector of dummy variables indicating the metropolitan
area where the household resides in the regression model narrows the homeownership gap in
each cross-section: from 12.0 percent to 6.0 percent in 1980, from 14.4 percent to 9.2 percent in
1990, and from 19.7 percent to 13.5 percent in 2000.11
The evidence summarized in Table 6, therefore, provides one important insight into how
the homeownership gap between immigrants and natives arises: immigrants and natives simply
tend to choose to live in different areas. In fact, the comparison of rows 2 and 3 of the table
suggest that locational differences between the immigrant and native populations explain a far

10

The homeownership gap between immigrants and natives is evaluated at the point where the years-sincemigration variable takes on the mean value for the immigrant population. The inclusion of the years-since-migration
variable in the regression models helps to control for differences that may exist across immigrant waves due either
to the process of assimilation or to cohort differences in homeownership rates.
11

The F-statistic associated with the vector of metropolitan area fixed effects is 140.2 in 1980, 137.9 in
1990, and 18.7 in 2000, implying that metropolitan area fixed effects play a very significant role in determining
homeownership rates.

17
larger part of the homeownership gap than do differences in background characteristics.
However, the table also indicates that the relative importance of locational differences declined
somewhat between 1980 and 2000. In 1980, differences in location between the two populations
explain almost one-half of the homeownership gap; by 2000, differences in location account for
about a third of the gap. The available evidence suggests that immigration began to “spread”
from the traditional gateway cities to many other locations in the United States during the 1990s
[6]. As a result, the location decision of the two populations could have become a somewhat less
important determinant of the homeownership gap during this period. Note, however, that despite
their declining importance, the differences in location decisions made by the two populations still
play a crucial role in determining the homeownership gap, generating a 6-point gap in
homeownership rates in 2000.
Finally, the fourth row of the table includes both the socioeconomic variables and the
vector of metropolitan area fixed effects. It is evident that there remains a great deal of
unexplained variation in homeownership rates between immigrant and native households. More
importantly, this unexplained gap is growing rapidly over time, from 5.7 percentage points in
1980 to 10.3 percentage points in 2000.

National Origin
I showed earlier that there are substantial differences in homeownership rates among
national origin groups. In addition, it is well known that the national origin mix of the immigrant
population in the United States changed substantially in recent decades. It is reasonable,
therefore, to suspect that some of the aggregate trend in the homeownership gap may be linked to
the changing national origin mix of immigrants.

18
Before proceeding to examine this relationship, it is instructive to examine the extent to
which the differences in homeownership rates across national origin groups simply proxy for
differences in socioeconomic or demographic characteristics. I estimated the following
regression model separately in each of the cross-sections:

(2)

Hijt = Xijt βt + njt + εijt ,

where njt denotes a national origin fixed effect indicating if the household head was born in
country j. I construct this vector of national origin fixed effects so that the left-out dummy
variable indicates if the household is a native-born household. The coefficients of the fixed
effects, therefore, give the adjusted difference in homeownership rates between a particular
national origin group and the native population. I restrict the analysis to the 90 largest national
origin groups.12 These 90 national origin groups contain over 90 percent of the immigrants who
entered the United States between 1960 and 1990.
The top panel of Table 7 summarizes some of the results of the analysis. To simplify the
presentation of the evidence—and because the qualitative nature of the results was quite similar
across the various cross-sections—Table 7 only reports the results obtained with the 1990
Census data. The two columns of the table represent alternative specification of the regression
model in (2). The coefficients reported in the first column come from a regression that do not
contain any explanatory variables in the vector X, so that the reported coefficients give simply
the unadjusted difference in homeownership rates between the immigrant group and the native

12 This restriction ensures that there are sufficient observations for each of the groups to reliably estimate
the national origin differentials in homeownership rates.

19
population. The second column includes the detailed vector of socioeconomic variables
described earlier as well as the vector of metropolitan area fixed effects.
It is evident that the inclusion of the background variables and metropolitan area fixed
effects explain part of the differences in homeownership rates across national origin groups. For
example, the unadjusted gap between Mexicans and natives is 25.9 percentage points. This
narrows down to 11.1 percentage points when the regression adjusts for differences in
background characteristics and area of residence.
However, it is also evident that these explanatory variables do not account for most of the
differences in homeownership rates across national origin groups. For instance, even after
controlling for background characteristics and metropolitan area fixed effects, the
homeownership gap was 16.5 percentage points for immigrants from the Dominican Republic,
8.2 percentage points for immigrants from India, and 12.0 percentage points for immigrants from
Korea.13
The bottom panel of the table presents some statistics that further describe the dispersion
in the vector of the national origin fixed effects estimated from the regression model in equation
(2). In particular, I present the standard deviation of the coefficients in this vector (weighted by
the sample size of the national origin group in each particular Census year). The standard
deviation in the unadjusted homeownership gap across the 90 national origin groups in 1990 is
.157, and declines to .085 when all the explanatory variables are included in the regression
model. In other words, an extensive set of observable characteristics describing the determinants

13

Although there exist sizable national origin differences in homeownership rates, the inclusion of the
national origin fixed effects into the regression model does not alter the coefficients of most of the socioeconomic
background variables. In 1990, for example, the coefficient of log of household income is .128 in the absence of
national origin fixed effects and .129 when the national origin fixed effects are introduced.

20
of the homeownership decision explains only about half of the observable differences across
national origin groups.
As noted earlier, the labor economics literature has documented the existence of national
origin differences in many economic outcomes, and has stressed that as a result of these
differences, the changing national origin mix of immigrants can help explain aggregate trends in
the immigrant population. The available evidence, however, does not help us understand the
source of much of the national origin differentials. Evidently, these differences persist even after
controlling for a detailed set of background characteristics. It is plausible that such factors as
discrimination against particular national origin groups, or differences in the way that the
immigrant population is self-selected from each source country’s population could be
responsible for the remaining differences. The importance of national origin in determining
tenure choice for the immigrant population suggests that the continuing study of these
differences is an important area for further research.

National Origin and the Widening Homeownership Gap
The evidence reported in Table 6 suggests that differences in location decisions or
background variables between the immigrant and native populations cannot account for the
widening gap in homeownership rates between the two populations. To more directly ascertain
the source of this increasing disparity, consider the following empirical exercise. Suppose we
pool two of the cross-sections, such as the 1980 Census and the 2000 CPS, and consider the
linear probability regression model:

(3)

Hit = Xit γ + π Rit + δt Iit + θ (Iit × Rit) + εit ,

21

where Rit is a dummy variable set to unity if the observation is drawn from the 2000 CPS, and
zero otherwise.
The key feature of the regression specification in equation (3) is that it includes the
immigrant dummy variable, a dummy variable indicating whether the observation was drawn
from the 2000 CPS, and an interaction between these two variables. In the absence of any
explanatory variables in the vector X, the coefficient of this interaction term (or θ) would
measure how much faster the homeownership rate changed in the immigrant population relative
to the change observed in the native population over the 1980-2000 period.
To give an example, the descriptive statistics presented earlier imply that the
homeownership rate rose by 4.0 percentage points in the native population between 1980 and
2000. I will restrict the empirical analysis reported in this section to either native households or
to immigrant households belonging to one of the 90 largest national origin groups. The data
indicate that the homeownership rate of immigrants (in this restricted sample of 90 national
origin groups) was 51.6 percent in 1980, and 47.7 percent in 2000, for a decline of 3.9
percentage points over the period. The coefficient θ would then give the difference-indifferences estimate of the widening in the homeownership gap, which equals –7.9 percentage
points (or –3.9 – 4.0). In other words, the parameter θ measures the rate of change in the
homeownership rate of the immigrant population relative to what was happening in the native
population. The inclusion of socioeconomic variables in equation (3) does not change the basic
interpretation of the coefficient θ; the coefficient now simply gives the relative rate of change in
homeownership rates after adjusting for differences in background characteristics.

22
Table 8 reports the coefficient θ estimated from a number of alternative specifications of
the regression model in (3) for the 1980-90 and 1980-2000 periods, respectively. The first row
indicates the value of the coefficient θ in the absence of any controls in the regression model. As
we saw from the numerical exercise in the previous paragraph, the coefficient θ takes on a value
of –7.9 percent for the 1980-2000 period.
The second row of the tables adds the detailed vector of background variables described
earlier to the regression specification (including the age, sex, educational attainment, and marital
status of the household head, the income of the household, the number of persons and children in
the household; and the number of years that immigrants have resided in the United States). The
coefficient θ now takes on a value of -5.1 percentage points, so that the homeownership gap
widened substantially even after controlling for differences in background characteristics
between the two populations.14 The third row includes only a vector of metropolitan area fixed
effects in the vector X, and shows that the different location decisions of immigrants and natives
do not help explain the widening of the homeownership gap at all. Put differently, the evidence
indicates that the homeownership gap between immigrants and natives widened even within
metropolitan areas.
The specification of the regression model in (3) implies that the metropolitan area fixed
effects control for factors that are specific to the metropolitan area and that did not change over
the 1980-2000 period. It is likely, however, that there were factors, such as housing prices, that
changed within a metropolitan area, and that the rate of change varied across areas. In other

14

It is worth noting that the vector of socioeconomic characteristics includes a variable indicating the
length of time that immigrant households have resided in the United States. The evidence reported in Table 8
indicates that changes in the mean number of years-since-migration do not explain the widening homeownership
gap. The main reason is that this variable was roughly constant over the 1980-2000 period. The typical immigrant in
1980 had been in the United States for 22.1 years, in 1990 for 21.1 years, and in 2000 for 21.3 years.

23
words, there are likely to be trends in homeownership rates that are specific to metropolitan
areas. To account for these varying trends across metropolitan areas in a very general way,
consider the expanded regression model:

(3′)

Hit = Xit γ + π Rit + δt Iit + θ (Iit × Rit) + ρikt + (ρikt × Rit) + εit ,

where ρikt denotes a vector of fixed effects indicating if the household resides in metropolitan
area k, and (ρikt × Rit) denotes the interaction of this vector with the dummy variable indicating if
the observation was drawn from the 2000 CPS. The coefficients of these interaction variables are
fixed effects giving the adjusted rate of change in homeownership rates within a metropolitan
area. The expanded specification in equation (3′), therefore, controls both for the fact that
metropolitan areas are different at the beginning of the period, and that the homeownership rates
were changing differentially across metropolitan areas. The fourth row of Table 8 reports the
coefficients obtained from this more general specification. The verdict is clear: controlling for
the varying trends in homeownership rates across metropolitan areas does not help explain the
widening homeownership gap between immigrants and natives. There is still a 7.7 percentage
point unexplained widening over the period.
It is worth stressing that by interacting the period effect (R) with the metropolitan area
fixed effects, equation (3) completely controls for the possibility that the 1980-2000 trend in
homeownership rates varies systematically across metropolitan areas. Note that it would be
statistically impossible to include either a measure of the price level in the metropolitan area as
of 1980 or the change in the price level in the metropolitan area over the 1980-2000 period into
this regression model. After all, these price indices would be perfectly collinear with the two

24
vectors of metropolitan area fixed effects (ρitk and ρitk × Rit) included in the regression model.
The regression specification in equation (3), therefore, already controls for any factors that are
specific to the metropolitan area either in the cross-section or over time, regardless of their
source.
It turns out, however, that there is an additional vector of variables that can be included in
the regression model in (3) that can completely account for the widening homeownership gap.
The fifth row of the table includes a vector indicating the country of birth of the immigrant
household, so that the coefficient θ now estimates what happened to the homeownership gap
within national origin groups. The coefficient reported in row 5 of the table for the 1980-2000
period is zero, both numerically and statistically. In other words, the homeownership gap was
constant between 1980 and 2000 within national origin groups. It is evident, therefore, that the
changing national origin mix of the immigrant population is the key variable that explains the
widening homeownership gap between immigrants and natives. Put differently, we would not
have observed an increase in the homeownership gap over these two decades had the national
origin mix of immigrants remained constant over the period.
The evidence summarized in this paper, therefore, implies that the “newer” national
origin groups tend to have relatively lower homeownership rates than “earlier” national origin
groups, and that this difference helps explain why homeownership rates have declined in the
immigrant population at a time when they were increasing in the native population. As with the
literature that analyzes the labor market performance of immigrants, national origin plays a
crucial role in the determination of the aggregate level of homeownership rates for the immigrant
population.

25
The last row of Table 8 includes all of the explanatory variables in the regression in
equation (3): background characteristics, metropolitan area fixed effects as well as fixed effects
accounting for different trends in homeownership rates across metropolitan areas, and country of
origin fixed effects. It is evident that the results of this most general specification do not change
the key implication of the analysis. Much of the increasing gap in homeownership rates between
immigrants and natives can be attributed to the fact that there are substantial differences in
homeownership rates across national origin groups, and that the changing national origin mix of
the immigrant population over the past two decades has led to a situation where the “average”
immigrant now belongs to a national origin group that simply tends to have a low
homeownership rate.

IV. Ethnic Enclaves
The evidence summarized in the previous section illustrated the importance of the
geographic sorting of immigrants in the United States as well as the national origin mix of the
immigrant population in generating differences in homeownership rates between immigrants and
natives. There is an additional sense in which the interaction between these two variables might
influence the demand for owner-occupied housing. Because particular immigrant groups tend to
cluster in particular cities, the geographic sorting leads to the creation and growth of ethnic
enclaves. It is likely that ethnic enclaves affect the structure of the housing market and the
amenities available in particular areas to different national origin groups.
There has been a great deal of debate over how ethnic enclaves affect the economic well
being of immigrants in the United States. One could argue that the geographic clustering and the
“warm embrace” of the enclave helps immigrants escape the discrimination that they might have

26
otherwise encountered in the labor and housing markets outside the enclave. This argument
would suggest that clustering improves economic opportunities for immigrant families within the
enclave. Moreover, the presence of other immigrants with similar preferences and attitudes in the
neighborhood may make the neighborhood much more welcoming and desirable. These
improvements in housing amenities and in economic opportunities could increase the demand for
owner-occupied housing in immigrant enclaves.
One can also argue, however, that the clustering can have adverse economic effects. The
ethnic enclave creates incentives for immigrants not to acquire the skills that might be useful in
the larger national market. In other words, the clustering may effectively hinder the move to
better-paying jobs by reducing the immigrants’ incentives to learn the culture and language of
the American labor market. In a sense, immigrants who live and work in an ethnic enclave are
the victims of a monopsony, a “one-company” town. These adverse economic effects would
presumably reduce the income of immigrant families living in the enclaves, lowering their
demand for owner-occupied housing.15
This section estimates the link between ethnic enclaves and the demand for owneroccupied housing.16 The empirical analysis exploits the information on national origin and
metropolitan residence contained in the microdata sets used in the previous sections. However,
because the sample size within a cell defined by metropolitan area and national origin is

15

Although there has been a contentious debate over whether immigrants benefit from working in an
ethnic enclave, a recent comprehensive study by Light and Gold [15, p. 70] concludes that “ethnic economies pay
lower wages than the general labor market.” A recent study by Borjas [5] provides additional evidence that there is a
strong negative correlation between the earnings of immigrants and the fraction of the metropolitan area’s
population that belongs to the immigrant’s ethnic group.
16

Toussaint-Comeau and Rhine [23] conduct a case study of homeownership in an enclave of Hispanic
immigrants in Chicago, and document that immigrants who are not English proficient will seek out Spanishspeaking lenders.

27
relatively small in the CPS data, the empirical study is restricted to the larger 1980 and 1990
Census extracts.
Define a particular immigrant group as the sample of foreign-born households with a
head born in country j and who live in metropolitan area k. To ensure that there is a sufficiently
large number of observations in each (j, k) cell, I again restrict the analysis to the 90 largest
national origin groups in the United States.
As I showed earlier, different national origin groups in the United States tend to settle in
different areas. To measure the extent of geographic ethnic clustering [9], I use an exposure
measure of ethnic clustering defined by:

(4)

Exposure Index = S jk =

N jk
Nk

,

where Njk gives the total number of persons who were born in country j and live in metropolitan
area k at a particular point in time (either 1980 or 1990); and Nk gives the total number of persons
(including natives) who live in metropolitan area k at that time. The counts Njk and Nk are
calculated using the entire population of persons aged 18-64 who were enumerated by each
Census in metropolitan area k, regardless of their work status or gender. The exposure index,
therefore, simply gives the fraction of the metropolitan area’s adult-age population that belongs
to the particular national origin group. Ideally, the analysis would relate homeownership rates to
measures of ethnic concentration at a more finely detailed geographic level, but such data are not
available.

28
Regression Analysis
I initially investigate the empirical nature of the link between homeownership and ethnic
enclaves by estimating the following linear probability model separately in the 1980 and 1990
census cross-sections:

Hijkt = Xijkt βt + αt Sijkt + njt + ρkt + εijkt ,

(5)

where Hijkt is a dummy variable indicating if an immigrant household i born in country j and
living in metropolitan area k owns a home at time t; X is a vector of standardizing variables
(described below); Sjkt is the exposure index; nj denotes a vector of fixed effects indicating the
household’s country of origin; and ρk denotes a vector of fixed effects indicating the
metropolitan area of residence.17 Further, I estimate equation (5) using only the sample of
immigrant households that belong to one of the 90 largest national origin groups in the
immigrant population.18
The coefficient α measures the link between homeownership and ethnic clustering. The
regression model in equation (5) includes two crucial vectors of fixed effects. First, the model
includes a vector of metropolitan area fixed effects. In any given cross-section, these geographic
fixed effects controls for the possibility that housing costs or the structure of the housing market

17

I also conducted the analysis using an alternative measure of immigrant clustering that divides equation
(4) by the fraction of the total U.S. population that belongs to the national origin group. This index of “relative
clustering” would equal one when the fraction of type-j immigrants who live in metropolitan area k is the same as
the fraction of type-j immigrants in the entire population of the United States. The empirical findings obtained with
this alternative measure of the relative size of the ethnic group were similar to those reported in this section.
18

Note that the sample of native households is not used in estimating the model. It would be of interest to
investigate how the creation and growth of ethnic enclaves influenced homeownership rates among native
households residing in those areas.

29
varies across metropolitan areas. In other words, the metropolitan area fixed effects net out any
area-specific effects on the demand for owner-occupied housing that equally affect all groups
living in that metropolitan area. Second, the regression model includes a vector of national origin
fixed effects. As show above, there are sizable unexplained differences in homeownership rates
across national origin groups (just as there are sizable unexplained national origin differentials in
many labor market outcomes). By including these fixed effects, the regression effectively
isolates the impact of different levels of ethnic clustering on the same national origin group.
Hence the impact of the ethnic enclave on homeownership is being identified from within-group
variation, taking advantage of the fact that members of the same national origin group choose to
reside in different metropolitan areas. In other words, the regression model in equation (5)
addresses the following type of question: what happens to the probability of homeownership
when, say, a Mexican household lives in Los Angeles, where there is a large Mexican
population, rather than in Miami, where there are relatively few Mexican immigrants?
Of course, this methodological approach raises the obvious issue of endogeneity in the
residential location of immigrants. After all, immigrants will likely move to metropolitan areas
where they face better economic opportunities (and perhaps better conditions in the housing
market). I will discuss the bias introduced by the endogeneity of residential location below.
The first row of Table 9 presents the coefficient α estimated from alternative
specifications of the regression model in (5). The first column reports the coefficient estimated in
the 1980 cross-section, while the second column reports the coefficients estimated in the 1990
data. As before, the regressions control for a detailed vector of background variables, including
the age, sex, educational attainment, and marital status of the household head, the log income of
the household, and the number of persons and children in the household. In both census years,

30
there is a numerically strong and statistically significant positive relation between the probability
of homeownership and the relative size of the ethnic enclave in the metropolitan area.
Moreover, the evidence suggests that ethnic enclaves remain important even when we
look at the trend in homeownership within a particular metropolitan area. In particular, consider
the following empirical exercise. Suppose we pool the 1980 and 1990 cross-sections and
estimate the following regression model in these pooled data:

(6)

Hijkt = Xijkt β + π Rit + α Sijkt + njt + ρkt + (ρkt × Rit) + εijkt ,

where Rit is a dummy variable set to unity if the observation is drawn from the 1990 census, and
zero otherwise. As before, the regression includes a vector of national origin fixed effects (nj)
and a vector of metropolitan area fixed effects (ρk). The specification in (6) also interacts the
metropolitan area dummy variables with the dummy variable indicating the Census year (or ρk ×
R). These interaction terms help to control for the fact that conditions in the housing market may
have changed differentially across metropolitan areas over the 1980-90 period. The coefficient α
now measures the extent to which changes in the exposure index within a particular metropolitan
area and national origin group affect homeownership in the immigrant population—after
controlling for changes in the housing market within a metropolitan area that affect all persons
living in that area equally.
The last column of Table 9 reports the coefficient estimated from the pooled data. The
coefficient is positive and significant, indicating a strong positive correlation between the growth
of ethnic enclaves over the 1980-2000 period and homeownership rates in the immigrant
population. The significance of the coefficient α implies that the geographic clustering of

31
immigrants has an independent effect on homeownership rates, even within national origin
groups and within metropolitan areas.
To evaluate the numerical importance of ethnic enclaves, it is instructive to consider a
simple simulation of the estimated regression model. In particular, consider the typical Mexican
household living in Los Angeles, where the exposure index takes on a value of .169 (indicating
that 16.9 percent of the population of the Los Angeles metropolitan area is of Mexican origin).
This household’s probability of homeownership would have fallen by 2.3 percentage points if
this household had chosen to live in Philadelphia, where only .1 percent of the population is of
Mexican origin.19 Ethnic enclaves, therefore, seem to have a numerically important impact on
homeownership rates.
As noted above, the results summarized in the first row of Table 9 might be biased
because the residential choices of immigrants are likely to be endogenous. The measured impacts
may simply reflect the fact that the same unobserved factors that lead to particular location
choices also lead to particular socioeconomic outcomes. The problem has been difficult to
resolve because there are few valid instruments that can help identify the relevant parameters
[10].
It is unlikely that immigrants randomly choose which metropolitan areas to reside in
when they enter the United States. Most likely, their location decision will depend both on the
presence of ethnic enclaves, which can transmit a great deal of information about job and
housing opportunities, as well as on the economic and housing opportunities available in
different areas. For example, suppose that immigrants have a strong desire to own their homes,
and, as a result, tend to cluster in areas where it is relatively easy to enter the owner-occupied

32
housing market. Ethnic enclaves would then form in areas that have relatively high
homeownership rates, creating a spurious positive correlation between any measure of the size of
the ethnic enclave and homeownership rates in the immigrant population.
The endogeneity issue can be partially addressed by focusing on the sample of
immigrants who entered the country as refugees. Refugees typically have much less choice in
deciding where to live in the United States (at least at the time of their initial entry). The State
Department assigns individual refugees to “sponsoring” private voluntary agencies that provide a
variety of social services, including initial resettlement in the United States [25]. The geographic
location of the refugees’ resettlement is determined by the sponsoring agencies, and depends
partly on the match between a refugee’s socioeconomic background and the availability of jobs
and services in particular localities—as perceived by the sponsoring agency—as well as on the
location of the sponsoring agency itself. It is worth stressing that although the initial placement
of refugees is perhaps more exogenous than that of traditional immigrants, part of the placement
is surely motivated by the agency’s desire to place refugees in areas where they are likely to
thrive. An additional problem is that the U.S. Census does not contain any information on the
type of visa used by a particular person to enter the United States. To approximate the refugee
population, therefore, I classify all immigrants who originate in the main refugee-sending
countries as refugees (all other immigrants are classified as non-refugees).20
The second row of Table 9 reports the estimate of the coefficient α when equation (6) is
estimated in the subsample of refugees. Ethnic enclaves continue to have a positive impact on

19 The drop of 2.3 percentage points is obtained by multiplying the regression coefficient reported in
column 3 (.138) times the difference in the exposure index between Los Angeles and Philadelphia (.168).
20 Thirteen countries account for 90 percent of the refugees awarded permanent residence status during the
1970s and 1980s: Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, Hungary, Laos, Poland,
Romania, Thailand, the former U.S.S.R., and Vietnam.

33
homeownership rates even in the refugee sample. If anything, the numerical impact of the ethnic
enclave on homeownership rates is numerically larger in the refugee sample than in the entire
immigrant population. The evidence, therefore, seems to reject the hypothesis that the strong
positive correlation between ethnic enclaves and homeownership rates can be attributed solely to
endogeneity bias.

V. Summary
This paper analyzed the determinants of homeownership in immigrant households. The
empirical analysis used data drawn from the 1980 and 1990 Public Use Samples of the U.S.
Census, and from the 1998-2000 Current Population Surveys. The study yields a number of
interesting empirical findings:
1.

Immigrant households have lower homeownership rates than native households and
this “homeownership gap” widened significantly in the past twenty years.

2.

Only a relatively small part of the homeownership gap between immigrants and
natives can be attributed to differences in such background variables as income and
household composition between the two populations. A much more important factor
in generating the sizable homeownership gap is the different location decisions
made by immigrants and natives.

3.

There are sizable differences in homeownership rates among the national origin
groups that make up the immigrant population. The changing national origin mix of
the immigrant population helps explain much of the widening in the
homeownership gap observed between 1980 and 2000.

34
4.

The interaction between national origin and locational choices is perhaps most
evident in the creation and growth of ethnic enclaves in major American cities. The
evidence suggests that ethnic enclaves increase the probability that immigrant
households own their homes.

The analysis in this paper suggests that immigration will play an increasingly important
role in determining the demand for owner-occupied housing in the United States. The role played
by immigration, however, does not depend simply on the fact that more immigrants imply more
households, which would then lead to an increase in housing demand. The impact of immigration
on homeownership rates is much more subtle, and it clearly depends on the national origin mix
of the immigrant population and on the locational choices made by immigrants. Moreover, the
evidence presented in this paper suggests that the growth of ethnic enclaves in major American
cities could become an important factor in determining the demand for owner-occupied housing
in many metropolitan areas.
It is important to note, however, that the link between immigration and homeownership
also depends on how immigrants affect housing prices. For instance, the increasing demand for
owner-occupied housing in ethnic enclaves should lead to a rise in housing prices in the affected
areas. These feedback effects will inevitably influence housing demand for both immigrant and
native households. Surprisingly, the impact of immigration on housing prices has not yet been
explored systematically.

35
References
1. R.D. Alba and J.R. Logan, Assimilation and Stratification in the Homeownership Patterns
of Racial and Ethnic Groups, International Migration Review, 26, 1314-1341 (1992).
2. G.J. Borjas, Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants,
Journal of Labor Economics, 3, 463-489 (1985).
3. G.J. Borjas, National Origin and the Skills of Immigrants in the Postwar Period, in
“Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and
Source Areas” (G.J. Borjas and R.B. Freeman, Eds.), University of Chicago Press,
Chicago (1992).
4. G.J. Borjas, The Economics of Immigration, Journal of Economic Literature, 32, 16671717 (1994).
5. G.J. Borjas, Ethnic Enclaves and Assimilation, Swedish Economic Policy Review, 7, 91122 (2000).
6. S.A. Camarota, “The New Ellis Islands,” Center for Immigration Studies, Washington,
DC (2001).
7. A. Colburn, Immigration and Housing, Housing Economics, 46, 11-15 (1998).
8. N.E. Coulson, Why Are Hispanic and Asian-American Homeownership Rates So Low?
Immigration and Other Factors, Journal of Urban Economics, 45, 209-227 (1999).
9. D.M. Cutler and E.L. Glaeser. Are Ghettos Good or Bad? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112, 827-872 (1997).
10. W.N. Evans, W.E. Oates, and R.M. Schwab, Measuring Peer Group Effects: A Study of
Teenage Behavior, Journal of Political Economy, 100, 966-991 (1992).
11. R. Friedberg and J. Hunt, The Impact of Immigration on Host County Wages,
Employment and Growth, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 23-44 (1995).
12. J. Gyourko and P. Linneman, An Analysis of the Changing Influences on Traditional
Household Ownership Patters, Journal of Urban Economics, 9, 318-341 (1996).
13. K.R. Ihlanfeldt, An Empirical Investigation of Alternative Approaches to Estimation of
the Equilibrium Demand for Housing, Journal of Urban Economics, 9, 97-105 (1981).
14. L.J. Krivo, Immigrant Characteristics and Hispanic-Anglo Housing Inequality,
Demography, 32, 599-615 (1995).
15. I. Light and S.J. Gold, “Ethnic Economies,” Academic Press, San Diego (2000).

36

16. B.C. Madrian and L.J. Lefgren, A Note on Longitudinally Matching CPS Respondents,
National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper 247 (1999).
17. S.J. Melman, Immigration, Housing Economics, 43, 5-9 (1995).
18. D. Myers and S.W. Lee, Immigration Cohorts and Residential Overcrowding in Southern
California, Demography, 33, 51-65 (1996).
19. D. Myers and S.W. Lee, Immigrant Trajectories into Homeownership: A Temporal
Analysis of Residential Assimilation, International Migration Review, 32, 593-625
(1998).
20. D. Myers, I. Megbolube, and S.W. Lee, Cohort Estimation of Homeownership
Attainment among Native-Born and Immigrant Populations, Journal of Housing
Research, 9, 237-269 (1998).
21. S.S. Rosenthal, J.V. Duca, and S.A. Gabriel, Credit Rationing and the Demand for
Owner-Occupied Housing, Journal of Urban Economics, 29, 48-63 (1991).
22. A. Saiz, Room in the Kitchen for the Melting Pot: Immigration and Rental Prices, Review
of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming 2003).
23. M. Toussaint-Comeau and S.L.W. Rhine, Ethnic Immigrant Enclaves and Home
Ownership: A Case Study of an Urban Hispanic Community, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, Consumer and Community Affairs Division (2000).
24. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, “Profile of the Foreign-Born
Population in the United States: 2000,” Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
(2001).
25. U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration, “U.S. Refugee
Admissions and Resettlement Program,” Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
(2000).

37
TABLE 1. HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES
IN NATIVE AND IMMIGRANT HOUSEHOLDS, 1980-2000
Homeownership rate
Native households
Immigrant households

1980
63.2
51.2

1990
64.2
49.9

2000
67.2
47.4

Immigrant households, by year of migration
1995-99
1990-94
1985-89
1980-84
1975-79
1970-74
1965-69
1960-64
1950-59

--------19.5
35.9
49.2
56.3
65.4

----16.0
30.6
45.7
54.5
60.8
66.5
75.3

14.5
26.4
35.3
46.0
56.4
60.0
68.2
72.8
77.8

572,125
261,472

593,532
318,307

94,056
16,788

8.4

9.8

Number of observations
Native households
Immigrant households
Percent of households that are foreign-born

13.1

38
TABLE 2. ASSIMILATION AND COHORT EFFECTS IN HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES
Cohort
Natives:

Age Group
25-34 in 1980
35-44 in 1980
45-54 in 1980
25-34 in 1990
25-34 in 2000

1980
49.8
71.0
76.9
-----

1990
67.0
76.2
80.4
44.8
---

2000
76.8
80.8
--68.0
46.7

Immigrants: 1970-74 Arrivals:

25-34 in 1980
35-44 in 1980
45-54 in 1980

31.9
46.1
46.6

58.4
65.4
61.6

70.9
72.3
---

Immigrants: 1975-79 Arrivals:

25-34 in 1980
35-44 in 1980
45-54 in 1980

16.5
28.2
30.4

53.1
58.0
54.8

68.3
62.7
---

Immigrants: 1980-84 Arrivals:

25-34 in 1990
35-44 in 1990
45-54 in 1990

-------

24.4
38.9
42.6

48.1
56.8
47.8

Immigrants: 1985-89 Arrivals:

25-34 in 1990
35-44 in 1990
45-54 in 1990

-------

12.2
21.1
25.4

43.0
39.4
40.5

Immigrants: 1990-94 Arrivals:

25-34 in 2000
35-44 in 2000
45-54 in 2000

-------

-------

22.3
33.7
38.2

Immigrants: 1995-99 Arrivals:

25-34 in 2000
35-44 in 2000
45-54 in 2000

-------

-------

10.0
19.3
25.2

39
TABLE 3. DIFFERENCES ACROSS NATIONAL ORIGIN GROUPS IN 1990

Educational attainment

Country of birth
Canada
China
Colombia
Cuba
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Germany
Greece
Haiti
India
Iran
Italy
Jamaica
Korea
Mexico
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
U.S.S.R.
United Kingdom
Vietnam

Percent gap in
household income
between immigrants
and natives

All
immigrants

Pre-1980
arrivals

All
immigrants

13.8
12.8
12.0
11.7
10.3
8.6
13.9
11.8
11.2
15.9
15.5
10.9
12.0
14.3
7.6
14.1
12.8
8.3
14.2
14.6
12.3

13.6
13.2
12.3
12.3
10.5
9.6
13.7
11.6
12.2
16.6
15.9
10.7
12.4
14.9
7.6
14.1
12.4
8.4
14.2
14.4
13.3

-2.6
-6.3
-12.1
-21.7
-54.6
-29.7
-1.2
-.4
-24.8
38.4
9.3
-12.6
-8.1
-7.7
-35.4
32.5
-18.7
3.2
-36.9
6.2
-15.4

Pre-1980
arrivals
-5.5
11.2
-3.3
-13.5
-50.9
-23.1
-1.8
2.2
-7.2
66.4
27.1
-13.6
-4.4
15.9
-29.6
40.1
-19.9
3.9
-28.3
-.6
9.9

Homeownership rate
All
immigrants
67.9
56.5
41.7
52.0
14.2
17.3
70.5
70.2
32.4
58.3
50.0
78.8
46.7
43.8
38.4
60.9
62.7
62.1
50.2
64.6
43.8

Pre-1980
arrivals
70.6
71.0
46.2`
57.7
18.4
28.5
72.9
74.1
45.8
79.9
59.7
80.3
55.1
62.1
49.5
72.5
70.1
68.7
60.3
68.8
61.9

Source: The data on educational attainment refers to completed years of schooling among male workers aged 25-64,
and is drawn from Borjas [4, p. 1686]. The percent gap in household income between the immigrant group and
native households is defined as the difference in household log income between the two groups times 100.

40
TABLE 4. METROPOLITAN AREA DIFFERENCES IN HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES
(Ranked by size of immigrant population in each year)
Percent of
metropolitan
area’s
population
Homeownership rate
that is
Native Immigrant foreign-born

Percent of total
Percent of total
immigrant
native population population living
in the
living in the
metropolitan area metropolitan area

1980
New York, NY
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA
Chicago, IL
Miami, FL
San Francisco, CA
Detroit, MI
Boston, MA-NH
Philadelphia, PA-NJ
Newark, NJ
Nassau-Suffolk, NY

34.0
53.9
60.6
61.5
56.3
73.1
54.6
70.3
60.4
82.3

30.5
39.4
54.0
46.8
54.4
74.4
47.5
68.5
55.4
79.9

22.0
19.4
11.6
34.4
13.8
8.2
12.0
6.2
12.8
9.9

5.6
4.6
4.3
0.7
2.3
2.7
1.5
3.0
1.2
1.6

17.2
12.0
6.1
4.3
4.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.9

1990
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA
New York, NY
Miami, FL
Chicago, IL
Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV
Orange County, CA
Houston, TX
San Francisco, CA
San Diego, CA
Boston, MA-NH

55.3
37.9
62.7
63.2
64.7
66.2
58.2
52.3
57.8
58.9

39.1
31.5
50.2
55.5
51.0
50.5
41.8
48.1
46.6
46.4

26.9
25.6
43.7
13.6
10.9
17.8
12.5
20.1
13.9
12.1

4.1
4.3
0.7
3.2
2.3
1.3
1.8
1.0
1.4
1.6

13.8
13.6
5.1
4.7
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.1
2.0

2000
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA
New York, NY
Miami, FL
Chicago, IL
Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV
Orange County, CA
Houston, TX
San Diego, CA
San Jose, CA
San Francisco, CA

56.5
37.9
58.2
66.5
68.1
70.2
59.7
57.6
71.3
49.8

37.5
27.1
50.8
55.8
49.9
40.1
45.4
49.8
50.1
39.2

41.6
38.6
61.6
15.3
17.1
28.0
17.9
23.3
34.5
26.6

2.7
3.0
0.4
3.5
2.0
1.0
1.7
1.1
0.6
0.8

12.8
12.6
4.5
4.2
2.8
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.2
1.9

41
TABLE 5. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
1980
Own home (%)
Age (%):
18-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
At least 65
Educational attainment (%):
Less than 9 years
9-11
12
13-15
16
At least 16
Female-headed household (%)
Log household income
Number of persons in
household
Number of persons under 18
Married, spouse present (%)
Married, spouse absent (%)
Years in the United States
Sample size

Native
63.2

Immigrant
51.2

1990

2000

Native Immigrant
64.2
49.9

Native Immigrant
67.2
47.4

8.3
23.8
18.0
16.5
16.2
17.1

5.4
20.1
18.3
14.8
12.6
28.8

5.3
22.5
22.6
15.9
13.6
20.2

4.5
23.1
24.3
17.2
12.0
19.0

5.4
18.3
23.2
19.7
12.8
20.7

5.5
23.5
26.3
18.5
11.6
14.7

13.6
14.9
32.5
18.3
10.3
10.3
27.7
10.5

33.9
11.6
22.4
13.8
7.5
10.8
28.1
10.3

6.8
9.7
29.7
27.8
16.2
9.7
32.0
10.6

24.2
8.7
23.8
19.7
12.3
11.3
28.4
10.5

4.2
8.9
30.7
28.0
18.8
9.5
55.8
10.6

20.5
11.0
23.2
17.3
16.6
11.4
60.5
10.4

2.8
1.0
62.1
3.6
---

2.9
1.0
61.8
3.4
22.1

2.7
.9
56.7
0.9
---

3.3
1.2
59.2
3.1
21.1

2.5
.7
50.6
1.4
---

3.2
1.0
57.9
3.4
21.3

572,125

261,472

593,552 318,307

94,056

16,788

42
TABLE 6. HOMEOWNERSHIP GAP BETWEEN IMMIGRANTS AND NATIVES
Year
1980
-.120
(.002)

1990
-.144
(.002)

2000
-.197
(.004)

Controls for socioeconomic characteristics

-.121
(.002)

-.126
(.002)

-.164
(.004)

Controls for metropolitan area fixed effects

-.060
(.002)

-.092
(.002)

-.135
(.004)

Controls for socioeconomic characteristics and
metropolitan area fixed effects

-.057
(.002)

-.066
(.002)

-.103
(.004)

Homeownership gap:
Unadjusted difference

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The regression for 1980 has 833,597 observations; the regression
for 1990 has 911,839 observations; and the regression for 2000 has 110,844 observations. The list of socioeconomic
characteristics includes the gender of the household head; the age of the household head (defined as a vector of
dummy variables indicating if the head is 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, or older than 65 years of age); the
educational attainment of the household head (defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if the head has less
than 9 years of schooling, 9-11 years, 12 years, 13-15 years, or at least 16 years); the log of household income;
dummy variables indicating if the head is married spouse present, or married spouse absent; the number of persons
in the household; the number of children (under age 18) in the household; and the number of years that the
household has resided in the United States (and its square). In the last three rows of the table, the homeownership
gap between immigrants and natives is evaluated at the mean number of years that the household has resided in the
United States in each cross-section. The metropolitan area fixed effects add a dummy variable for each metropolitan
area observed in the data.

43
TABLE 7. DETERMINANTS OF NATIONAL ORIGIN DIFFERENTIALS
IN HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES, 1990
Regression specification
(1)
.036
-.078
-.123
-.501
.062
-.060
-.205
-.259
-.034
-.016

(2)
-.004
-.038
-.095
-.165
.030
-.082
-.120
-.111
-.035
-.007

Summary statistics for national origin fixed effects:
Standard deviation (across 90 national origin groups)
1980
1990
2000

.144
.157
.146

.091
.085
.077

R-squared
F-statistic testing for significance of national origin fixed effects

.017
---

.308
37.5

Includes socioeconomic characteristics
Includes metropolitan area fixed effects

No
No

Yes
Yes

Country of origin:
Canada
China
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Germany
India
Korea
Mexico
Philippines
Poland

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Because of the large sample size and the large number of regressors, the
regressions summarized in this table use a 50% random sample of the native extract; the regression has 601,456
observations. The list of “socioeconomic characteristics” includes the gender of the household head; the age of the
household head (defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if the head is 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64,
or older than 65 years of age); the educational attainment of the household head (defined as a vector of dummy
variables indicating if the head has less than 9 years of schooling, 9-11 years, 12 years, 13-15 years, or at least 16
years); the log of household income; dummy variables indicating if the head is married spouse present, or married
spouse absent; the number of persons in the household; the number of children (under age 18) in the household, and
the number of years that the household has resided in the United States (and its square). The metropolitan area fixed
effects add a dummy variable for each metropolitan area observed in the data.

44
TABLE 8. EXPLAINING THE WIDENING HOMEOWNERSHIP GAP BETWEEN
IMMIGRANTS AND NATIVES
Regression specification:
1. Unadjusted rate of widening

1980 to 1990
-.029
(.004)

1980 to 2000
-.079
(.011)

2. Adjusted rate, controls for socioeconomic characteristics

-.009
(.003)

-.051
(.009)

3. Adjusted rate, controls for metropolitan area fixed effects

-.027
(.004)

-.080
(.011)

4. Adjusted rate, controls for metropolitan area fixed effects
and interacts metropolitan area fixed effects with dummy
variable indicating census year

-.036
(.004)

-.077
(.011)

5. Adjusted rate, controls for immigrant’s country of birth

.025
(.004)

.003
(.011)

6. Adjusted rate, controls for immigrant’s country of birth,
socioeconomic characteristics, metropolitan area fixed
effects and interacts metropolitan area fixed effects with
dummy variable indicating census year

-.003
(.003)

-.030
(.010)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Because of the large sample size and the large number of
regressors, the regressions summarized in this table use a 33% random sample of the 1980 and 1990 native extracts;
the regression for 1980-90 has 878,725 observations; the regression for 1980-2000 has 509,622 observations. The
list of “socioeconomic characteristics” includes the gender of the household head; the age of the household head
(defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if the head is 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, or older than 65
years of age); the educational attainment of the household head (defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if
the head has less than 9 years of schooling, 9-11 years, 12 years, 13-15 years, or at least 16 years); the log of
household income; dummy variables indicating if the head is married spouse present, or married spouse absent; the
number of persons in the household; and the number of children (under age 18) in the household, and the number of
years that the household has resided in the United States (and its square). The metropolitan area fixed effects add a
dummy variable for each metropolitan area observed in the data, and the national origin fixed effects add a dummy
variable for each of the 90 national origin groups in the immigrant population.

45
TABLE 9. ETHNIC ENCLAVES AND HOMEOWNERSHIP
(Impact of the exposure index on the probability of homeownership)
Regression Specification
Group/year:
All immigrant households
R-squared
Refugee households
R-squared

1980
.285
(.061)
.320

1990
.061
(.047)
.352

Pooled
.138
(.045)
.334

.342
(.086)
.320

.067
(.118)
.349

.266
(.054)
.326

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are corrected for the clustering of immigrant cohorts within
metropolitan areas. The exposure index is defined as the fraction of the metropolitan area’s population that belongs
to the household’s national origin group. The regression estimated in the 1980 cross-section has 234,432
observations (43,906 observations in the refugee sample); and the regression in the 1990 cross-section has 297,944
observations (50,689 observations in the refugee sample). The list of “socioeconomic characteristics” includes: the
gender of the household head; the age of the household head (defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if
the head is 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, or older than 65 years of age); the educational attainment of the
household head (defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if the head has less than 9 years of schooling, 911 years, 12 years, 13-15 years, or at least 16 years); the log of household income; dummy variables indicating if the
head is married spouse present, or married spouse absent; the number of persons in the household; the number of
persons under the age of 18 in the household, and the number of years that the household has resided in the United
States (and its square). All regressions contain a vector of metropolitan area fixed effects, and a vector of national
origin fixed effects. In addition, the pooled regressions include a dummy variable indicating the survey from which
the observation is drawn, and interact this period effect with the metropolitan area fixed effects.

