                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      GROWING BY LEAPS AND INCHES:
        CREATIVE DESTRUCTION, REAL COST REDUCTION, AND INCHING UP


                                           Michael R. Darby
                                           Lynne G. Zucker


                                          Working Paper 8947
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8947


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




An earlier version of this paper was delivered as Michael R. Darby’s Presidential Address at the Western
Economic Association International Meetings, San Francisco, CA, July 6, 2001. The research has been
supported by grants from the University of California's Industry-University Cooperative Research Program,
the University of California Systemwide Biotechnology Research and Education Program, and the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation through the NBER Research Program on Industrial Technology and Productivity. We
are indebted to many co-authors, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate and undergraduate research assistants
who have contributed to the development of these ideas over the last decade. This paper is a part of the
NBER's research program in Productivity. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Growing by Leaps and Inches: Creative Destruction, Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up
Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker
NBER Working Paper No. 8947
May 2002
JEL No. O30, L11, M13



                                              ABSTRACT

        Most firms achieve perfective progress, incrementally improving commodities or productivity.
But technological progress is concentrated in a few firms achieving metamorphic progress: forming or
transforming industries with technological breakthroughs (e.g., biotechnology, lasers, semiconductors,
nanotechnology). Unless congruent with incumbents' science and technology base, metamorphic progress
promotes entry. Scientific breakthroughs embodied in discovering scientists, protected by natural
excludability, and transferred by learning-by-doing-with at the bench generally drive metamorphic
progress.   Embodied knowledge is rivalrous and leads to entry and industry dominance by
star-scientist-linked firms. Incorporating this scientific-entrepreneurial process is essential to improving
- if not transforming - endogenous growth models.




Michael R. Darby                                          Lynne G. Zucker
Cordner Professor of Money & Financial Markets            Professor of Sociology &
Depts. of Management, Economics & Policy Studies          Director, Center for International Science,
Anderson Graduate School of Management                     Technology, and Cultural Policy
University of California, Los Angeles                     School of Public Policy & Social Research
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                                University of California, Los Angeles
and NBER                                                  Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551
darby@ucla.edu                                            and NBER
                                                          zucker@ucla.edu
                          Growing by Leaps and Inches:
            Creative Destruction, Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up
                              by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker


                Drunk: Can you help me find my keys?

                Passerby: Sure, where exactly did you drop them?

                Drunk: Way over there by the trash can.

                Passerby: Then why are you searching over here?

                Drunk: The light’s much better under the lamppost.

                                Milton Friedman, Economics 331, Fall 1967


        The class laughed on hearing this joke, not yet realizing how well it described the profession

for which they were preparing. Even those present who cannot carry memory of a joke home from

the barbershop still remember the day they first heard that little joke. The thesis of this paper is that

the economics profession has spent years looking for technological progress under the familiar

lamppost of research and development (R&D) by incumbent firms aimed at improvement in

existing commodities or productive methods.            Such perfective progress (as we term it) is

amenable to hedonic measurement and analysis of firm behavior and market equilibrium in terms

of return on investment, public goods, and positive externalities. We show here that metamorphic

progress associated with creation of new industries or technological transformation of existing

industries is of the same or higher order of magnitude as a source of technological progress.

        We believe that our approach complements Arnold C. Harberger’s recent emphasis on the

concentration of growth in a few companies in a few industries which are achieving dramatic real

cost reductions. He began to formulate his own schema in his 1990 W.E.A. presidential address and

by his 1998 A.E.A. presidential address could report considerable empirical evidence in support of


                                                   1
this concentration (Harberger 1998). Harberger distinguishes between yeast which makes bread rise

evenly and mushrooms which pop up unexpectedly in the back yard. In titling this paper, we had in

mind the Japanese picture of progress by inching up – or earlier Frank Knight’s (1944) Crusonia

plant which grows proportionately except as parts are cut off and eaten.1 In contrast, we emphasize

the process of this or that industry leaping forward at any given time – a process which may have

prompted Schumpeter’s (1934) model of creative destruction.

        Breakthrough discoveries in science and engineering – particularly invention of a new way

of inventing such as corn hybridization, integrated circuits, and recombinant DNA – typically drive

metamorphic progress. These discoveries are rarely well understood in the early years following

their discovery. As a result, natural excludability is characteristic of these radical technologies due

to the extensive tacit knowledge required to practice them and the length period of learning-by-

doing-with at the lab bench required to transfer them. Thus, metamorphic progress cannot be

analyzed following Arrow’s information as a public good paradigm.

        The importance of metamorphic progress based on naturally excludable technologies

motivates a challenging and exciting research agenda to remove the black box covering the linkages

among scientific breakthroughs, high technologies, entry and success in nascent industries, and the

movement toward industrial maturity where government statistics and economic research are most

likely – coincidentally – to begin. There are real data problems in studying hundreds of private

start-up companies in industries still lumped into one or another classification ending in “n.e.c.” (not

elsewhere classified).    They are manageable, however, if economists are willing to exploit

unconventional sources and methods more familiar to organizational theorists such as industry

directories, financial practitioners’ on-line services, the ISI and other scientific literature databases,

and sophisticated matching methods for linking firms and individuals across databases.




                                                    2
       Before addressing these central issues, we make a necessary digression in the next section

of the paper to clarify the relationship between metamorphic progress and the supposed acceleration

of secular productivity growth post-1995 labeled the “New Economy” by Federal Reserve

Chairman Alan Greenspan (2000a-b, 2001) and others.2 In Section II, we review a large and

important sociology of organizations and management literature which has identified recurrent

patterns of industry formation. These patterns clearly indicate that the formation process involves

decades of change in numbers and average size of firms inconsistent with standard microeconomic

analyses of entry and exit for industries in and around equilibrium. We also review equilibrium

models of industrial organization, highlighting key points of difference and congruence. In the third

section we report in some detail on research on biotechnology by us and others, emphasizing

theoretically and empirically interesting results which appear to be generalizable to other industries

during their formative and transformative phases.         The fourth section focuses on natural

excludability which is central to understanding the slow diffusion of very profitable innovations.

We then point out the implications of these results for important issues in policy analysis and

welfare economics. In the concluding section of the paper we attempt to draft a collective research

agenda which suggests some next steps for economics and its sister disciplines in understanding

growth and the wealth of nations.



                       I. Metamorphic Progress and the “New Economy”



       Experience suggests that our arguments on the importance of metamorphic progress can be

misread -- and perhaps dismissed – as supporting or even implying the “New Economy” ideas

discussed most significantly by Alan Greenspan (2000a-b, 2001). We have no reason to believe




                                                  3
that the processes driving metamorphic progress have either accelerated or decelerated in the last

half of the 1990s and thus have no expectation of change in either direction of overall technical

progress.

       Little support for any extraordinary productivity growth in 1996-2000 is found in the 1950-

2001 record of U.S. nonfarm-business labor productivity growth reported in Figure 1.3 I believe

that the years 1996-2000 are better characterized as years of average productivity growth with one

year moderately above average. Despite his best efforts, Rudebusch (2000) was unable to find any

statistically significant increase in potential output (corrected for cyclical movements using the

demographics-adjusted unemployment rate).4 This sort of new economy looks very much like the

same old economy.        Indeed, 1995-2000 productivity growth was considerably below that

experienced in the period 1960-1968 just preceding the Great Inflation. We believe that the

evidence is fully consistent with normal procyclical patterns.

       In summary, although changes in the rate of metamorphic progress might explain a “New

Economy” increase in potential-output growth, we do not believe that has occurred in recent years.

Landefeld and Fraumeni (2001) provide a nice review of the debate and measurement issues in

regard to the New Economy hypothesis.



                               II. Patterns of Industrial Formation



       The typical pattern of formation of new industries involves a few firms initially entering,

growing to many, and ultimately consolidating, producing the curve shown in Figure 2 for

number of firms. When the number of firms stabilizes or begins to decline, that does not imply

however that the overall industry size also declines. What typically happens instead is that the




                                                  4
remaining, successful entrants grow fast enough that the overall size of the industry continues to

increase (as does the average size of the remaining firms), as shown in the industry GDP-share

curve in Figure 2. Costs of adjustment in size are generally non-linear, with fixed costs of

adjustment rather than the standard assumption of convex adjustment costs, as the review of

evidence in Haltiwanger (1997) shows.5 Thus, the peak number of firms is reached at a time

when industry output is still growing. The general form of the industry life cycle shown in

Figure 2 has been strongly supported in empirical research.

       We will first review the findings relevant to our main line of argument in the population

or organizational ecology approach in the sociology/management literature. We then do the

same for the more familiar (to economists) industrial organization literature concerned with

learning by firms under competition. We aim to place our own approach in a broader context,

not to attempt a global review.



Theories of Population/Industry Emergence and Growth

       Organizational Ecology.         Populations of organizations emerge sharing the same

“organizational form,” meaning “central or core design.” Reviews by Baum (1996) and by

Singh and Lumsden (1990) identify a wide range of organizational forms, including savings and

loan associations, hotels, life insurance companies, day care centers, semiconductor firms, and

California wineries. The mixture of private and public organizations is typical of ecological

research, and represents exploitation of available data resources rather than systematic

comparison across these two sectors.

       Most ecological research gathers data on the initial or at least early growth of each

organizational form, and sometimes captures the full life cycle of a population as shown in




                                                5
Figure 2 above. Organizational ecology focuses attention on the founding/birth of firms and on

the population dynamics that support moving from the initial founding of a single firm to

emergence of a new industry. Clearly, a population is generally a significantly narrower group

of firms than an industry and has the advantage of studying “proto-industries” during the process

of their development.

          The hypothesized shape of the number of firms curve shown in Figure 2 above has been

broadly supported across strikingly different empirical settings, as shown for trade associations

by Aldrich and Staber (1988: Figure 7-2 to 7-5), for local units of Mothers Against Drunk

Driving (MADD) by McCarthy, Wolfson, Baker, and Mosakowski (1988: Figure 5-1 and 5-2),

for labor unions by Carroll and Hannan (1989: Figure 1), for telephone companies by Barnett

and Amburgey (1990: Figure 4.1 and 4.3), and for Finnish newspapers by Miner, Amburgey and

Stearns (1990: Figures 1, 2, 3). But theory development has not kept pace with empirical work,

and the framework within which results can or should be interpreted is often unclear,

contradictory, or disconfirmed.      Variables proliferate with few validity tests and tenuous

relationship to theoretical dimensions of central interest; central theoretical constructs often have

no clear empirical referents.6

          Probably the most robust thread in ecological theory is organizational form, introduced

explicitly and developed in McKelvey (1982), McKelvey and Aldrich (1983), and Romanelli

(1991).     Processes by which new forms are developed include imprinting at the period of

emergence in Stinchcombe (1965), and the source and emergence of varieties of forms in

Brittain and Freeman (1986), Marrett (1980), and Aldrich and Waldinger (1990).

          What underlies the initial emergence and early growth of a new organizational

population? Ecological research has only recently gone beyond measuring the effects of the




                                                 6
number of prior births on the number of births in the next period, called “population dynamics,”

and the number of organizations in a population in the prior period, called “population density.”

Zucker, Darby, and Peng (1998) show that fundamentals of resource reallocation and

mobilization, coupled with resource quality, provide significantly stronger predictive power

especially in predicting location of growth than population dynamics or density. We report

repeated dynamic simulations demonstrating that population ecology model predictions are

essentially uncorrelated with the panel data on biotechnology entry by year and region, while our

alternative model has correlation coefficients averaging above 0.8.

       Industrial Organization. Most theory and research in industrial organization (hereafter,

I/O) begins where organizational ecology leaves off. Ecology-based research focuses on the

history of development of an organizational population – the process of industry emergence. I/O

research has been primarily concerned with firms in mature industries and processes central to

mature industry life cycle including growth and turnover, as Caves’s recent review (1998)

indicates.   In mature industries, observed differences in profitability, productivity, industry

output shares, investment, and similar variables provide the basis for entry by the firm as well as

the basis for later changes in firm strategy, predicting growth and turnover in industries.

       Studies in industrial organization broadly support the pattern of change shown in our

Figure 2, but only for a subset of companies operating in mature industries, as Caves summarizes

(1998:1958-59): “hazard rates for incumbents are lower than for entrants through all stages of the

cycle in ‘non-technical’ products (where experience advantages might be great),” but “higher for

‘technical’ products, where entrants bring the continuing flow of innovations.” The latter results

come from Audretsch (1991). Klepper and Miller (1995) and Klepper (1996) show that the

number of firms offering a product reaches a long-run stable equilibrium after declining from an




                                                 7
early peak through a prolonged, steady shake-out phase that suggests continuing competition

among firms to reduce costs rather than initial entry that overshot the potential market.

       I/O research is based directly on economic theories of competition.             From the I/O

perspective (Caves 1998, p. 1947, footnote 2), organizational ecology “suffers from eschewing

simple priors about business behavior: intended profit-maximization and the need to cover costs

to keep a firm’s coalition together.” Hence, the orienting theories underlying population ecology

and I/O are sufficiently different that there has been little cross-fertilization, despite empirical

research on the same or very similar underlying processes.7

       Our research program seeks to build a bridge between these two related approaches by

bringing organizational ecology’s focus on industry emergence into a model that includes wealth

maximization and measures of resources (e.g., intellectual human capital of the stars, venture

capital), competencies (e.g., main technology employed), and external environment (beyond

other firms to include top quality universities and other local characteristics, as well as quality of

the local labor force and national cost of capital).

       In standard I/O studies, two major theoretical approaches have developed over the past

two decades to deal with empirical inconsistencies with earlier models such as the law of

proportionate growth. Central to both are the processes of learning by, and the characteristics of

the information available to, firms in an industry: Learning about the decisions and success of

other firms, as well as your own firm through its experience, improves the firm’s efficiency and

hence growth and survival.

       Most models of competition and growth are more suited to manufacturing and other

routinized production contexts where the main source of uncertainty is arguably how an entering

firm will perform relative to existing firms in that same industry. In Jovanovic (1982) and




                                                   8
Lippman and Rumelt (1982) firms learn about their competitiveness only after entry, through

experience relative to that of other firms. Because costs are random, and different between

firms, a potential entering firm does not know its own expectation, but knows the distribution of

all firms’ costs in that industry. Firms differ in size because some discover that they are more

efficient than others, not because of fixity of capital. These models have proven themselves in

numerous empirical studies of mature industries as reviewed by Caves (1998).

       Recent large-scale research in industrial organization has documented the variability of

the performance path of individual firms, as shown especially in panel studies by Davis and

Haltiwanger (1992) and Pakes and Ericson (1998). A recent model, developed by Ericson and

Pakes (1995), explicitly incorporates firm-specific changes in investment in response to chanes

in uncertainty and to evolution of competing firms and other industries. The success of the firm

in terms of profitability and value is determined by the stochastic outcome of its investment,

within the context of success by other firms in the same industry and the context of competitive

pressures from new entry and other industries.

       This model endogenizes the processes of selection in industry evolution and thus both

entry and exit. Industry-level dynamics are predicted to develop over time in an increasingly

regular way, spending more time in “natural states,” including number of incumbents, entrants

and exits, but failing to reach a limit. The Ericson-Pakes approach provides a more complete

model of firm behavior in industries where production is not routine, but where central tasks are

invented and re-invented as the frontiers of knowledge develop whether due to technological

breakthrough or other kinds of invention, from quality circles to new financial instruments.




                                                 9
    III. Findings for Biotechnology and Other Science-Driven Technological Revolutions



       The process underlying metamorphic progress is defined by the introduction of a new

“breakthrough” technology which either eliminates the ability of firms practicing the old technology

to survive or which creates an entirely new industry.8 If the technological breakthrough relies on

the same scientific and engineering base as the previous technology incumbent firms are generally

strengthened as they readily convert to the new technology.        Focusing on what happens to

incumbent firms, Tushman and Anderson (1986) refer to these changes as “competence-

enhancing.” If the science and engineering base of the new technology is disjoint from that of the

existing technology, existing firms tend to shrink and exit and many new entrants arise practicing

the new (incumbent’s) “competence destroying” technology (Tushman and Anderson 1986;

Henderson 1993).

       We emphasize whether the breakthrough technology is incumbent-enhancing or entry-

generating. Incumbent-enhancing breakthroughs are the same as Tushman and Anderson’s

competence-enhancing breakthroughs.          Entry-generating breakthroughs include both their

competence-destroying technologies and breakthroughs which create whole new industries. The

key example of entry-generating breakthroughs are the entrepreneurial start-up phase in high-

technology industries characterized by a high valuation on ability to practice the new technology

while any incumbent firms’ expertise in a previous technology becomes obsolete and, often, a

barrier to adoption of the new technology.

       Much recent research – including ours – has concentrated on industries being formed or

transformed in response to entry-generating technological breakthroughs. Nonetheless, Tushman

and Anderson (1986) provide an impressive list of incumbent-enhancing breakthroughs and the




                                                10
recent work by Harberger (1998) and his associates suggest that metamorphic progress of this

type is also a relatively frequent feature of a growing economy. In contrast, we (Darby and

Zucker 2001; Zucker and Darby 2001) found in Japan that the technological breakthroughs

which led to a wave of entrepreneurial start-ups in the U.S. were adopted more or less

successfully either by established firms with congruent scientific bases which took advantage of

the opportunity to enter new industries or by technological transformation of incumbent firms.

The key institutional difference which appear to have led to different metamorphic processes in

the two countries were the (recently relaxed) Japanese prohibition on public offerings of stock in

firms without an established record of substantial profitability. The extraordinary length of

private financing implied by this prohibition effectively eliminated the possibility of Japanese

startup firms financed by venture capitalists.

       Research on the formation/transformation entrepreneurial phase in high technology

industries has proceeded far enough that we can begin to define and, in some cases, tentatively

answer key questions about processes that shape metamorphic change and ultimately the total rate

of technological progress in the economy. While we focus here on entry-generating breakthroughs,

incumbent-enhancing metamorphic change also may be important for technological progress.9



Many Are Called, But Few Are Chosen

       Entry-generating breakthroughs are characterized by a formation phase of perhaps ten to

twenty years (see Figure 2) during which many more firms enter the industry than will survive in

the long run. In the following consolidation or shakeout phase of perhaps ten to thirty years,

most of these firms are either absorbed by the industry’s winners or leave the industry at their

owners’ initiative or that of their creditors.10 This occurs even as industry output continues to




                                                 11
grow dramatically; average (surviving) firm size grows even more rapidly. The consolidation

phase may be followed by an extended period of stability corresponding to the standard price-

theory model of entry and exit maintaining zero-economic profits and optimal firm size. A final

phase of decline is not necessary but often observed. Alternatively, the entire process may be

interrupted in any phase by another metamorphic breakthrough.

       Why are so many more new firms or new operations of existing firms created than are really

needed? Is their creation and destruction a case of organizational waste and entrepreneurial

misjudgment or is firm-number overshooting valuable and entry ex ante justified? Uncertainty

about which entrants will be most successful in implementing the new technology is sufficient for

the observed pattern to be efficient, as shown by Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994) and Ericson and

Pakes (1995), and recently elaborated by Bernardo and Chowdhry (2002).

       For incumbent-enhancing breakthroughs it is obvious that the most successful

implementers will be among the incumbent firms where so much expertise relative to the

technology and cooperative technologies is present. Indeed, one or more of these firms is likely

to be the source of the breakthrough. While inventing and early adopting incumbent firms are

likely to improve their standing in the industry (Tushman and Anderson 1986), there is no reason

for any outsiders to enter in the expectation that they will out-compete the incumbents. Thus the

overshooting of firm numbers is characteristic of only entry-generating metamorphic progress.

       Although there are many hopeful entrants in the latter case, few of them typically survive.

For example, Table 1 presents some data on U.S. new biotechnology firms in 1989 drawn from a

study we did with Jeff Armstrong.11 The first of these firms was founded in 1976 to exploit the

string of technological breakthroughs in the life sciences, most of which followed directly or

indirectly from the invention of genetic engineering as reported by Cohen, Chang, Boyer, and




                                               12
Helling (1973). Firm formation accelerated after the 1980 U.S. Supreme Court decision which

upheld the patenting of engineered cells and cell parts and the underlying recombinant-DNA

technology covered by the Cohen-Boyer patent (1980). By 1990 over half of the employees in the

industry were concentrated in the top 10 percent of the firms and over two thirds of the industry

were in the top 20 percent of the firms. Figure 3 illustrates these data and shows that the same

top-21 firms (out of 211) also accounted for 54 percent of the growth in employment from 1989

to 1994.12 More generally, Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (2002, Table 6) show that U.S. patents

have been concentrated in a relatively few career inventors since the 1870s.



Academic Science Matters a Lot

       Entry-generating metamorphic progress almost always arises from outside the

industry(ies) to which it will be applied. Many observers have pointed to anecdotal evidence of

the importance of research universities as a source of breakthroughs which have created such

regions as the Silicon Valley around Stanford, Route 128 around M.I.T. and Harvard, and the

Research Triangle around Duke, the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, and North

Carolina State University.13 Mansfield (1995) documents the important role played by academic

research in even incremental industrial R&D, i.e., in perfective progress.

       A stream of recent research on innovation in the U.S. has found evidence of “geographically

localized knowledge spillovers” occurring in areas around major universities: Jaffe (1986, 1989),

Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993), Audretsch and Feldman (1996), and Henderson, Jaffe,

and Trajtenberg (1998). The underlying assumption is that proximity to a major university itself

provides technological opportunity; the localization is assumed to be due to the social ties between

university and firm employees or to firm employees’ access to seminars at the university. The




                                                13
importance of distance is strengthened by Adams and Jaffe’s (1996) finding that geographic

distance is an important impediment to flow of technology even within the firm.

       Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998) and Darby and Zucker (2001) find that firms are more

likely to begin using biotechnology near where and when “star” bioscientists are actively publishing

in the U.S. and Japan, respectively. Although these findings have been cited as evidence of

geographically localized knowledge spillovers, we read our results – and those of the other authors

cited above – as only demonstrating geographical localization of knowledge. Zucker, Darby, and

Armstrong (1998, 2002) and Zucker and Darby (2001) show for California, the U.S., and Japan,

respectively, that university effects on nearby firm R&D productivity are highly concentrated in the

particular firms with bench-science working relationships with top academic scientists and

practically absent otherwise. We identify these academic-firm links by the academic scientist

publishing a journal article that also has one or more firm-affiliated authors.14 Table 2 and the

corresponding Figure 4 indicate the close connection between links to top research university

faculty and success: ranking firms by their linked articles up to 1989 does about as well as ranking

by 1989 employment at predicting the 1989-1994 employment increase. Put another way, an

investor who restricted his or her biotech portfolio at the end of 1989 to only the 22.7 percent of

firms with any linked firm-research university core biotech publications or the 10.9 percent with

more than one or two of these would include all of the top-10 firms and nearly all of the base-hit

firms. The message of these simple correlations holds up in the context of poison regressions which

allow for other determinants. Figure 5 reports the strong estimated effects of these linked articles on

firm research productivity in California and Japan.15

       Fieldwork – supported by analysis of the timing of the academic scientists’ first articles with

a firm and its founding -- indicates that these academic-firm co-publishing relationships most often




                                                  14
connote that the academic scientist was a firm founder or at least presently has a significant

financial interest in the firm.16 Indeed, Herbert Boyer of the Cohen-Boyer team which discovered

recombinant-RNA or genetic engineering and entrepreneur Robert Swanson founded the first of the

new biotech firms (Genentech). Similarly, Torero (1998) finds that a few hundred top scientists

and engineers account for a large part of the patenting in the semiconductor industry, and firm

success depends heavily on the degree of involvement of those stars in a firm. Where and when

these star semiconductor scientists and engineers are working is an important determinant of

where and when new semiconductor firms are established (Torero, Darby, and Zucker 2001).



         IV. Natural Excludability and the Diffusion of Metamorphic Breakthroughs



       The central role of a relatively small number of scientists and engineers in determining

success of high-technology firms forces us to rethink the nature of technology. Economists have

traditionally analyzed technology as if it were a public good with a marginal cost of (re)production

of zero (Nelson 1959, Arrow 1962). Despite the seminal works of Stigler (1961) and Becker (1964)

spawning the vast literatures on the economics of costly information and human capital, most

analyses of technology including the “new” endogenous growth models typically conceive of

technology as information that can be recorded on a floppy diskette and then be costlessly

reproduced and applied. Romer (1990, p. S75), for example, acknowledges that this nonrivalrous

characterization is an idealization but argue that it is much more expensive to create a new

technology than learn it and that the idealization is harmless. We disagree.

       When a major scientific breakthrough occurs and creates the opportunity for a

corresponding incumbent-enhancing or entry-generating technological breakthrough, it may be




                                                 15
very difficult for anyone other than the discovering scientists or their close working associates to

reduce the discovery to technological practice. The ideas are far from codified and even the

discovering scientists are not sure exactly what it is that they are doing which is crucial.

Published results – including those in a patent – may not be reproducible unless the reproducing

scientist goes to the discoverer’s lab and learns by doing with him or her.17 In biotechnology,

patent disclosures are often made by deposit of a cell line with an independent agent so that they

will be publicly available at the expiration of the patent term: it is simply not possible to write

down what a person “skilled in the art” would have to do to obtain the same organism.

        Breakthrough discoveries leading to metamorphic growth are often of the same nature as

Griliches’s classic case of (1957, 1960) corn hybridization: an invention of a way of invention.

Such platform technologies involving new techniques and instrumentation are typically hard to

work with at first and their diffusion is based on learning-by-doing-with at the laboratory bench:

that is, by immediate observation and practice with someone who holds the tacit knowledge of

how to make the technique work.

        Not only are breakthrough discoveries often characterized by extensive tacit knowledge,

only a relatively few top scientists near the frontier of the area are likely to be able to figure out how

the discovery might be used to actually produce something of economic value. While everyone

might want to pluck the newly available low-lying fruit, not everyone can see where they are. The

late Robert Swanson, the founding CEO of Genentech, liked to tell the story of how the firm

obtained such a favorable royalty deal for Humulin® (human insulin produced by genetically

modified bacteria) from the usually shrewd bargainers at Eli Lilly and Co.: The scientists there

were so sure that Herbert Boyer and Genentech were attempting the impossible that no serious




                                                   16
bargaining was done until Genentech notified Lilly that they were holding a press conference

announcing success in three days.

       We say that this embodied knowledge – transferred slowly only be learning-by-doing-with –

is characterized by natural excludability. Even if the university is assigned a patent to the discovery

most of the value accrues to the discoverers since without their cooperation the patent cannot be

used. Our fieldwork for biotechnology and more general studies by Jensen and Thursby (2001)

and Thursby and Thursby (2002) support the natural excludability hypothesis. For example, in

the Jensen and Thursby (2001, p. 243) survey of Technology Transfer Office managers, “For 71

percent of the inventions licensed, respondents claim that successful commercialization requires

cooperation by the inventor and licensee in further development.”



Diffusion with Natural Excludability

       If new metamorphic technologies were really like software on a disk, diffusion of this

highly profitable knowledge would be limited only by the speed with which people realize the

value of the new processes (Mansfield 1961, Griliches and Schmookler 1963). In contrast to this

potentially infinite rate of adoption, natural excludability limits the extent of diffusion to an

exponential times the number of discoverers.

       To see this, consider biotechnology in 1973 and suppose that 6 people in 2 laboratories

knew how to do genetic engineering (recombinant DNA). Suppose one knowledgeable person

can transfer the knowledge to at most 1 person per year. Then the maximum number of potential

practitioners of the art in year t (t = 0 in 1973) is 6•2t. Even if this rapid rate of diffusion were

possible, there would only be 6•210 = 6,144 potential practitioners of genetic engineering in

1983, each of whom would still be earning a very large shadow wage. Over time, the value of




                                                  17
the knowledge declines as the number of practitioners increases until new apprentices earn only

the normal human capital return to their investment in learning the knowledge.

       Thus, there is a varying period of time during which the discovers and early learners

derive supranormal returns from practicing their knowledge and also benefit from lower cost

assistants due to the implicit tuition chain.       This period of time can be long enough to

significantly impact the formative period of a new industry, such as biotechnology or

nanotechnology, or transformative periods such as have occurred in semiconductors. We have

formulated a much more elaborate model involving multiyear learning in a lab with the number

of learners in the lab and their probability and lag to leading their own lab, all as a function of the

value of the knowledge, but the basic message of at most exponential growth from a small base

remains intact.   Zucker, Darby, and Torero (2002) illustrate both the geometric growth in

scientists publishing their first paper reporting a genetic-sequence discovery and the continuing

tacit nature of the knowledge.18

       Discovering and other top scientists and engineers play a key role in metamorphic progress

as we have seen so far for biotechnology and semiconductors, lasers as described by Sleeper (1998),

and nanotechnology (based on our new research). We believe that natural excludability makes this

role a frequent feature of metamorphic progress. Note that even where university professors follow

the rules and promptly disclose inventions for patenting by the university under the Bayh-Dole Act,

the value of those patents is impacted by the usual necessity to license the patent to a firm and on

terms such that the discovering professors are willing to cooperate in the commercialization process.




                                                  18
                             V. Unsettled Welfare and Policy Issues



       Academic purists often express concerns about faculty involvement in commercialization of

their discoveries. These concerns include: (a) lost scientific productivity of the scientists, (b)

reduction in the amount of science which is contributed to the common pool by publishing, (c)

deflection of the development of science toward more commercially relevant problems, (d) conflict

of interest leading to scientists’ distorting their findings, and (e) conflict of commitment to the

university. Our research can shed light on some of these concerns, while others remain open issues.

We do not consider more radical objections to scientific progress and productivity growth since we

believe that these are well answered in more general debates.



Lost Scientific Productivity of the Scientists

       One of the initial motivations of the biotechnology study which spawned our current larger

growth, science, and technology project was to examine the cost in lost scientific productivity of

commercial involvement of the very best academic bioscientists. Surprisingly, we found robust

evidence that scientific productivity of these scientists increases during their commercial

involvement (as compared to their own productivity before or after) on the standard measures of

publications and citations to those publications (Zucker and Darby 1995, 1996). To give an extreme

example, the most commercially involved star scientists (those ever affiliated with a firm and with

patents) have 9 times as many citations as do star scientists who are never affiliated or linked to a

firm and have no patents. About half of that difference reflects the fact that those who become

involved are more energetic to begin with, and the rest the increase in publications per year and

citations per publications during their years of firm involvement.




                                                 19
        In the half decade since we first published those findings, we have further tested them on an

expanded U.S. data set using improved methodology and replicated them for Japan.                  Since

publishing increases robustly for scientists working with firms, we were forced to reconsider our

initial assumptions. First, the delays in publication required for patenting by firms are typically on

the order of three months and universities also require delay while they prepare patent applications

with possibly less efficiency.     Further purely academic scientists also may prefer to delay

publication for strategic reasons; one respondent put it this way: “When I was a pure academic, I

didn’t exactly throw away my lead by publishing rich discoveries until I put together three or four

articles following them up.” We may not only have over-estimated the increased returns to secrecy

but also missed two factors which seem to swamp any higher value for secrecy.

        The first countervailing factor is that commercial involvement gives the scientists much

more resources to do their work. Not only are venture capitalists and investment bankers easier

funding sources (per dollar) than the NIH or NSF, but it permits scientists the luxury of research

assistants who are highly experienced and skilled long-term employees instead of first-year graduate

students doing an assay or protocol for the first time.

        The second countervailing factor is that the best scientists really love doing science! That is,

doing science is a luxury good for which the income elasticity is greater than 1. When their

company goes public, they consume not only more Ferrari automobiles but more experiments.19



Reduction in the Amount of Science Which Is Contributed to the Common Pool by Publishing

        These concerns in part refer to publishing activities by scientists who are commercially

involved and those have been addressed above. There is, however, a broader concern that the

commercialization of science will reduce the amount of publishing by scientists generally – thus




                                                  20
reducing the positive externalities which enrich the entire enterprise. Put another way, extensive

faculty involvement in the commercial world may import commercial norms of trade secrecy into

the academy. Our evidence suggests that just the opposite is true and that the new biotech firms –

largely started with active faculty as principals – have exported academic values of publishing to the

industries in which they are involved.      The new biotech firms were a major organizational

form/design innovation that forced the surviving incumbents to permit and reward journal

publication in order to compete for the best and brightest scientists who are needed for the firm to

survive and prosper. As the top research executive at one of the largest pharmaceutical firms put it:

       We see some danger of losing our competitive advantage by publishing, but a

       much greater danger if we do anything that deters the best scientists from coming

       here. Further, we need for our scientists to have great reputations in order to

       bring others like them to [the firm]. We are the beneficiaries of world-wide

       scientific research, and thus we also need to contribute to this pool of scientific

       knowledge, creating a public good.... Relative to new biotechnology firms, [we]

       may believe more strongly in the commonality of research tools because we have

       a wider array of methodologies and products. (Zucker and Darby 1997, pp. 438-

       439.).

       Table 3 is an extract of the top and “Other References” [i.e., non-patent references] section

from Goeddel and Heyneker’s (1982) U.S. Patent 4,342,832, assigned at issue to Genentech, Inc.

The patent was applied for in July 1979 and cites related work by the inventors (Goeddel et al.

published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in the same year). Note the

extensive citations to other work published in leading academic journals, indicating the continuity

between basic science and new intellectual property in the science-driven industries. Indeed, much




                                                 21
research done at firms is openly published either without a patent or shortly after one is applied for.

In the most successful firms, world-class scientists are more likely to follow high-stakes, high-

returns R&D strategies instead of more predictable incremental strategies, as indicated by the

larger jump-size in their stock price when success or failure is revealed (Darby, Liu, and Zucker

2002).

         The evidence is clear that the involvement of university faculty in commercialization of

their discoveries has widened the norms of publication of research results into the very science-

driven industries where there is the most to be learned from firm research. It is hard to credit that

other university scientists are publishing less while those directly involved are publishing more; so

we conclude that there has likely been an overall increase in the propensity to publish research

results rather than the hypothesized decrease.



Deflection of the Development of Science toward More Commercially Relevant Problems

         We believe that the trajectory of science is bent to a degree toward more commercially

relevant problems.    Just as provision of government research funding targeted to politically

important issues would seem to have some impact on the trajectory of science, we would expect that

the availability of commercial funding should also have an impact. However, it is very hard to

develop a counterfactual trajectory for science, so our evidence is indirect: Zucker, Darby, and

Torero (2002) find that bioscientists working in areas more directly relevant to human disease are

more likely to become linked to firms, and, as noted above, scientists who are linked to firms are

both generally more productive of articles and citations to those articles and are significantly more

productive during their linkage than they were previously. Thus there must be some impact of

commercial relevance on the course of science. However, since more science is being done in total




                                                  22
and progress in one area depends in part on progress in other areas, we cannot conclude

unambiguously that there is less progress in the less commercially applicable areas than there would

have been in the absence of commercial involvement.

        Even if there were less science in the less commercially applicable areas, it does not follow

that this is a cost rather than a benefit. In the case of biotechnology, it means that more people are

being spared from death and suffering from disease and from starvation due to high food costs.

Possibly it is appropriate that scientists weigh these benefits directly and in terms of their financial

implications in choosing which problems to work on.            Even in economics, there are some

distinguished practitioners who argue that their science would be healthier if empirical relevance

played a greater role in allocation of rewards and hence choice of problems.



Conflict of Interest Leading to Scientists’ Distorting Their Findings

        From time to time cases of scientific fraud emerge, and the fear is that this frequency is

inevitably increased where scientists can profit directly from selling products or shares of stock

based on such claims. This is probably a very small risk for our star scientists who are likely at a

robust corner solution due to reputations of immense value and realistic prospects for the Nobel and

other major prizes. Where reputation value is lesser, one would expect that fraud increases with the

returns. However, we do not normally argue against wealth creation on the grounds that it increases

the incentives for theft and fraud.



Conflict of Commitment to the University

        Finally, there is an argument that the opportunity to commercialize discoveries distracts

faculty from the roles which they are paid for: to instruct, to do research, and to attend committee




                                                  23
meetings. We can leave out any threat to research since that unambiguously increases in quantity

and quality during commercial involvement, so the threat is concentrated in the areas of teaching

and collegiality. Even for teaching, the issues are complicated by the extraordinarily high value of

training received by apprentice researchers in the laboratories of scientists making valuable

discoveries with natural excludability. If the possibility of working with such scientists increases

the applications to the university in the relevant department(s) or school(s), can we truly say that

their teaching output has decreased?

       Moreover, in addressing the question of diversion from “commitment” to the university, we

must face the issue that the roles or commitments of a professor are not standardized and are

traditionally subject to individual negotiation as discussed by Stigler (1950) and Stinchcombe

(1990). This immediately raises the issues of incentive packages and compensating differentials in

wages of professors who – if they make a commercially valuable discovery – will tend to profit

from the discovery as well as do more research and less teaching and collegiality. Normally, we

would suppose that markets handle these contracting issues rather efficiently although not perfectly

compared to a costless world (Darby and Karni 1973, Aghion and Tirole 1994). Possibly the

complaints about conflict of commitments reflect more the feeling of some faculty in other

departments that they work just as hard and should be equally rewarded by the market.



VI. Conclusions: A Draft Research Agenda



       The endogenous growth literature assumes that technology is a nonrivalrous recipe which is

costly to discover but costless to replicate. We saw in Section IV above that for many industries

undergoing metamorphic progress, technology instead possesses natural excludability, resides in




                                                24
particular individuals, and diffuses by learning-by-doing with. That is, breakthrough technologies

are better thought of as rivalrous human capital, not a recipe on a disk capable of free copying. It

follows that the focus of the endogenous growth literature should shift from the theory of the firm

toward understanding the motivations of discovering scientists to report or bootleg discoveries, to

found new firms or cooperate with existing firms in commercializing their discoveries, and most

importantly to do the initial research which creates the opportunity for a commercial breakthrough.

Key issues largely ignored in the current growth literature include compensating wage differentials,

incentive pay, rents and quasi-rents, and moral hazard along the lines of Aghion and Tirole (1994).

Jensen and Thursby (2001), Thursby and Thursby (2000), and Zucker, Darby, and Torero (2002)

explicitly pursue those issues.

       If the most important, breakthrough technologies are typically embodied in individual

scientists and transferred or diffused by learning-by-doing-with, then the incentives to discover

are considerably higher than conventionally analyzed even if the university or firm gets nominal

ownership of the intellectual property rights in the discovery through a patent. The discoverers

and patent-owner have an interesting bargaining problem since the patent is worthless unless the

discoverers cooperate with the licensee(s), often firms in which the discoverers have founders’

interests. On the other hand, the angel investors and venture capitalists financing discovers’

firms want to be sure that the intellectual property is secure and tied down, so the discoverers

must either negotiate a reasonable agreement with their employers (the patent owners) or take

extraordinary steps to document that the discoveries were not made with, say, university

resources. Hence, the plethora of firm laboratories very near campuses and the attraction of

university-adjacent science parks to ensure that follow-up discoveries clearly belong to the firms

and not the universities.




                                                25
       Our approach also suggests that the analysis of spillovers (the S&T literature’s term for

positive externalities) is basically flawed. The spillovers from the ivory tower that are widely

used to explain geographically localized knowledge (i.e., increased research productivity for

firms) in the neighborhood of great research universities do not hold up to rigorous empirical

analysis. Increased research productivity is very large in firms with specific identifiable links to

discovering university scientists and engineers and otherwise nil or insignificant. The more

important positive externalities associated with commercialization of university discoveries have

been neglected in the literature. These are the non-localized spillovers associated with increased

publishing by the university scientists working with the firms and by the scientists and engineers

employed by the firms.20

       We know from a great deal of empirical research in the field of growth accounting that

technological progress together with growth in the average level of human capital are the

ultimate determinants of growth in output per capita. The endogenous growth literature has

started the important work of understanding the determinants of technological progress in an

aggregate model. The aggregate models to date are oriented toward explaining what we call

perfective progress – based on incremental R&D performed by incumbent firms. We argue that

metamorphic progress is an equal or greater source of technological progress and that most often

– but not always – metamorphic progress involves discoveries made by scientists and engineers

external to the existing industry and involves embodied knowledge which is protected by natural

excludability and diffused by learning-by-doing-with. We believe that building on these ideas

will strengthen both the science and technology and the endogenous growth literatures with the

ultimate result that we understand what institutional arrangements are most conducive to growth

in the standard of living.




                                                26
                                       REFERENCES

Adams, James D., and Adam B. Jaffe, “Bounding the Effects of R&D: An Investigation Using

       Matched Establishment-Firm Data.” Rand Journal of Economics, Winter 1996, 27(4):

       700-721.

Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole, "The Management of Innovation," The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, November 1994, 109(4): 1185-1209.

Aldrich, Howard, and Udo H. Staber, “Organizing Business Interests: Patterns of Trade

       Association Foundings, Transformations, and Death,” in Glenn R. Carroll, ed.,

       Ecological Models of Organizations, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1988.

Aldrich, Howard E., and Roger Waldinger, “Ethnicity and Entrepreneurship,” Annual Review of

       Sociology, 1990; 16:111-135.

Arrow, Kenneth J., "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention," in

       Richard R. Nelson, ed., The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and

       Social Factors, N.B.E.R. Special Conference Series vol. 13, Princeton, NJ: Princeton

       University Press, 1962. [Pp. 609-625]

Audretsch, David B., “New-Firm Survival and the Technological Regime,” Review of Economics

       and Statistics, August 1991, 73(3): 441-450.

Audretsch, David B., and Maryann P Feldman, “R&D Spillovers and the Geography of

       Innovation and Production,” American Economic Review, June 1996, 86(3): 630-640.

Bania, Neil, Randall Eberts, and Michael Fogarty, “Universities and the Startup of New

       Companies: Can We Generalize from Route 128 and Silicon Valley?” Review of

       Economics and Statistics, November 1993, 75(4): 761-766.




                                               27
Barnett, William P., and Terry L. Amburgey, “Do Larger Organizations Generate Stronger

       Competition?” in Jitendra V. Singh, ed., Organizational Evolution: New Directions,

       Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1990.

Baum, Joel A. C., “Organizational Ecology,” in Stewart R. Clegg, Cynthia Hardy, and Walter R.

       Nord, eds., Handbook of Organization Studies. London, U.K.: Sage Publications, 1996.

Baum, Joel A. C., and Walter W. Powell, “Cultivating an Institutional Ecology of Organizations:

       Comment on Hannan, Carroll, Dundon, and Torres,” American Sociological Review,

       August 1995, 60(4): 529-538.

Becker, Gary S., Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference

       to Education, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1964.

Bernardo, Antonio E., and Bhagwan Chowdhry, “Resources, Real Options, and Corporate

       Strategy,” Journal of Financial Economics, in press 2002.

Brittain, Jack W., and John H. Freeman, “Entrepreneurship in the Semiconductor Industry,”

       paper presented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, New

       Orleans, 1986.

Carroll, Glenn R., and Michael T. Hannan.          “Density Dependence in the Evolution of

       Populations of Newspaper Organizations,” American Sociological Review, Aug. 1989,

       54(4): 524-541.

Caves, Richard E. “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and Mobility of

       Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1998, 36(4): 1947-1982.

Cohen, Stanley, and Herbert Boyer, “Process for producing biologically functional molecular

       chimeras,” United States Patent number 4,237,224, granted December 2, 1980.




                                              28
Cohen, Stanley, A. Chang, Herbert Boyer, and R. Helling, "Construction of Biologically Functional

       Bacterial Plasmids in vitro," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November

       1973, 70(11): 3240-3244.

Darby, Michael R., Labor Force, Employment, and Productivity in Historical Perspective,

       Monograph and Research Series, No. 37, Los Angeles, CA: U.C.L.A. Institute of

       Industrial Relations, 1984. (1984a)

Darby, Michael R., "The U.S. Productivity Slowdown: A Case of Statistical Myopia," American

       Economic Review, June 1984, 74: 301-322. (1984b)

Darby, Michael R., and Edi Karni, "Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of Fraud,”

       Journal of Law and Economics, April 1973, 16: 67-88.

Darby, Michael R., Qiao Liu, and Lynne G. Zucker, "High Stakes in High Technology: High-

       tech Market Values as Options," UCLA working paper April 2002 [revised version of

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7201, June 1999.]

Darby, Michael R., and Lynne G. Zucker, “Change or Die: The Adoption of Biotechnology in

       the Japanese and U.S. Pharmaceutical Industries,” Comparative Studies of Technological

       Evolution, 2001, 7: 85-125.

Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and

       Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1992, 107(3): 819-

       863.

Dorfman, Nancy S., “Route 128: The Development of a Regional High Technology Economy,”

       in David Lampe, ed., The Massachusetts Miracle: High Technology and Economic

       Revitalization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.




                                               29
Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes, “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for

      Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies, January 1995, 62(1): 53-82.

Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Policy for the Information Economy, A

      Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, MO:

      Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2001.

Freeman, John, Glenn R. Carroll, and Michael T. Hannan, “The Liability of Newness: Age

      Dependence in Organizational Death Rates,” American Sociological Review, October

      1983, 48(5): 692-710.

Goeddel, David V., Dennis G. Kleid, Francisco Bolivar, Herbert L. Heyneker, Daniel G.

      Yansura, Roberto Crea, Tadaaki Hirose, Adam Kraszewski, Keiichi Itakura, and Arthur

      D. Riggs, “Expression in Escherichia coli of Chemically Synthesized Genes for Human

      Insulin,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, January 1979, 76(1): 106-

      110.

Goeddel, David V., and Herbert L. Heyneker, “Method of constructing a replicable cloning

      vehicle having quasi-synthetic genes,” United States Patent number 4,342,832, granted

      August 3, 1982.

Greenspan, Alan, “Technology and the economy,” Remarks before the Economic Club of New

      York,   New    York,    NY,   January    13,   2000.   [http://www.federalreserve.gov/

      boarddocs/speeches/2000/200001132.htm] (2000a)

Greenspan, Alan, “Technological innovation and the economy,” Remarks before the White

      House Conference on the New Economy, Washington, D.C., April 5, 2000.

      [http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2000/20000405.htm] (2000b)




                                              30
Greenspan, Alan, “Economic developments,” Remarks before the Economic Club of New York,

       New York, NY, May 24, 2001.         [http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/

       2001/200105242/default.htm] (2001)

Griliches, Zvi, "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,"

       Econometrica, October 1957, 25(4): 501-522.

Griliches, Zvi, “Hybrid Corn and the Economics of Innovation,” Science, July 29, 1960, 132(no.

       3422): 275-280.

Griliches, Zvi, and Jacob Schmookler, “Inventing and Maximizing,” American Economic

       Review, September 1963, 53(4): 725-729.

Haltiwanger, John C., “Measuring and Analyzing Aggregate Fluctuations: The Importance of

       Building From Microeconomic Evidence,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,

       May/June 1997, 79(3): 55-77.

Harberger, Arnold C., “A Vision of the Growth Process,” American Economic Review, March

       1998, 88(1): 1-32.

Head, Keith, John Ries, and Deborah Swenson, "Agglomeration Benefits and Location Choice:

       Evidence from Japanese Manufacturing Investments in the United States," Journal of

       International Economics, May 1995, 38(3-4): 223-247.

Henderson, Rebecca, "Underinvestment and Incompetence as Responses to Radical Innovation:

       Evidence from the Photolithographic Alignment Industry," RAND Journal of Economics,

       Summer 1993, 24 (2): 248-270.

Henderson, Rebecca, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "Universities as a Source of

       Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting 1965-1988,"

       Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1998, 80(1): 119-127.




                                             31
Jaffe, Adam B., “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D; Evidence from Firms’

       Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” The American Economic Review, December 1986,

       76(5): 984-1001.

Jaffe, Adam B., “Characterizing the ‘Technological Position’ of Firms, with Application to

       Quantifying Technological Opportunity and Research Spillovers,” Research Policy,

       1989, 18(1): 87-97.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, “Geographic Localization of

       Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, August 1993, 63(3): 577-598.

Japan Times, “Professor Guilty in Drugs Bribes Case,” Japan Times International Edition, April

       18, 1999.

Jensen, Richard, and Marie Thursby, "Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Tale of University

       Licensing," American Economic Review, March 2001, 91(1): 240-259.

Jones, Bryan D., and Arnold Vedlitz, “Higher Education Policies and Economic Growth in the

       American States,” Economic Development Quarterly, February 1988, 2 (1): 78-87.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, May 1982, 50(3):

       649-670.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Glenn MacDonald, "The Life-Cycle of a Competitive Industry," Journal

       of Political Economy, April 1994, 102(2): 322-347.

Klepper, Steven, “Entry, Exit, Growth, and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle,” American

       Economic Review, June 1996, 86(3): 562-583.




                                             32
Klepper, Steven, and John H. Miller, “Entry, Exit, and Shakeouts in the United States in New

       Manufactured Products,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 1995, 13(4):

       567-91.

Knight, Frank H., “Diminishing Returns from Investment,” Journal of Political Economy, March

       1944, 52(1): 26-47.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Inventive Activity and the Market for

       Technology in the United States, 1840-1920,” paper presented at the Second Annual

       Roundtable for Engineering Entrepreneurship Research (REER), DuPree College of

       Management at Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia, March 21-23, 2002. 2002.

Landefeld, J. Steven, and Barbara M. Fraumeni, “Measuring the New Economy,” Survey of Current

       Business, March 2001, 81(3): 23-40.

Lerner, Abba P., “On the Marginal Product of Capital and the Marginal Efficiency of

       Investment,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1953, 61(1): 1-14.

Lippman, Steven A., and Richard P. Rumelt, “Uncertain Imitability: An Analysis of Interfirm

       Differences in Efficiency under Competition,” Bell Journal of Economics, Autumn 1982,

       13(2): 418-438.

Mansfield, Edwin, “Technical Change and the Rate of Imitation,” Econometrica, October 1961,

       29(4): 741-766.

Mansfield, Edwin, "Entry, Gibrat's Law, Innovation, and the Growth of Firms,” American

       Economic Review, December 1962, 52(5): 1023-1051.

Mansfield, Edwin, "Academic Research Underlying Industrial Innovations:             Sources,

       Characteristics, and Financing," Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1995,

       77(1): 55-65.




                                             33
Marrett, Cora Bagley. “Influences on the Rise of New Organizations: The Formation of

       Women”s Medical Societies.” Administrative Science Quarterly, March 1980, 25(1):

       185-199.

McCarthy, John D., Mark Wolfson, David P. Baker, and Elaine Mosakowski, “The Founding of

       Social Movement Organizations,” in Glenn R. Carroll, ed., Ecological Models of

       Organizations, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1988.

McKelvey, Bill, Organizational Systematics: Taxonomy, Evolution, Classification, Berkeley,

       CA: University of California Press, 1982.

McKelvey, Bill, and Howard Aldrich, “Populations, Natural Selection, and Applied

       Organizational Science,” Administrative Science Quarterly, March 1983, 28(1): 101-128.

Miner, Anne S., Terry L. Amburgey, and Timothy M. Stearns. “Interorganizational Linkages and

       Population Dynamics: Buffering and Transformational Shields,” Administrative Science

       Quarterly, December 1990, 35(4): 689-713.

Nelson, Richard R., "The Economics of Invention: A Survey of the Literature," Journal of

       Business, April 1959, 32(2): 101-127.

Pakes, Ariel, and Richard Ericson, “Empirical Implications of Alternative Models of Firm

       Dynamics,” Journal of Economic Theory, March 1998, 79(1): 1-46.

Romanelli, Elaine, “The Evolution of New Organizational Forms,” Annual Review of Sociology,

       1991, 17: 79-103.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98

       (5, Part 2--Supplement): S71-S102.




                                               34
Rudebusch, Glenn D., “How Fast Can the New Economy Grow?” FRBSF Economic Letter,

       Number 2000-05; February 25, 2000.         [http://www.frbsf.org/econrsrch/wklyltr/2000/

       el2000-05.html]

Schumpeter, Joseph A., The Theory of Economic Development, Redvers Opie, trans., Harvard

       Economic Studies vol. 46, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1934.

Singh, Jitendra V., and Charles J. Lumsden, “Theory and Research in Organizational Ecology,”

       Annual Review of Sociology, 1990, 16: 161-195.

Sleeper, Sally D., The Role of Firm Capabilities in the Evolution of the Laser Industry: The

       Making of a High-Tech Market, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Carnegie Mellon

       University, Pittsburgh PA, 1998.

Smilor, Raymond W., George Kozmetsky, and David V. Gibson, Creating the Technopolis:

       Linking Technology, Commercialization, and Economic Development, Cambridge, MA:

       Ballinger Publishing Co., 1988.

Stigler, George J., Employment and Compensation in Education, National Bureau of Economic

       Research Occasional Paper 33, New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research,

       1950.

Stigler, George J., "The Economics of Information," Journal of Political Economy, June 1961,

       69(3): 213-225.

Stinchcombe, Arthur L., “Organizations and Social Structure,” in James G. March, ed.,

       Handbook of Organizations, Chicago: Rand McNally, 1965.

Stinchcombe, Arthur L., “University Administration of Research Space and Teaching Loads:

       Mangers Who Do Not Know What Their Workers Are Doing,” in A.L. Stinchcombe,

       Information and Organizations, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990.




                                             35
Thursby, Jerry G., and Marie Thursby, “Who Is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of Growth in

       University Licensing,” Management Science, January 2002, 48(1): 90-104.

Torero, Maximo, “Analyzing the Spillover Mechanism on the Semiconductor Industry in the

       Silicon Valley and Route 128,” chapter 1 in Torero, Maximo, Essays on Diffusion of

       Technical Change, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, UCLA Economics Department, 1998.

Torero, Máximo, Michael R. Darby, and Lynne G. Zucker, "The Importance of Intellectual

       Human Capital in the Birth of the Semiconductor Industry," UCLA Working Paper,

       January 2001.

Tushman, Michael L., and Philip Anderson, "Technological Discontinuities and Organizational

       Environments," Administrative Science Quarterly, March 1986, 31(1): 439-465.

Wedervang, Frőystein, Development of a Population of Industrial Firms: The Structure of

       Manufacturing Industries in Norway, 1930-1948, Oslo, Norway: Universitetsforlaget,

       1965.

Zucker, Lynne G., "Combining Institutional Theory and Population Ecology: No Legitimacy,

       No History," American Sociological Review, Aug. 1989, 54(4): 542-545.

Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, "Virtuous Circles of Productivity: Star Bioscientists

       and the Institutional Transformation of Industry," National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Paper No. 5342, November 1995.

Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, "Star Scientists and Institutional Transformation:

       Patterns of Invention and Innovation in the Formation of the Biotechnology Industry,"

       Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November 12, 1996, 93(23): 12,709-

       12,716.




                                             36
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, "Present at the Biotechnological Revolution:

      Transformation of Technical Identity for a Large Incumbent Pharmaceutical Firm,"

      Research Policy, December 1997, 26(4&5): 429-446.

Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, "Capturing Technological Opportunity Via Japan's

      Star Scientists: Evidence from Japanese Firms' Biotech Patents and Products," Journal of

      Technology Transfer, January 2001, 26(1/2): 37-58.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong, "Geographically Localized

      Knowledge: Spillovers or Markets?" Economic Inquiry, January 1998. 36(1): 65-86.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong, "Commercializing Knowledge:

      University Science, Venture Capital, and Firm Performance in Biotechnology,"

      Management Science, January 2002, 48(1): 138-153.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, "Intellectual Human Capital and

      the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises," American Economic Review, March 1998,

      88(1): 290-306.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Yusheng Peng, "Fundamentals or Population

      Dynamics and the Geographic Distribution of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises, 1976-

      1989," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6414, February 1998.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Máximo Torero, "Labor Mobility from Academe to

      Commerce," Journal of Labor Economics, in press 2002.




                                             37
                                             FOOTNOTE

1
Abba Lerner (1953) also propagated the Crusonia plant.
2
See, for example, the papers collected in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2001).
3
If it were the point of the paper, we would do a full analysis of productivity growth taking

account of changes in capital, labor-quality adjustments for the hours worked, and pro-cyclical

movements in productivity (see Darby 1984a-b). Before undertaking such an effort, we would

want to see evidence of an interesting anomaly in cruder measures of productivity growth.

Central bankers saying that the economy works differently from before so that they can ignore

the usual signs of monetary over-stimulus hardly qualify as an anomaly.
4
Rudebusch clearly walked a tight line between professional and institutional loyalty: “As noted

above, there is, of course, always a large amount of uncertainty about estimates of the growth rate of

potential output. Indeed, based on a strict statistical interpretation of Figure 1, there is a one in five

chance that there has been no change in the growth of potential output in the 1990s.”
5
Growth in overall industry size can be attributed to movement down an elastic demand curve as

more efficient lower cost producers replace higher cost producers. The question is why does it

take so long for the low cost producers to emerge and drive out the others.
6
Zucker (1989), Baum and Powell (1995), as well as the review articles by Baum (1996) and by

Singh and Lumsden (1990), raise significant questions about the directions of theory and

research in organizational ecology, while at the same time stressing the value of particular

empirical studies done under the ecology banner.
7
Compare infant mortality in Wedervang (1965) to liability of smallness, ruling out age effects,

in Freeman, Carroll, and Hannan (1983).
8
New industries may eliminate or greatly reduce the size of other industries previously satisfying



                                                   38
the fundamental function – e.g., the advent of the automobile industry all but eliminated both the

buggy and buggy whip industries. In principle, we could view the present automobile and

vestigial buggy industries as a transformed personal land transportation industry, but it is not

apparent what would be gained from such semantic niceties.
9
The range and impact of incumbent-enhancing metamorphic change is suggested by Harberger’s

ongoing work on major cost reductions in existing industries.
10
    This process may interact with waves of optimism and pessimism about the future of an

emerging industry. For example, despite a promising and ultimately successful pipeline of drug

discoveries, Cetus faced a cash shortage during a phase of biotech-pessimism and merged into

Chiron.
11
    Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (2002).
12
    Note that we maintained the decile sorting by level of 1989 employment in Figure 3. If we had

instead sorted by employment change along the lines of Harberger (1998), the top and second

deciles so-defined would account for 75.8 and 17.4 percent of the net employment change with

only 6.7% left for the other firms. The bottom 80% (169 firms) on this basis includes 63 firms

with negative change, 10 with no change, and 96 firms with positive employment change.
13
    See especially, Nancy S. Dorfman (1988), Bryan D. Jones and Arnold Vedlitz (1988),

Raymond W. Smilor, George Kozmetsky, and David V. Gibson (1988), Neil Bania, Randall

Eberts, and Michael Fogarty (1993). There are, of course, other important sources of geographic

agglomeration (see, for example, Keith Head, John Ries, and Deborah Swenson 1994).
14
    Publications involving scientists at two firms are extremely rare. Further, the scientists practice

serial monogamy: usually writing with only one firm during his or her career and, in the

alternative, writing with only one firm at a time.



                                                   39
15
 We introduce major methodological innovations in Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (2002),

exploiting a substantially broadened database, so that simple comparisons are not possible although

the results are very supportive of the importance of academic-firm linked articles.
16
 In Japan, explicit principal status in a firm is forbidden to professors at the national

universities. However, continuing unreported cash payments on the order of the scientist’s

salary are common (and rarely prosecuted, but see Japan Times 1999 for a counter-example) as

are lucrative corporate directorships promised when the professor “descends from heaven” at age

55 or 60 (i.e., post-retirement).
17
 Sometimes when an important result is difficult to reproduce in another location, the entire

laboratory is reproduced including the placement of equipment down to the coffee urn. If the

result can then be obtained, detective work ensues to figure out what features are crucial. In a

similar vein, during our fieldwork we heard one distinguished scientist grumble that another “had

stolen my best cloner.” This is not a remark applicable to something easy to learn from material

written on a floppy disk!
18
 Tacitness is indicated by the fact that the bulk of new authors reporting genetic-sequence

discoveries for the first time were writing as co-authors with previously published discovers and

this continued to the end of the data set (1994), as reported in Zucker, Darby, and Torero (2002).
19
 Milton Friedman reminds us that economists are not immune to this science as [tax-exempt or

conspicuous?] consumption phenomenon: Irving Fisher amassed a fortune inventing a visible file

system and founding one of the constituents of Remington-Rand. He used it to hire a sizable

staff of assistants to compute (X’X)-1X’y in the days before electric calculators. The ability to

estimate multiple regressions was a powerful professional advantage in the 1920s.
20
 We are indebted to Milton Friedman for this point.



                                                 40
                                          Table 1
                   Concentration of Employment in New Biotech Firms, 1989


                                      Number               Employment
                                      of Firms               in 1989
            Top Decile                   21                   53.8%
            Next Decile                  21                   15.0%
            Bottom 80%                  169                   31.2%
            Totals                      211                 100.0%


Source: Calculations of the authors for the biotech-using firms which disclosed employment for
1989 and 1994 and were formed after 1975 in the Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (2002) database.




                                             41
                                          Table 2
            Relation of Employment in New Biotech Firms to Links to High Science
    As Represented by Articles Co-Authored with Scientists in Top 112 Research Universities


                      Number     Employment    Employment     Core Links to    Other Links to
                      of Firms     in 1989    Change 1989-94 Top Universities Top Universities

By 1989 Employment:
   Top Decile            21        53.8%           53.2%          76.4%            79.4%
   Next Decile           21       15.0%             9.4%           6.2%             4.0%
   Bottom 80%           169        31.2%            37.4%          17.4%            16.6%
   Totals               211       100.0%           100.0%         100.0%           100.0%

By Core Links
   Top Decile            21        48.7%           53.4%          94.0%            81.5%
   Next Decile           21        7.1%             4.6%           5.1%             7.7%
   Bottom 80%           169        44.2%            42.0%          0.9%            10.7%
   Totals               211       100.0%           100.0%         100.0%           100.0%



Core links are a count of articles published through 1989 in journals directly related to
biotechnology which are indexed by the Institute of Scientific Information and with one or more
authors affiliated with the firm and one or more authors affiliated with any of the top 112 U.S.
research universities in terms of receipt of federal research funding.
Other links are a count of articles published through 1989 in journals not directly related to
biotechnology which are indexed by the Institute of Scientific Information and with one or more
authors affiliated with the firm and one or more authors affiliated with any of the top 112 U.S.
research universities in terms of receipt of federal research funding.

Source: Calculations of the authors for the biotech-using firms which disclosed employment for
1989 and 1994 and were formed after 1975 in the Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (2002) database.




                                              42
                                               Table 3
                 Extract from U.S. Patent 4,342,832, Assigned to Genentech, Inc.
                            Illustrating Close Ties to Academic Science

United States Patent                                                                   4,342,832
Goeddel , et al.                                                                   August 3, 1982

Method of constructing a replicable cloning vehicle having quasi-synthetic genes

                                            Abstract

Described are methods and means for the construction and microbial expression of quasi-synthetic
genes arising from the combination of organic synthesis and enzymatic reverse transcription from
messenger RNA sequences incomplete from the standpoint of the desired protein product.
Preferred products of expression lack bio-inactivating leader sequences common in eukaryotic
expression products but problematic with regard to microbial cleavage to yield bioactive material.
Illustrative is a preferred embodiment in which a gene coding for human growth hormone (useful in,
e.g., treatment of hypopituitary dwarfism) is constructed and expressed.

Inventors:       Goeddel; David V. (Burlingame, CA); Heyneker; Herbert L. (Burlingame, CA)
Assignee:        Genentech, Inc. (South San Francisco, CA)
Appl. No.:       055126
Filed:           July 5, 1979
                                           ...

Other References

Technology Review, pp. 12 and 13, Dec. 1976.
Martial et al., Science, vol. 205, Aug. 10, 1979.
Shine et al., Nature, vol. 285, Jun. 12, 1980, pp. 456-461.
The Economist, pp. 87 and 88, Jul. 14, 1979.
Time, Jul. 30, 1970, p. 70.
Newmark, Nature, vol. 280, pp. 637 and 638, Aug. 23, 1979.
Villa-Komaroff et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 75, pp. 3727-3731, Aug. 1978.
Seeburg et al., Nature, vol. 276, pp. 795-798, Dec. 1978.
Itakura et al., Science, vol. 198, pp. 1056-1063, Dec. 1977.
Crea et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 75, pp. 5765-5769, Dec. 1978.
Klenow et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 65, pp. 168-175, Jan. 1970.
Sutcliffe, Cold Spring Harbor Symposium 43, pp. 70-90 (1978).
Curtis et al., Molecular Cloning of Recombinant DNA, by Scott et al., pp. 99-111 (1977).
Ullrich et al., Science, vol. 196, pp. 1313-1319, Jun. 1977.
Bolivar et al., Gene 2, pp. 95-113 (1977).
Goedel et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 76, pp. 106-110, Jan. 1979.
Chang et al., Nature, vol. 275, pp. 617-624, Oct. 1978.
Maxam et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 560-564 (Feb. 1977).
Kornberg, DNA Synthesis, pp. 87 and 88, pub. by W. H. Freeman & Co., 1974.
Razin et al., Proc. Natl. Acad., vol. 75, pp. 4268-4270, Sep. 1978.
Wickens et al., The Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 253, No. 7, pp. 2483-2495 (1978).




                                               43
                                                   Figure 1. U.S. Nonfarm-Business Labor Productivity Growth, 1950-2001


                                    8
                                    7
                                    6
                                    5
                                    4
                                    3
                                    2
                                    1
                                    0
                                    -1




Percentage Change from Prior Year
                                    -2

                                     950 952 954 956 958 960 962 964 966 968 970 972 974 976 978 980 982 984 986 988 990 992 994 996 998 000
                                    1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2
                                                                 Nonfarm Business Sector: Output Per Hour of All Persons.
                                                                Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics

                                                                    Productivity growth    1950-2000 average = 2.18%



                                                                                      44
                                                                                         Figure 2. The Four Stages of an Industry's Life Cycle

                                                         400
                                                                       Formation Phase                                  Consolidation or Shakeout Phase                                                 Decline Phase

                                                         350



                                                         300
                                                                                Number of
                                                                                Firms
                                                         250



                                                         200



                                                         150



                                                         100
                                                                                                   Indusry GDP
                                                                                                   Share
                                                          50




Industry Number of Firms and GDP Share in Basis Points
                                                           0
                                                               0   3   6   9   12   15   18   21    24   27   30   33   36   39   42   45   48   51   54   57   60   63   66   69   72   75   78   81    84   87   90   93   96   99
                                                                                                          Age of the Industry from Formation or Transformation



                                                                                                                                       45
Figure 3. Concentration of U.S. New Biotechnology Firms’
 1989 Employment and Employment Change 1989-1994




                            1989 Employment



          Bottom 80%
              31%




                                                   Top Decile
                                                     54%




              Next Decile
                 15%




                    Employment Change 1989-1994




       Bottom 80%
           37%



                                                  Top Decile
                                                    54%




                Next Decile
                   9%




                                    46
Figure 4. Concentration of New Biotechnology Firms’ Links to
   Top Research Universities for 1989 Employment Deciles



                Core Links to Top Research Universities
                 Bottom 80%
                     17%




         Next Decile
            6%




                                                Top Decile
                                                  77%




               Other Links to Top Research Universities

                  Bottom 80%
                      17%


           Next Decile
              4%




                                              Top Decile
                                                79%




                                   47
 Figure 5. Estimated Effects of Number of University Star-Firm
    Linked Articles on Success of Californian and Japanese
                  Biotechnology-Using Firms




9
8
7
6
5
4
 3
 2                                                                  5 Star Articles Linked to Firm
 1                                                              2 Star Articles Linked to Firm
 0
     Pr                                                             0 Star Articles Linked to Firm
          od Pro       Pr
            uc du          o    Pr        E
              ts     ct duc odu mp U.S
                 in    s      ts      c         lo         .P
                    De in D on ts o ym                         at
                      ve ev        th       n         e n         e
                         lo    e      e       t he        t G nts
                           pm lop       M            M        r           G
                             en me ark                a r o wt              ra
                               t-      nt     et         ke         h         nt
                                                   -        t         ( i n
                                                                                 ed
                                  Ca - J
                                    lifo ap
                                                     Ca - J                          (
                                        rn       a n
                                                        lifo ap 100 x10
                                                            rn an                s)       )
                                           ia                   ia                  - C - Ja
                                                                                       al       pa
                                                                                         if.
                                                                                             ..   n



                                                           48
