                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EFFICIENCY AND EQUITY IN SCHOOLS AROUND THE WORLD


                                           Eric A. Hanushek
                                            Javier A. Luque


                                          Working Paper 8949
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8949


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




The opinions in this paper do not necessarily represent those of Banco Central de Reserva del Peru. An
anonymous referee provided useful comments that sharpened the analysis. This project was supported by the
Smith Richardson Foundation and the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Eric A. Hanushek and Javier A. Luque. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Efficiency and Equity in Schools around the World
Eric A. Hanushek and Javier A. Luque
NBER Working Paper No. 8949
May 2002
JEL No. I2, H4, J0



                                             ABSTRACT

        Attention to the quality of human capital in different countries naturally leads to concerns about
how school policies relate to student performance. The data from the Third International Mathematics
and Science Study (TIMSS) provide a way of comparing performance in different schooling systems.
The results of analyses of educational production functions within a range of developed and developing
countries show general problems with the efficiency of resource usage similar to those found previously
in the United States. These effects do not appear to be dictated by variations related to income level of
the country or level of resources in the schools. Neither do they appear to be determined by school
policies that involve compensatory application of resources. The conventional view that school resources
are relatively more important in poor countries also fails to be supported.




Eric A. Hanushek                                                 Javier A. Luque
Hoover Institution                                               Banco Central de Reserva del Peru
Stanford University                                              Lima, Peru
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu
     Efficiency and Equity in Schools around the World
                                By Eric Hanushek and Javier Luque


        The emphasis on human capital policy that has become a centerpiece of government

programs around the world is now accepted as a natural and enlightened view of policy.

Important contributions by Theodore Shultz, Gary Becker, and Jacob Mincer set the case for the

importance of human capital for individual productivity and earnings, for the distribution of

economic success, and ultimately for the growth of national economies. The implications of this

work has been extended into the developing world by a strong and consistent focus of the World

Bank – propelled in large part by a series of influential studies by George Psacharopoulos. This

work builds on that, considering what countries can do to improve the human capital of their

populations.

        The central focus is how systematic policy actions of governments affect student

performance. Building upon the testing and surveys of the Third International Mathematics and

Science Study (TIMSS), we consider specifically how families and schools contribute to within

and between country variations in student performance. We then go beyond this to investigate

whether school in the different countries work to narrow or widen performance differences.


School quantity and quality

        Empirical work in human capital has concentrated on the private returns to the quantity

school obtained by individuals. The standard Mincer formulation shows how investment can be

translated into observed differences across individuals (Mincer (1970, 1974)). If investment

declines linearly and if all of the costs of investment are forgone earnings, the simple relationship

between log earnings and years of schooling yields a direct estimate of the rate of return on a year

of schooling. This elegant characterization has the overwhelming virtue that it can be applied

using commonly available data not only for the United States but many countries of the world. In
fact, the exploitation of this generalizability provides clear information about the importance of

variations in returns of schooling around different regions of the world (Psacharopoulos (1973,

1981, 1985, 1994)).

        The arguments behind government involvement differ somewhat from those for

individuals. Indeed, a general finding that the returns to schooling are high does not necessarily

mean that this is an area for governmental intervention. Intervention is typically justified by

some sort of market failure (such as externalities or credit constraints) or by other goals such as

adjusting the income distribution. In fact, at least for the U.S., education has long been thought of

as a tool for providing skills to disadvantaged individuals in order to improve their income

outcomes. Much of the support for schooling policies internationally also reflects potential gains

in terms of the income distribution.

        Recent arguments have also provided other support for government interventions based

on externalities emanating from the growth process. The general endogenous growth model

suggests that the level of education in the economy affects a nation’s growth.1 This structure

induces an externality that individuals will not take into account in their own decision process.

        Empirical work has underscored the importance of quantity of schooling in these areas.2

The strongest and most consistent support comes for the relationship between schooling and

individual earnings. While relying on more limited evidence, considerable support also exists for

the importance of schooling in affecting the distribution of earnings and growth.

        The central feature of this analysis, however, is how quality of schooling enters. Nobody

believes that all schools within a country or across countries are the same in terms of knowledge




1
  The endogenous growth models come a variety of forms; see Nelson and Phelps (1966), Romer (1986,
1990), and Rebelo (1991).
2
  Some controversy still exists about the form of growth models and about the importance of endogenous
growth models. A variety of approaches have been used to test the underlying models, but important
questions remain. See Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992); Benhabib and Spiegel (1994); Barro and Sala-I-
Martin (1995); Bils and Klenow (2000).


2
imparted and quality in general. Such differences, while often difficult to deal with, have obvious

implications for understanding the basic issues addressed here.

         The economic effects of differences in the quality of graduates of our elementary and

secondary schools are much less understood than the effects of quantity, particularly with regard

to the performance of the aggregate economy. The incomplete understanding of the effects of

educational quality clearly reflects difficulties in measurement. Although quality of education is

hard to define precisely, we mean the term quality to refer to the knowledge base and analytical

skills that are the focal point of schools. Moreover, to add concreteness to this discussion, we

will tend to rely on information provided by standardized tests of academic achievement and

ability. Relying on standardized tests to provide measures of quality is controversial—in part

because of gaps in available evidence and in part because of the conclusions that tend to follow

(as discussed below).3 Nevertheless, such measures appear to be the best available indicators of

quality and do relate to outcomes that we care about.

         A variety of studies of the labor market focus directly on how individual differences in

cognitive ability affect earnings (and modify the estimated returns to quality).4 The most recent

direct investigations of cognitive achievement have suggested substantial labor market returns to

measured individual differences in cognitive achievement. For example, Bishop (1989, 1991),

O'Neill (1990), Grogger and Eide (1993), Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995), Neal and Johnson

(1996), Currie and Thomas (2000), and Murnane et al. (2000) each find that the earnings

         3
           A substantial part of the controversy relates to the implications for effectiveness of expenditure or
resource policies, as discussed below. The contrasting view emphasizes measuring "quality" by the
resources (i.e., inputs) going into schooling. Most recent along this line is Card and Krueger (1992a); see
also the reviews of the discussion in Burtless (1996) and Betts (1996).
         4
           The early work was subsumed under the general topic of "ability bias" in the returns to
schooling. In that, the simple question was whether the tendency of more able individuals to continue in
school led to an upward bias in the estimated returns to school (because of a straightforward omitted
variables problem). See, for example, Griliches (1974) or Hanushek (1973). More recently, see Blackburn
and Neumark (1993, 1995) and Taber (2001). The correction most commonly employed was the inclusion
of a cognitive ability or cognitive achievement measure in the earnings function estimates. While focusing
on the estimated returns to years of schooling, these studies generally indicated relatively modest impacts
of variations in cognitive ability after holding constant quantity of schooling.



3
advantages to higher achievement on standardized tests are quite substantial. These results are

derived from quite different approaches. Bishop (1989) worries about the measurement errors

that are inherent in most testing situation and demonstrates that careful treatment of that problem

has a dramatic effect on the estimated importance of test differences. O'Neill (1990), Bishop

(1991), Grogger and Eide (1993), and Neal and Johnson (1996) on the other hand, simply rely

upon more recent labor market data along with more representative sampling and suggest that the

earnings advantage to measured skill differences is larger than that found in earlier time periods

and in earlier studies (even without correcting for test reliability). Currie and Thomas (2000)

provide evidence for a sample of British youth and rely on a long panel of representative data.

Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995), considering a comparison over time, demonstrate that the

results of increased returns to measured skills hold regardless of the methodology (i.e., whether

simple analysis or error-corrected estimation). Murnane et al. (2000) provides further evidence of

the effects of cognitive skills (although offers some caution in the interpretation of strength of

effects)

           An additional part of the return to school quality comes through continuation in school.

There is substantial evidence that students who do better in school, either through grades or

scores on standardized achievement tests, tend to go farther in school (see, for example, Dugan

(1976); Manski and Wise (1983). Rivkin (1995) finds that variations in test scores capture a

considerable proportion of the systematic variation in high school completion and in college

continuation. Indeed, Rivkin (1995) finds that test score differences fully explain black-white

differences in schooling. Bishop (1991) and Hanushek, Rivkin, and Taylor (1996) find that

individual achievement scores are highly correlated with school attendance. A significant portion

of the effect of early test scores on closing the black-white income gap in Neal and Johnson

(1996) comes through the relationship of achievement on subsequent school attainment.

Behrman et al. (1998) find strong achievement effects both on continuation into college and on

quality of college; moreover, the effects are larger when proper account is taken of the


4
endogeneity of achievement. Hanushek and Pace (1995), using the High School and Beyond

data, find that college completion is significantly related to higher test scores at the end of high

school.

          This work, while less complete than might be desired, leads to a conclusion that

variations in cognitive ability, as measured by standardized tests, are important in career success.

Variation in measured cognitive ability is far from everything that is important, but it is

significant in a statistical and quantitative sense.

          The linkage of individual cognitive skills to aggregate productivity growth has been more

difficult to establish. There is no clear consensus on the underlying causes of improvements in the

overall productivity of the United States economy, nor on how the quality of workers interacts

with economic growth. The analysis of the impact of schooling quality on cross-country

differences in growth by Hanushek and Kimko (2000), however, suggests that quality may be

very important and could even dominate effects of the quantity of schooling differences across

countries. The concern in such work is the direction of causality. While a series of specification

tests indicates that there is a causal relationship between quality and growth, the exact magnitude

of the effect is open to question.

          The available evidence suggests that human capital quality is important. Quality

measured by cognitive achievement tests directly influences individual and aggregate

productivity. Moreover, at least through the growth mechanism and through the redistributive

goals of government, externalities point to a natural role for government. But, even if the

evidence on externalities were ignored, governments around the world are the primary supplier of

educational services. Thus, without having to answer questions about the rational for action, it is

clear that the efficiency and equity of governmental supply are important public policy issues.




5
Resources and measurement

         An important issue throughout the discussions of school quality has been the relationship

between outcome measures of quality (earnings, test scores, and the like) and the resources

devoted to schools. This issue has two facets. First, when direct quality measures are generally

not available, can simple measures of the resources devoted to schools be used as a substitute for

a quality measure? Second, if government is to intervene, can it do effectively so by altering the

level and distribution of resources going to schools?

         Most of the research attention has actually gone to the latter issue – the relevance of

resources as a policy tool. On that score the U.S. evidence has been reasonably clear. The

resources devoted to schools are not closely or consistently related to student outcomes. While

there has been some controversy over this analysis, the data indicate that a minority of studies

finds significant and positive relationships with performance.5

         The general structure of the production function estimation designed to pinpoint causality

has focused on a model such as:



         O = f(X, R)                                                                                (1)



         Where O is student outcomes, R is a vector of school resources, and X is a vector of

other inputs into schooling including, importantly, family background of students. The analysis

of causal mechanisms has been focused on separating the various inputs into student

performance.

         The proxy question – i.e., whether measures of resources are an indicator of quality

differences regardless of the mechanism – has been looked at separately, although there is


5
 For discussions of the basic results of estimation of the effects of resources, see Hanushek (1986, 1997).
For discussions of the controversies, see Hedges, Laine, and Greenwald (1994), Greenwald, Hedges, and
Laine (1996) and Hanushek (1996).


6
obvious overlap. In this collection, other studies have looked at just the simple resource-outcome

relationship. While these have not been systematically reviewed in the way that the studies

identifying causal factors have, they appear to give somewhat stronger support, at least in the

United States, to the proxy relationship.6 This stronger relationship could simply reflect a

positive relationship between resources and other factors such as might arise if wealthier parents

on average both contribute more directly to performance and put more resources into their

schools.

           In the growth setting, there is no direct evidence of the proxy relationship. The attempts

to look at resources tended to give incorrect signs and to be poor proxies (Hanushek and Kimko

(2000)).

           Empirical work on quality in an international setting has, however, been even rarer than

in the United States. Few international data sets have had information on outcomes and

resources, although – when available – there seems to be slightly stronger relationships of

resources and outcomes in the production function setting of equation 1 (Heyneman and Loxley

(1983); Hanushek (1995); Vignoles et al. (2000)). When these data have been available, it has

been difficult to summarize because the data sets have tended to be very specialized and to be

very different across studies. And, little is known about the value of proxy relationships across

countries.


International resource-quality estimates

           The primary objective of this work is to provide a consistent set of estimates for

educational production functions from a set of developing and developed countries. This analysis




6
  In their selective review of studies relating resources to earnings, for example, Card and Krueger (1996)
tend to find positive relationship. This review mixes some studies that consider family backgrounds with
others, including Card and Krueger (1992b), that do not. Betts (1996) provides a further review of these
prior estimates.


7
is made possible by recent international testing and data collection, which provide scores on

common examinations across countries.

        Such comparative analysis has been largely precluded in the past, although some work

does exist. Perhaps the largest and most influential study is Heyneman and Loxley (1983). They

analyze data from the Second International Mathematics and Science Study along with other

country specific tests. Their primary conclusion is that resource variations appear to be more

closely related to student performance in developing countries than in the United States (an issue

we return to below).

        To put the resource issue into perspective, it is perhaps most useful to begin with

aggregate differences across countries. The comparison of cognitive achievement across

countries capitalizes on seven voluntary international tests of student achievement in mathematics

and science that were conducted over the past three decades. The International Association for

the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA) administered five and the International

Assessment of Educational Progress (IAEP) administered two. 7 The IEA, since its establishment

in 1959, has a long and unique role in developing comparative education research for almost all

aspects of primary and secondary education. On the other hand, the IAEP, starting in 1988, builds

on the statistical techniques and procedures developed in the United States for the National

Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), the main national testing instrument in the United

States since 1969. While the IAEP is geared to the U.S. curriculum, the IEA has an international

focus not associated with the curriculum in any particular country.

        The concentration on mathematics and science corresponds to the theoretical emphasis on

the importance of research and development activities as the source of growth (e.g., Romer

7
  Details of participating countries, test administration, and sample sizes of the testing prior to the
mid1990s can be found in Hanushek and Kim (1995). Barro and Lee (2001) expand international quality
measures by including reading and literacy scores along with more recent TIMSS data. We do not include
reading and literacy because of concerns about valid testing across languages and doubts about putting
these scores into a common one dimensional scale with science and mathematics tests. Reading literacy
assessments, for example, are available for 30 countries in 1991 (U.S. Department of Education (1995)).



8
(1990)). Able students with a good understanding of mathematics and science form a pool of

future engineers and scientists. At least for the United States, Bishop (1992) provides separate

confirmation of the importance of mathematics in determining individual productivity and

income. Additionally, while some test information exists for other subjects, it cannot be

compared readily with the mathematics and science scores and therefore is not used here.

        An overview of the testing results is best seen from figure 1. This figure shows the

country results on each of the math and science tests from the beginning in the early 1960s

through the Third International Mathematics and Science Study in 1995. For this, all of the

scores in each year are normalized to a world mean of 50 (see Hanushek and Kim (1995);

Hanushek and Kimko (2000)). While a different array of countries has participated in the tests,

some sense of the overall pattern can be seen from the figure.8 There is an aggregate tendency for

East Asian countries to perform better and for developing countries to score worse. Nonetheless,

the performance of individual countries does seem to drift to some extent.

        The simplest way to view the pattern is to estimate an “international production function”

that pools the data across time and countries. One reason for pursuing this is that the very large

differences in resources across countries offers promise that any real resources effects could be

detected. Here we present the analysis through 1990, as demonstrated by Hanushek and Kimko

(2000).9 Specifically, there is no pattern to scores and resources, at least after controlling for

differences in families over time. Table 1 reproduces the estimated resource effects on

achievement for a sample including all country-years of test data that also had complete input

data. Of the three separate resource measures—expenditure per pupil, proportion of GDP

devoted to public education, and pupil-teacher ratio in primary schools, all three go in the wrong

direction.

8
  An alternative approach to setting the international mean is to benchmark the U.S. tests to the scores on
the U.S. National Assessment of Educational Progress. In reality, however, this has little impact since the
pattern of the NAEP scores mirrors quite closely the pattern of U.S. rankings on math and science scores in
figure 1. See Hanushek and Kimko (2000).



9
Figure 1.


                                     Performance on International Mathematics and Science Examinations


                                80

                                             Japan




                                          New Zealand



                                                                                  Japan
                                                                                                                                                    Singapore
                                            Hungary                                                                                                   Korea
                                            Australia
                                                                                                                                                      Japan

                                           Germany

                                                                                                                                                      Belgium
                                                                               Netherlands                                                          Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                               United Kingdom                        China            Austria
                                                                                                                                     Korea        Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                     Slovenia
                                                                                                Hong Kong                                            Australia
                                            Sweden                              Hong Kong        Singapore                        Switzerland         Sweden
                                                                                                                                                  Czech Republic
aggregate test score (scaled)




                                                                                                Netherlands                        Taiwan             Ireland
                                         United Kingdom                          France           Hungary                                           Switzerland
                                             Finland                             Finland           Japan                            Hungary           Hungary
                                                                                                   Korea            Korea                          United States
                                          United States                                                                              SSUR
                                                                                                                                      Italy       United Kingdom
                                          Netherlands                                                                                                Germany
                                                                                                                                    France         New Zealand
                                                                                  Belgium                                                         Russian Federat
                                                                                  Sweden                                              Israel          Norway
                                                                              United Kingdom                        Canada                            France
                                                                                                  Poland                         United Kingdom      Thailand
                                                                                                                United Kingdom
                                50          France                             New Zealand        Norway             Spain
                                                                                                                                     Canada
                                                                                                                                      Spain
                                                                                                                                                     Denmark
                                                                                                                                                       Latvia
                                                                                                                                                       Spain
                                            Belgium                                                                               United States       Iceland
                                                                                 Canada                                             Slovenia          Greece
                                              Italy                               Israel          Australia         Ireland          Ireland         Romania
                                                                                                  Thailand                                              Italy
                                                                                                                 United States
                                                                                 Hungary                                                              Cyprus
                                                                                                  Sweden
                                                                                                  Finland                                             Portugal
                                                                                                                                                     Lithuania
                                                                                                                                    Portugal
                                                                               United States      Canada
                                                                                                United States                                          Iran



                                                                               Luxembourg                                           Jordan
                                                                                 Thailand                                                            Colombia


                                            Thailand
                                                                                                    Italy
                                                                                Swaziland

                                                                                  Nigeria        Philippines
                                                                                                                                     Brazil
                                                                                                                                                   South Africa



                                                                                                                                                       Israel




                                             Chile


                                                                                                                                  Mozambique



                                              India
                                               Iran

                                20
                                                                                                                                                      Kuwait




                                           1970                                 1981             1985             1988             1991              1995
                                                                                test year
Table 1. Alternative estimates of the impact of resources on
international math and science performance across countries


                                                                Resource coefficients
                                                                 (standard errors)


     Current public expenditure                    -0.766
     per student                                   (0.21)

     Pupil-teacher ratio in primary                                                             0.089
     schools                                                                                    (0.15)

     Total expenditure on                                                -189.78
     education/GDP                                                       (88.69)

     Number of country-years                         69                     67                    70

     R-squared (adjusted)                           0.22                   0.26                  0.25

          Source: Hanushek and Kimko (2000).

           Note: Each equation includes intercept differences for the specific test, a measure of the average schooling
level of adults in the country, and the population growth rate (see Hanushek and Kimko (2000)). Sample includes one
observation for each country-year of test data that also has available input measures.
         There are good reasons to be cautious about these results, however, since the simplified

production function estimates do not measure any organizational or structural differences in the

school systems of the various countries. These factors – if important and if correlated with

resources – will bias the estimated coefficients.10 Because these estimates can be biased and

because they can mask substantial within-country variation, we go on to consider variations in

scores for individual countries.

         Cross-country estimation has also been conducted for the TIMSS international testing by

Woessman (2000, 2001). He combines the microlevel TIMSS information with data about

characteristics of the overall system – centralization, private school options, unionization, and the

like – and concludes that organizational features and not resources tend to drive country level

performance.

         We pursue a different approach. The availability of internationally comparable measures

of quality allows us to study the human capital production function at a country level. In this

study, we focus on what policies seem associated with increased performance on student tests

within each country. Performance will be measured as outcomes on math tests from the Third

International Math and Science Survey (TIMSS). This analysis expands previous evidence, which

was generally available only at a country level, to provide internationally comparable results.


TIMSS Data

         This study relies on data from the Third International Math and Science Study (TIMSS),

a testing and data collection program conducted by the International Association for the

Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA) in 1995.11 It involved more than 40 countries in

three different targeted populations: 9 year olds, 13 year olds, and 17 year olds. Here we focus

9
 The most important point of this estimation is that it excludes the TIMSS data, the subject of this analysis.
10
  As Hanushek, Rivkin, and Taylor (1996) discuss in the context of U.S. production function estimates, the
aggregation of data to the national level will exacerbate any omitted variables bias.




10
largely on the first and second populations where the country sample is larger and where the data

are more complete. TIMSS involved gathering information about student achievement and

student backgrounds in the different participating countries, as well as teacher and school

characteristics.

        The design of TIMSS involved collecting information in each country for 150 schools per

age group. At the school level, the standard procedure was to collect two separate individual

classrooms corresponding to the two adjacent grades with the largest numbers of students of the

target age group. These students were tested, and data about their family backgrounds were

collected. Teachers and principals then supplied information about the students, the teachers, and

the school.

        Great care was taken to ensure representative samples of schools and students. There

were nonetheless a number of countries that did not comply with all the TIMSS design in terms

of sample selection. This selective sampling, which was carefully monitored by the IEA, leads to

some doubts about the overall country averages, but it is probably less serious for the analysis

done here. For discussion and analysis, see Marlin and Mullis (1996).

        The outcomes for average math and science test scores of the countries participating in

the TIMSS are found in Figure 2. The math and science test scores were scaled to have a world

mean of 50 per test and are designed to be internationally comparable.

East Asian countries dominate the top rankings of the test scores with only Thailand slipping

down in the earliest age group. This East Asian advantage is sustained across the different age

groups. In general, there are relatively few major movements in the rankings across the different

age groups, although the fall of performance by U.S. students as they age is notable.12 Use

students go from 9th out of 26 at age 9 to 22nd out of 40 at age 13 to 18th out of 21 at age 17.


11
   A description of the sampling procedures, testing protocols, and monitoring of performance can be found
in Marlin and Mullis (1996). More recently, the TIMSS testing was repeated (TIMSS-R), and this project
is described in Gonzales et al. (2000). This study relies on just the first round of TIMSS.
          12
             Thailand also goes from the 20th to the 14th position between 9 and 13 year olds.


11
 Figure 2. TIMSS mathematics scores by age cohort



               600                        Singapore



                         Korea
                                            Korea
                                            Japan


                         Japan                                Netherlands
                                       Belgium Flemish         Sweden
                       Singapore         Hong Kong
                                           Bulgaria
                                         Netherlands
                      Netherlands          Slovenia            Iceland
                       Hong Kong            Austria
                         Austria           Hungary             Norway
                                       Slovak Republic       Switzerland
                     Czech Republic                           Denmark
                        Australia      Czech Republic          Canada
                                           Australia
                      United States         Ireland           Australia
                          Israel      Russian Federation     New Zealand
                        Slovenia         Switzerland            Austria
                         Ireland           England             Slovenia
                        Canada             Canada
                                           Thailand
                        England           Germany
                                           Sweden               France
                        Hungary
                        Scotland        United States
                                        New Zealand            Germany
                                            France
                         Latvia            Norway
                                           Scotland
                      New Zealand      Belgium French            Israel
                                             Spain
TIMSS Scores




                                                                Hungary
                        Norway             Iceland          Czech Republic
                                          Denmark          Russian Federation
                                            Latvia           United States
                        Greece            Romania
                                           Greece              Lithuania
               460      Thailand
                        Iceland
                         Cyprus            Cyprus
                        Portugal          Lithuania             Cyprus
                                          Portugal

                                             Iran




                                           Kuwait

                        Kuwait
                          Iran
                                          Colombia




                                                              South Africa



                                         South Africa




               320

                       age 9           age 13                age 17
                                      age group
Education production functions

        Most of the public discussion of TIMSS has relied upon national average scores. Here,

however, we employ the extensive school data for each country. The large samples and consistent

data across countries provide an opportunity to compare international schooling experiences of a

wide group of countries.

        Our primary goal is assessing the role of school inputs (such as teacher characteristics

and class size) and student background characteristics, on student performance. One objective is

ascertaining the possibility for using pure resource policies in the schools of different countries to

affect labor force quality. The second point of our analysis is consideration in more detail of the

dependence of educational outputs on family backgrounds. Household characteristics have been

found in the U.S. literature to be one of the most important predictors of educational performance.

Does this hold across countries and across different schooling structures?

        Our starting point is a standard linear production function defined in terms of

achievement levels. We later consider alternative estimation approaches designed to deal with a

variety of potential problems.

        Consider the simple formulation:



        Oijc = a 0c + a Fc Fijc + a Sc S ijc + ε ijc                                  (2)

where i refers to an individual student, j to the classroom, and c to the country for the student. F

and S are multidimensional measures of family and school factors, respectively. The relationship

is specified to hold for a specific country and age level and aF and aS are country specific

parameters relating the various factors to student outcomes. We aggregate the individuals to a

classroom level, both for data reasons and for conceptual ones.13 The nonschool factors (F)


        13
           The appropriate way to estimate such models has been the subject of considerable past
discussion. As a general rule, value-added models which contain information about past student
performance levels are superior to the level formulations employed here. The TIMSS data, however, do


12
common across the estimation include: geographical location and various aggregations of student

family background such as the percentage of students whose parents have not completed

secondary education or the percentage with various capital goods in the home as a measure of

wealth.14 The school factors (S) considered include: total enrollment, teacher characteristics of

teacher degree level and teacher experience, grade level, and class size.15 Teacher education is

measured by indicator variables for having a bachelor’s degree or having a master’s degree and

by a separate indicator variable for whether or not the teacher had specialized teacher training.

Ordinary least squares are used to estimate the education production functions across classrooms

for each country level and for the 9- and 13-year-old samples separately.

         The analysis relies on all countries that have sufficient data for estimation of national

production functions. There are 18 countries for 9-year-olds and 33 countries for 13-year-olds

that have complete data and that are amenable to analysis. Descriptive statistics for the data are

displayed in Appendix Tables A1 and A2.


Basic results

         The summary of the production function results is presented in table 2. This table

aggregates the estimated production parameters for school factors (S), which are estimated

separately for each country and age group, to see if there are patterns to international

performance. The summary indicates the sign and statistical significance (10 percent level) of the



not support such estimation. The estimates here rely on a similarity of schooling resources over a student’s
career. See Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2001).
14
   Family background data can be found from two sources – the student reports when they took the tests or
the principal responses about various aggregate characteristics. The data from the two sources differ in
detail and scope. Our analysis has considered both sources of data, and the overall results are not affected
much by the source of data. Nonetheless, the school-based data are available for a smaller set of countries,
so we present results just for the analysis based on individual student information about family
background.
15
   The age groups can be sampled at different grade levels, and this is controlled for by inclusion of a grade
level dummy variable. The estimated models also include dummy variables for rural and urban areas. The
class size measure comes from the teacher survey and pertains to the actual size of the specific classroom.
At times some of the family or school information is missing, and we include a dummy for these cases with
no information in order to not diminish the overall sample size in each country.


13
Table 2. Distribution of estimated production function parameters across countries and age groups, by
sign and statistical significance (10 percent level)

Dependent variable: classroom average TIMSS mathematics score


                                                 Age 9 population                                                         Age 13 population
                                 Negative                   Positive                Number                Negative                    Positive               Number
                                          Not           Not                            of                          Not           Not                            of
                       Significant                                Significant                    Significant                                Significant
                                       significant significant                      countries                   significant significant                      countries

Class Size                   3              11            2              0             17             2              8              6             17            33

Teacher with at
least a bachelor’s           0              3             12             0             15             2              11            12              2            32
degree
Teacher with
                             0              7             4              1             12             0              12            11              2            25
special training

Teacher experience           0              7             6              4             17             3              9             17              4            33


School enrollment            0              9             5              3             17             2              9             15              6            32



Note: Bold indicates the number of statistically significant results with the expected sign of the effect. Because these estimates rely on actual class size, its
expected sign is negative while the estimates for teacher education and experience have an expected positive sign. No clear expectation exists for school
enrollment
estimated parameters.16 Entries in bold indicate parameters that are statistically significant and

that have the expected sign.17 Prior analyses, done mostly for the USA, show small or no impact

of the common school inputs on educational outcomes. Does that hold for alternative systems

with varying organizational structure and incentives?

        The results in Table 2 provide a slightly stronger indication of an association between

resources and student performance than found in the United States, although the estimates lack

the precision needed to have much confidence in any effects. We begin our description with the

estimated class size effect. Class size effect seems to have a different pattern at the different ages

and grades. For the younger age group, smaller classes have the expected negative sign in 14 out

of 17 countries, but the effect is statistically significant (at the 10 percent level) for just three

countries. The effect on the 13-year-olds is different. In over half of the countries the impact is

positive and statistically significant with only 2 countries showing a negative and statistically

significant effect. On the basis of sign of effect, these results are in line with the literature that

stresses the impact of smaller classes for younger children, although the imprecision of the

estimates introduces considerable uncertainty. We are interested in the causal effects of lowering

class sizes, but a possible explanation for the positive results is the use of compensatory policies

that place lower achieving students in smaller classes. We return to consider that possibility in the

next section.

        The level of teacher’s education, measured by whether or not the teacher has at least a

university degree, provides little consistent impact on student performance. For the younger age

group, the estimates tend at least to be positive, but none are statistically significant even at the 10

percent level. For older group, positive and negative results are evenly distributed. Importantly,

16
   Because of the relatively small samples for each country – typically around 300 classrooms for each age
group, a loose 10 percent significance level is used throughout in an effort to provide added information
about the distribution of results.
17
   The estimated parameters include total enrollment in the school, but there are no clear expectations for
the sign of this variable. Note that parameter estimates are obtained for varying numbers of countries,
reflecting the fact that some countries did not report complete information. Further, when specific



14
policy generally dictates more education for teachers of older children. The second measure of

teacher preparation is an indicator variable for whether the teacher had specialized teacher

training (in addition or in place of a university degree). There is little indication that this

specialized training has any impact, although the variations in its definitions across countries

make aggregation of these results difficult. However it is organized in the various countries it

appears to have little impact on classroom success of teachers.

        The teacher experience effects tend to be skewed toward positive achievement, ignoring

statistical significance. But only a small number of the estimates are significant even at the 10

percent level for either age group. Total school size tends to be positively related to performance

in the older age group, although there is a large variation across countries. Note that this finding

is not simply a reflection of schools in isolated or rural areas, because all regressions include an

indicator of geographic region.

        In addition to the school factors, a variety of family background measures are included.

These results (not shown) are quite consistent across countries. Children from favored families

(indicated by separate measures of having more than 25 books at home, a calculator, a computer,

a study desk, or a dictionary) consistently perform better. Additionally, living with their mother;

and, for the older age group, having a mother and father with at least secondary education also

contribute positively to achievement. (Parental education measures are unavailable for the

younger group). We return below to the persistence of educational effects across generations.

        Interestingly, the pattern of results for the school resource factors is virtually unchanged

when the family background factors are ignored (not shown). In other words, even if thinking

just about proxying overall quality differences of inputs by simple measures of schools, use of the

school resource measures is not successful.




variables were missing for individual schools, a dummy variable indicating missing data was included in
the estimation.


15
Diminishing Returns?

        Given the substantial variation in education and degree level of teachers across countries,

it is useful to see whether the pattern of student achievement results is related to the overall level

of training. In particular, having a university degree might be more important in a country where

a minority of teachers complete a degree than in a country where all teachers have degrees. Table

3 displays the training of teachers in each country (ranked by increasing prevalence of a

university degree) along with the estimated effects on student performance. The results show no

pattern of impacts related prevalence of degree or substitution of teacher training for university

degrees.

        The preceding estimation also aggregates the results from a wide variety of countries –

rich and poor along with those having large and small initial class sizes. This aggregation could

potentially mark important and systematic differences across countries. For example, rich

countries that devote considerable resources to their schools may find diminishing marginal

returns to added resources, while those with relatively few resources devoted to schools may find

that added resources have large effects.

        Two different investigations suggest that differential effect of resources across countries

by current level of development is not the predominant factor in the array of results. As shown in

Figure3, the estimated effects of class size reductions are not systematically larger in poorer

countries (as measured by GNP/capita). For 13 year olds (not shown), there is a slight positive

relationship between income and the size of the coefficient, but the vast majority shows positive

rather than the hypothesized negative effect. Thus, while the data are thin for very poor countries,

there is no apparent differential effect by level of national income. Similarly, a similar exercise

suggests that there is a small positive relationship between average class size and the class size

coefficient when looking across countries for the younger age group.




16
Table 3. Distribution of Teacher qualifications and Estimated Effect on Outcomes
                         Level of qualifications             Estimated effect on student performance
                                    Specialized                                     Specialized teacher
                        University                           University degree
                                       teacher                                            training
                         degree                                                 a
                                       training              Sign        Signif.     Sign        Signif.a
Age 9
Slovenia                         4%            100%             +
Iran                             7%             86%             -                       +           *
Netherlands                     10%            100%             +
Norway                          10%             95%             +                       -          ***
Greece                          14%            100%             +
Cyprus                          18%             84%             +                       -
Hong Kong                       25%             64%             +                       -
New Zealand                     29%             99%             +                       -
Scotland                        32%             99%             -             ***       -          ***
Portugal                        36%             93%             -                       +
Iceland                         53%             94%             +                       -          ***
Ireland                         58%             89%             +                       -
Czech Republic                  66%            100%             +
Latvia                          77%             99%             +                       -
Canada                          82%             98%             -                       +
United States                  100%             96%                                     +
Age 13
Slovenia                         5%             92%             -             ***       -          ***
Netherlands                     23%             88%             -             ***       -          ***
Norway                          31%             96%             -             ***       -          ***
Iceland                         41%             90%             -                       +
Romania                         43%             92%             +                       +
Switzerland                     47%             92%             -                       +
Russian Federation              48%             98%             -                       +
Sweden                          51%             68%             +                       -
England                         54%             80%             -             ***       -          ***
France                          58%             53%             -                       -
Hong Kong                       59%             54%             -             ***       -          ***
Thailand                        61%             93%             -              *        -
New Zealand                     63%             96%             +                       -
Spain                           65%             10%             -                       +
Colombia                        73%             93%             +                       -
Canada                          83%             99%             -             ***       -          ***
Latvia                          83%             94%             +                       -          ***
Cyprus                          83%             79%             +                       -
United States                   85%             97%             +                       -
Lithuania                       85%             98%             +              *        -
Scotland                        87%            100%             -
Ireland                         92%             95%             -             **        +           **
Portugal                        94%             68%             -                       +
Czech Republic                  96%             98%             +                       -
Korea                           98%            100%             +
Slovak Republic                 98%             99%             -                       +
Greece                          99%             13%             +                       +           *
Note: a. Statistical significance: * .10 level; ** .05 level; *** .01 level
    Figure 3. Estimated Class Size Coefficient by GNP in 1995


                                                                                           Hong Kong

                         .003
class size coefficient




                                                                                                  Iceland
                                                                     Ireland
                           0      Iran
                                                   Cyprus

                                                                  New Zealand   Scotland
                                                   Slovenia
                                                                                  Canada
                                                                                             Netherlands
                                  Czech Republic
                                  Latvia
                                                                                                                       Norway




                                                                                                                                  Japan

                                                       Portugal




                                                                                                       United States
                                                   Greece



                     -.003

                                1000                                             20000                                          40000
                                                                                GNP 1995
        In general, the data provide little support for the thesis that diminishing marginal returns

are driving the results.




Selection and compensatory policies

        The general lack of support for the importance of class size, including the large number

of estimates with the wrong sign, could simply reflect active assignment policies within schools.

In particular, if principals tended to place students who have specific problems or are simply

doing poorly in smaller classes, these compensatory placement policies could yield results with

the incorrect sign. In such case, being in a small class may simply identify prior poor performance

as recognized by the principal. Of course, others have identified an opposite relationship –that

families with greater wealth buy superior schools with smaller class sizes.

        A variety of approaches have previously been used to deal with such problems. The

simplest and most straightforward has been estimation of value-added models. In these,

achievement at any point in time is related to prior achievement along with the flow of family and

school resources. Since the prior achievement captures the incentive for compensatory policies

unless assignment is based on things not captured by prior achievement, the impact of class size

can be directly estimated. This approach, however, does not lead to stronger results for class size

effects in the United States (see Hanushek (1997, 1999)). An alternative approach has been the

use of various versions of instrumental variables. These include school level class size in

Akerhielm (1995) and specific demographic interactions (Angrist and Lavy (1999); Hoxby

(2000)). Case and Deaton (1999) in an alternative approach rely on arbitrary decision making by

whites for black schools in South Africa. The evidence from past instrumental strategies is,

again, mixed, although there tend to be more estimates of the expected direction.




17
         The requirements for appropriate instruments are typically difficult to meet, and the

results tend to hold just for specific circumstances.18 Nonetheless, while instrumental variables

approaches have conceptual appeal, within these international estimates using the TIMSS data it

is difficult to find suitable instruments.19

         To understand the potential for estimates deriving from compensatory placement, we

employ two alternative but complementary strategies. First, we consider schools where

compensatory placement is not feasible. Specifically, by looking at just rural schools –ones that

are much more likely to have only a single classroom in a given grade – we can isolate the impact

of class size variation per se. Simply put, if there is not a possibility of allocating students across

classrooms, the class size cannot be a reflection of assignment. Second, by including a variable

indicating whether the classroom is identified by the principal as being smaller than the average

for the grade, we are able to remove the average achievement effect of compensatory setting (if in

fact compensatory allocations prevail). We can then observe the impact of class size adjusted for

average compensatory policies within schools.

         Table 4 (9 year olds) and 5 (13 year olds) display the results of these two investigations

of by country. While the overall pattern of estimated class size effects is very similar, these

alternative approaches yield a few changes. For the younger students in Table 4, negative impacts

of larger classes become statistically significant in the rural schools of Canada and Slovenia and,

in Hong Kong, the estimate goes from positive significant to negative significant. On the other

hand, Cyprus becomes positive and significant for rural schools. The precision of estimates also

falls in several countries. For the older students in Table 5, some positive effects turn into



18
   An appropriate instrument must be correlated with the variable of interest (here, class size) but
uncorrelated with the selection rule of schools in terms of unmeasured achievement. Angrist and Lavy
(1999), for example, make use of a peculiarity in Israeli schooling policy (“Maimondides’ rule”) in order to
look exogenous variations in class size. Hoxby (2000) capitalizes the “lumpiness” of classrooms to observe
variation in class size induced to demographic differences.
19
   Woessman and West (2002) use an instrumental approach in an alternative recent analysis of the TIMSS
data. They rely on grade average class size instead of the number of students in the specific tested
classroom along with removing a school fixed effect to deal with school selection.


18
Table 4. Sign and statistical significance of alternative estimates of
class effects allowing for compensatory placement, age 9 cohort

                      Full sample                   Rural sample                            Within school small classesa




                                                                                    class indicator
                                    Significanceb




                                                                    Significanceb




                                                                                                      Significanceb




                                                                                                                                      Significanceb
                    size estimate




                                                    size estimate




                                                                                     Sign of small




                                                                                                                      size estimate
                    Sign of class




                                                    Sign of class




                                                                                                                      Sign of class
                                     Statistical




                                                                     Statistical




                                                                                                       Statistical




                                                                                                                                       Statistical
Canada                   -                              -               **               -                **              -                *
Cyprus                   -                              +                *               +                                +
Czech
Republic                -                               -                                -                 *              -
Greece                  -              **               -                                -                                -               **
Hong Kong               +              ***              -              ***               -                **              +              ***
Iceland                 +                               -                                -                                +
Iran                    -                               +                                -               ***              -
Ireland                 +                               +                                -                                -
Japan                   -              ***              -                                +                                -                *
Latvia                  -                               -                                -                                -
Netherlands             -                               -                                +                                -                *
New Zealand             -                               +                                +                                +
Norway                  -                               -                                +                                -
Portugal                -                               +                                -                                -
Scotland                -                               -                                +                                +
United States           -              ***              -                *               -                                -              ***
Slovenia                -                               -               **               -                                -


Notes:
a. Estimates based on full sample with inclusion of an indicator variable for whether the classroom has
fewer students than the average for the grade.
b. Statistical significance:
            * .10 level
           ** .05 level
         *** .01 level
Table 5. Sign and statistical significance of alternative estimates of
class effects allowing for compensatory placement, age 13 cohort

                        Full sample                      Rural sample                                   Within school small classesa



                    Sign of class size




                                                         Sign of class size




                                                                                                                                Sign of class size
                                                                                              class indicator
                                         Significanceb




                                                                              Significanceb




                                                                                                                Significanceb




                                                                                                                                                     Significanceb
                                                                                               Sign of small
                                          Statistical




                                                                               Statistical




                                                                                                                 Statistical




                                                                                                                                                      Statistical
                        estimate




                                                             estimate




                                                                                                                                    estimate
Austria                   +                                    +                                   +                                  +                  *
Belgium (Fl)              +                 ***                +                                   +                                  +                 ***
Belgium (Fr)              +                 ***                +                   *               -                                  +                 ***
Canada                    +                 **                 +                                   +                                  +                 **
Colombia                  -                                    +                                   -                 *                -
Cyprus                    +                                    +                                   -                                  +
Czech
Republic                  +                 ***                +                                    -               **                +
Slovak
Republic                  -                                 -                                   -                   **             -
Denmark                   +                                 +                                   +                                  +
France                    +                 ***             +                     **            +                                  +                    **
Germany                   +                  **             +                                   +                                  +                    ***
Greece                    -                  *              -                                   -                                  -
Hong Kong                 +                 ***            n.a.                                 -                                  +                    ***
Iceland                   +                  **             +                                   -                                  +
Ireland                   +                 ***             +                    ***            -                   **             +                    ***
Japan                     +                 ***             -                                   -                                  +                    ***
Korea                     -                  *              -                                   -                                  -                     *
Latvia                    -                                 -                     **            -                                  -
Lithuania                 +                 ***             +                                   +                                  +                    ***
Netherlands               +                 ***             +                    ***            +                                  +                    ***
New Zealand               +                 ***             +                                   -                   **             +
Norway                    -                                 +                                   -                                  -
Portugal                  +                 ***            n.a.                                 +                                  +                    ***
Romania                   +                                 -                                   -                                  +
Russian Fed.              +                                 -                                   -                                  -
Spain                     -                                 +                                   +                                  -
Sweden                    +                 ***             +                    ***            +                                  +                    ***
Switzerland               -                                 -                     **            +                                  +
Thailand                  +                                 +                                   +                                  +
England                   +                 ***             +                    ***           n.a.                               n.a.
Scotland                  +                 ***            n.a.                                 -                                  +                    ***
United States             -                                 -                                   -                                  -                     *
Slovenia                  -                                 +                                   +                                  -

Notes: n.a. Country data are unavailable to perform estimation.
       a. Estimates based on full sample with inclusion of an indicator variable for whether the
       classroom has fewer students than the average for the grade.
       b. Statistical significance: * .10 level; ** .05 level; *** .01 level
negative, but not significant (Japan, Romania and Russian Federation). In general the positive

results become less significant in the smaller samples of rural schools.

            The identification of class sizes that are below the grade average provides an indication

of the tendency toward compensatory policies in each country. Across all countries at the

different grade levels, the estimated effects are almost evenly split between compensatory and

“elitist” placement, but the statistically significant differences favor compensatory placement.

Four of 17 countries for the younger age group and five of 32 countries for the older age group

show lower achievement in the classrooms with smaller than the grade average for the school

class sizes (holding constant the class size). Importantly, identification of such within school

placements does little to change the sign or significance of the estimated class size effects.

            These alternative approaches to assessing the importance of compensatory class size

policies do not indicate that the overall results are heavily influenced by selection effects. Thus,

other explanations must be found for the patterns of results, particularly the predominantly

perverse effects found for the samples of 13-year-olds.


Families and Schools

            One issue of some significance is how the education systems of various countries impact

on the distribution of outcomes. The results here, mirroring those in most other studies, show that

family background exerts a very strong effect on student performance. Students from

disadvantaged families and from families where the parents themselves have less education tend

to systematically perform worse on the TIMSS tests than do students who do not have those

deficits.

            Heyneman and Loxley (1983) focused attention on the relative importance of family

background and school factors. In this work, which parallels that of Coleman et al. (1966), they

compare the amount of variance explained by family background with that explained by school

factors. Their analysis suggests that measured school resources explain a considerably higher


19
proportion of the variance in poor countries, leading them to conclude that school resources are

more important in developing countries.

        In table 6, we reproduce their analysis for the consistent database from TIMSS.

Heyneman and Loxley (1983) approach the problem by looking at the marginal addition to

explained variance that is provided by school factors. In other words, employing the methodology

of Coleman et al. (1966), they first remove all of the variance in test scores that can be attributed

to family backgrounds. They then add school factors and look at the addition to explained

variance (column 1). In their analysis, the latter is a substantial percentage of the total explained

variance (column 3). When we do a similar analysis as shown in the next to last column (lower

bound of variance explained by school factors), we do not reproduce their results. First, the

proportion explained by the addition of school factors is relatively modest, particularly for the

sample of 9 year olds. Second, there is no clear relationship with income of the countries. The

countries have been ordered from poorest to richest, but there is not a simple monotonic pattern in

the relative importance of school factors.

        Substantial criticism was leveled at the original Coleman Report for this methodology

(e.g., Hanushek and Kain (1972)). Specifically, this methodology attributes any “common

explained variance” to family factors. In other words, when family and school factors are

positively correlated, the first regressions with only family variables include the effect of family

background plus a portion of the schools effect that is proxied by the collection in family factors.

The importance of such correlation is shown by column 2 and by the final column (upper bound

of variance explained by school factors). In column 2, family factors are ignored, effectively

reversing the calculation by attributing all of the common explained variance to school factors.

When this is done, school factors appear to explain a majority of the total explained variance in

most countries.




20
         Importantly, regardless of how the calculations are done, there is no clear pattern by

wealth of the country. In other words, it does not appear that school resources are differentially

important in poorer countries.

         A more fundamental problem with this approach is the reliance on comparisons of

explained variance to derive conclusions about the importance of resources. The variance

explained by a set of regressors combines information about the impact of each factor (i.e., its

coefficient), the correlation with other inputs, the observed variance of each, and the observed

variance of the test score outcomes. The latter three factors are a function of the particular sample

and institutional structure. For example, if all of the schools in a country had precisely the same

class size, class size could not explain any of the observed variance in test scores – regardless of

how important class size might be for student learning. Similarly, if student backgrounds showed

relatively little variation within a country, families would offer little explanation for test score

variations even though they were very important.

         A more subtle issue also arises, since concentration on explained variance neglects

consideration of how school resources are estimated to affect performance. For example, the

previous summaries of the estimated parameters (table 2) showed that 17 out of the 33 estimates

for class size effects for the age 13 population were positive. A number of these are statistically

significant, and, while they will contribute to the test score explanation, this evidence would

hardly be appropriate for arguing about the importance of school resources in developing

countries.20

         A slightly different issue is whether the schooling system tends to reduce achievement

gaps found at entry to schooling. Specifically, if we take the distribution of achievement at entry

20
  An alternative approach to assessing the role of measured school resources is to compare their impact to
some objective standard such as the academic deficit of disadvantaged students. Our estimates allow us to
calculate the percentage change in achievement that can be expected from a reduction in class size. These
can be compared to average difference in performance for disadvantaged students (measured according to
our SES measures). The estimates uniformly show unrealistically large changes in resources to eliminate
the gaps. For example, the best cases for class size reduction imply a necessity to reduce class size by ten



21
Table 6. Additional Explanatory Power of School Inputs
(Countries ordered by increasing GDP/capita)

                     Variance explained by school
                               factors (∆R2)          Total       Importance of school factors
                     Entered after Entered before explained
                         family           family  variance (R2)   Lower bound    Upper bound
                           (1)               (2)       (3)           (1)/(3)       (2)/(3)
 Age 9
Iran                      0.01             0.47       0.68             1%            69%
Latvia                    0.03             0.32       0.55             5%            59%
Czech Republic            0.03             0.39       0.49             6%            79%
Slovenia                  0.02             0.50       0.64             2%            78%
Cyprus                    0.07             0.58       0.61            11%            95%
Greece                    0.02             0.39       0.57             3%            68%
Portugal                  0.03             0.24       0.49             7%            48%
New Zealand               0.01             0.22       0.62             2%            35%
Ireland                   0.02             0.41       0.67             3%            61%
Scotland                  0.01             0.36       0.59             1%            62%
Canada                    0.02             0.36       0.54             4%            65%
Hong Kong                 0.04             0.51       0.66             6%            77%
Netherlands               0.04             0.60       0.68             5%            88%
Iceland                   0.01             0.45       0.56             1%            81%
United States             0.03             0.30       0.66             5%            45%
Norway                    0.01             0.56       0.68             1%            82%
Japan                     0.02             0.63       0.67             3%            94%
 Age 13
Romania                   0.07             0.19       0.39            17%            49%
Lithuania                 0.05             0.38       0.54             9%            71%
Colombia                  0.05             0.20       0.62             8%            32%
Russian Federation        0.04             0.17       0.40             9%            42%
Latvia                    0.03             0.21       0.34             8%            61%
Thailand                  0.11             0.44       0.56            19%            79%
Slovak Republic           0.04             0.29       0.46             9%            62%
Czech Republic            0.02             0.24       0.58             4%            42%
Slovenia                  0.01             0.36       0.57             2%            63%
Cyprus                    0.02             0.33       0.69             3%            47%
Greece                    0.04             0.37       0.67             6%            56%
Korea                     0.03             0.42       0.63             5%            68%
Portugal                  0.05             0.36       0.58             8%            62%
Spain                     0.02             0.34       0.61             3%            56%
New Zealand               0.03             0.21       0.58             5%            36%
Ireland                   0.11             0.32       0.55            21%            57%
England                   0.19             0.22       0.36            54%            61%
Scotland                  0.08             0.26       0.57            14%            47%
Canada                    0.05             0.19       0.32            15%            59%
Hong Kong                 0.15             0.30       0.66            22%            45%
Sweden          0.14   0.29   0.43   32%   67%
Netherlands     0.11   0.45   0.70   16%   64%
Belgium (Fl)    0.05   0.21   0.52    9%   40%
Belgium (Fr)    0.07   0.37   0.72   10%   52%
Iceland         0.05   0.22   0.36   14%   62%
France          0.05   0.36   0.54    9%   66%
Austria         0.04   0.21   0.33   11%   64%
United States   0.02   0.11   0.45    4%   23%
Germany         0.02   0.22   0.75    3%   30%
Denmark         0.09   0.44   0.51   18%   87%
Norway          0.05   0.42   0.57    9%   74%
Japan           0.10   0.36   0.41   25%   88%
Switzerland     0.03   0.19   0.45    6%   42%
to school to reflect just nonschool factors, does schooling provide a set of independent inputs that

become increasingly important and reduce the impact of families? The presence of two adjacent

cohorts at different points in the schooling process allows an evaluation of the impact of schools

on the link between family characteristics and educational outcomes. To look at the effect over

time of families, we normalize the test scores for each age group to have a mean of 0 and standard

deviation of 1. We then pool the age 9 and age 13 cohorts and test whether the family background

effects are the same across ages.21 The results change slightly depending on which family

background measure is used, the effect for the presence of 25 or more books at home is

illustrative. For seven of the twelve countries (those with sufficient data for the estimation), the

differential effects of family inputs indicate a significant lessening influence of families (Canada,

Czech Republic, Hong Kong, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, New Zealand, and Norway). The only

country that significantly goes in the opposite direction is Portugal. These results generally hold

up for other measures of family wealth or home environment.




Conclusions
        Strong evidence indicates that quality of human capital is very important for individual

success and for nations as a whole. Until recently, however, it has been difficult to look at quality

across nations in a consistent manner. Most of the evidence about the determination of quality

has been restricted to the United States. The availability of a common performance measurement

for students in different countries permits an investigation of the operations of school systems in

up to 37 countries.

        This analysis considers policies that might be used to promote higher quality schools

within countries. The particular emphasis is the power of resource policies such as improving


or more standard deviations in order to close the achievement gap between poor and the rest of the
countries.




22
teacher education or reducing class sizes. These policies have proven ineffective in the United

States, but this situation does not necessarily hold elsewhere. If there are diminishing marginal

impacts of school resources, the United States could simply be working on a “flat” portion of the

production function, while other countries might not be.

         Across the sampled TIMSS countries, the overall strength of resources in obtaining better

student performance appears rather limited, but it is more positive than in the corresponding

analyses of U.S. achievement. Certain countries also do stand out as having significant effects,

and these should be investigated in more detail. Nonetheless, the results defy many

generalizations. It simply does not appear to be the case that outcomes related to school resource

differences are more positive in the poorer countries or in the countries that begin with lower

levels of resources.

         A common concern from this estimation is that the estimated effects might simply be an

artifact of direct policy actions in different nations. The strongest potential case involves class

sizes. If schools systematically use reduced class size in a compensatory manner to make up for

past learning difficulties of individual students, a positive relationship between class size and

student performance could simply reflect the selection of students and not the true causal impact

of reduced class size. To investigate this possibility, two separate approaches are used. First,

because rural schools tend to be small and tend to have a single class in each grade, the ability to

allocate students in a compensatory manner is sharply limited. Estimation of models just for rural

schools provides no more general support for class size policies than the prior estimation across

all schools. Second, the principal of schools identified if the particular sampled classroom had a

class size below average for the grade in the school. We separate out the average achievement

differences for within-school small classrooms and then investigate the impact of class size



21
  In a separate analysis, we also calculate coefficients of variation for each country and age group. While
overall these show no narrowing of the distribution, these measures are subject to the underlying variation
of test measurement and thus are difficult to interpret.


23
differences. While a number of countries appear to place lower achieving students in small

classrooms, allowing for this does not change the pattern of class size effects.

        Looking beyond simple resource policies appears necessary. Variations in performance

across countries do suggest that a variety of organizational and incentive issues are likely to be

more important than concentration on just resources to schools, a result supported by Woessman

(2000, 2001).

        Finally, we investigate whether the schooling systems in various countries appear to

ameliorate the impact of poorer family backgrounds. It has been conventionally held, particularly

following Heyneman and Loxley (1983), that schools and school resources are more important

than families in developing countries. Our analysis, using alternative methods, does not support

the notion that school resource impacts vary systematically with country income or development.

Further, when we investigate the impact of family backgrounds comparing younger with older

students, we find mixed evidence that the impact of families tends to decline with age. This

analysis is, nonetheless, relatively imprecise and should not be taken as conclusive.




24
References

Akerhielm, Karen. 1995. "Does class size matter?" Economics of Education Review 14,no.3
        (September):229-241.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 1999. "Using Maimondides' rule to estimate the effect of class size on
         scholastic achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114,no.2 (May):533-575.

Barro, Robert J., and Jong-wha Lee. 2001. "International data on educational attainment: Updates and
        implications." Oxford Economic Papers 53,no.3 (July):541-563.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.

Behrman, Jere R., Lori G. Kletzer, Michael S. McPherson, and Morton Owen Schapiro. 1998. "The
       microeconomics of college choice, careers, and wages: Measuring the impact of higher
       education." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 559(September):12-
       23.

Benhabib, Jess, and Mark M. Spiegel. 1994. "The role of human capital in economic development:
        Evidence from aggregate cross-country data." Journal of Monetary Economics 34,no.2:143-174.

Betts, Julian R. 1996. "Is there a link between school inputs and earnings? Fresh scrutiny of an old
          literature." In Does money matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement and
          adult success, edited by Gary Burtless. Washington, DC: Brookings:141-191.

Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2000. "Does schooling cause growth?" American Economic Review
        90,no.5 (December):1160-1183.

Bishop, John. 1989. "Is the test score decline responsible for the productivity growth decline?" American
         Economic Review 79,no.1:178-197.

———. 1991. "Achievement, test scores, and relative wages." In Workers and their wages, edited by
     Marvin H. Kosters. Washington, DC: The AEI Press:146-186.

———. 1992. "The impact of academic competencies of wages, unemployment, and job performance."
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 37(December):127-194.

Blackburn, McKinley L., and David Neumark. 1993. "Omitted-ability bias and the increase in the return to
        schooling." Journal of Labor Economics 11,no.3 (July):521-544.

———. 1995. "Are OLS estimates of the return to schooling biased downward? Another look." Review of
     Economics and Statistics 77,no.2 (May):217-230.

Burtless, Gary. 1996. Does money matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement and adult
         success. Washington, DC: Brookings.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992a. "Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the
        characteristics of public schools in the United States." Journal of Political Economy 100,no.1
        (February):1-40.

———. 1992b. "School quality and black-white relative earnings: A direct assessment." Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 107,no.1 (February):151-200.
———. 1996. "Labor market effects of school quality: Theory and evidence." In Does money matter? The
     effect of school resources on student achievement and adult success, edited by Gary Burtless.
     Washington, DC: Brookings:97-140.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 1999. "School inputs and educational outcomes in South Africa."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 114,no.3 (August):1047-1084.

Coleman, James S., Ernest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander M. Mood,
       Frederic D. Weinfeld, and Robert L. York. 1966. Equality of educational opportunity.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. 2000. "Early test scores, socioeconomic status, school quality, and
         future outcomes." Department of Economics, UCLA (mimeo) (September).

Dugan, Dennis J. 1976. "Scholastic achievement: its determinants and effects in the education industry." In
        Education as an industry, edited by Joseph T. Froomkin, Dean T. Jamison and Roy Radner.
        Cambridge, MA: Ballinger:53-83.

Gonzales, Patrick, Christopher Calsyn, Leslie Jocelyn, Kitty Mak, David Kastberg, Sousan Arafeh, Trevor
        Williams, and Winnie Tsen. 2000. Pursuing excellence: Comparisons of international eighth-
        grade mathematics and science achievement from a U.S. perspective, 1995 and 1999. Washington,
        DC: National Center for Education Statistics.

Greenwald, Rob, Larry V. Hedges, and Richard D. Laine. 1996. "The effect of school resources on student
       achievement." Review of Educational Research 66,no.3 (Fall):361-396.

Griliches, Zvi. 1974. "Errors in variables and other unobservables." Econometrica 42,no.6
         (November):971-998.

Grogger, Jeffrey T., and Eric Eide. 1993. "Changes in college skills and the rise in the college wage
        premium." Journal of Human Resources 30,no.2 (Spring):280-310.

Hanushek, Eric A. 1973. "Regional differences in the structure of earnings." Review of Economics and
       Statistics 55,no.2 (May):204-213.

———. 1986. "The economics of schooling: Production and efficiency in public schools." Journal of
     Economic Literature 24,no.3 (September):1141-1177.

———. 1995. "Interpreting recent research on schooling in developing countries." World Bank Research
     Observer 10,no.2 (August):227-246.

———. 1996. "A more complete picture of school resource policies." Review of Educational Research
     66,no.3 (Fall):397-409.

———. 1997. "Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An update." Educational
     Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19,no.2 (Summer):141-164.

———. 1999. "The evidence on class size." In Earning and learning: How schools matter, edited by Susan
     E. Mayer and Paul Peterson. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution:131-168.

Hanushek, Eric A., and John F. Kain. 1972. "On the value of `equality of educational opportunity' as a
       guide to public policy." In On equality of educational opportunity, edited by Frederick Mosteller
       and Daniel P. Moynihan. New York: Random House:116-145.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Dongwook Kim. 1995. "Schooling, labor force quality, and economic growth."
       Working Paper 5399, National Bureau of Economic Research (December).
Hanushek, Eric A., and Dennis D. Kimko. 2000. "Schooling, labor force quality, and the growth of
       nations." American Economic Review 90,no.5 (December):1184-1208.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Richard R. Pace. 1995. "Who chooses to teach (and why)?" Economics of
       Education Review 14,no.2 (June):101-117.

Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin, and Lori L. Taylor. 1996. "Aggregation and the estimated effects of
       school resources." Review of Economics and Statistics 78,no.4 (November):611-627.

Hedges, Larry V., Richard D. Laine, and Rob Greenwald. 1994. "Does money matter? A meta-analysis of
        studies of the effects of differential school inputs on student outcomes." Educational Researcher
        23,no.3 (April):5-14.

Heyneman, Stephen P., and William Loxley. 1983. "The effect of primary school quality on academic
      achievement across twenty-nine high and low income countries." American Journal of Sociology
      88(May):1162-1194.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. 2000. "The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence from
        population variation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115,no.3 (November):1239-1285.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil. 1992. "A contribution to the empirics of economic
       growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,no.2 (May):407-437.

Manski, Charles F., and David A. Wise. 1983. College choice in America. Cambridge: Harvard University
        Press.

Marlin, Michael O., and Ina V. S. Mullis. 1996. Third international mathematics and science study:
        Quality assurance in data collection. Boston: Center for the Study of Testing, Evaluation, and
        Education Policy, Boston College.

Mincer, Jacob. 1970. "The distribution of labor incomes: a survey with special reference to the human
         capital approach." Journal of Economic Literature 8,no.1 (March):1-26.

———. 1974. Schooling Experience and Earnings. New York: NBER.

Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, Yves Duhaldeborde, and John H. Tyler. 2000. "How important are
       the cognitive skills of teenagers in predicting subsequent earnings?" Journal of Policy Analysis
       and Management 19,no.4 (Fall):547-568.

Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, and Frank Levy. 1995. "The growing importance of cognitive skills
       in wage determination." Review of Economics and Statistics 77,no.2 (May):251-266.

Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The role of pre-market factors in black-white differences."
        Journal of Political Economy 104,no.5 (October):869-895.

Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund Phelps. 1966. "Investment in humans, technology diffusion and economic
        growth." American Economic Review 56,no.2 (May):69-75.

O'Neill, June. 1990. "The role of human capital in earnings differences between black and white men."
          Journal of Economic Perspectives 4,no.4 (Fall):25-46.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1973. Returns to education: An international comparison. San Francisco, CA:
        Jossey-Bass Inc.
———. 1981. "Returns to education: An updated international comparison." Comparative Education
     Review 17,no.3:321-341.

———. 1985. "Returns to education: A further international update and implications." Journal of Human
     Resources 20,no.4 (Fall):585-604.

———. 1994. "Returns to investment in education: A global update." World Development 22:1325-1344.

Rebelo, Sergio. 1991. "Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth." Journal of Political Economy
        99,no.3 (June):500-521.

Rivkin, Steven G. 1995. "Black/white differences in schooling and employment." Journal of Human
         Resources 30,no.4 (Fall):826-852.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2001. "Teachers, schools, and academic
         achievement." Working Paper No. 6691, National Bureau of Economic Research (revised)

Romer, Paul. 1986. "Increasing returns and long-run growth." Journal of Political Economy
        94(October):531-556.

———. 1990. "Endogenous technological change." Journal of Political Economy 99,no.5,pt. II:S71-S102.

Taber, Christopher R. 2001. "The rising college premium in the eighties: Return to college or return to
        unobserved ability?" Review of Economic Studies 68,no.3 (July):665-691.

U.S. Department of Education. 1995. Digest of education statistics. 1995 ed. Washington, DC: National
        Center for Education Statistics.

Vignoles, Anna, Rosalind Levacic, James Walker, Stephen Machin, and David Reynolds. 2000. ""The
        relationship between resource allocation and pupil attainment: A review"." DP 02, Centre for the
        Economics of Education, London School of Economics and Political Science (November).

Woessman, Ludger. 2000. "Schooling resources, educational institutions, and student performance: The
      international evidence." Kiel Working Paper No. 983, Kiel Institute of World Economics, Kiel,
      Germany, December 200

———. 2001. "Why students in some countries do better." Education Matters 1,no.2 (Summer):67-74.

Woessman, Ludger, and Martin R. West. 2002. "Class-size effects in school systems around the world:
      Evidence from between-grade variation in TIMSS." Research Paper PEPG/02-02, Program on
      Education Policy and Governance, Harvard University (March).
Appendix Table A1. Descriptive statistics for Age 9 cohort




                      Class size(students)




                                                                                                                                                                desk
                                                        Lives with mother




                                                                                                                                                                                                Teacher experience
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (in years)
                                                 Not




                                                                                           home


                                                                                                     House with calculator
                                             working




                                                                                                                                                    House with study
                                                                            More than 25 books at




                                                                                                                              House with computer




                                                                                                                                                                        House with dictionary
Canada              22.8                     14%       91%                    78%                   81%                      51%                      73%              80%                         18.9
Cyprus              26.4                     16%       87%                    52%                   72%                      32%                      82%              77%                         17.6
Czech Republic      19.1                      7%       97%                    83%                   93%                      31%                      77%              76%                         22.6
Greece              20.0                     22%       95%                    49%                   56%                      21%                      82%              85%                         16.8
Hong Kong           36.2                     20%       94%                    47%                   91%                      35%                      74%              94%                         14.8
Iceland             14.4                     23%       87%                    82%                   75%                      73%                      85%              70%                         14.5
Iran                31.9                      8%       74%                    18%                   37%                       8%                      23%              27%                         16.2
Ireland             21.8                     12%       96%                    67%                   82%                      72%                      69%              90%                         20.6
Japan               31.4                     15%                                                                                                                                                   16.1
Latvia              18.7                      8%       93%                    76%                   74%                      21%                      92%              78%                         20.5
Netherlands         21.2                     21%       89%                    70%                   81%                      69%                      84%              76%                         17.4
New Zealand         28.9                     19%       88%                    79%                   86%                      52%                      73%              89%                         15.5
Norway              17.4                     14%       95%                    81%                   68%                      51%                      86%              67%                         18.9
Portugal            19.3                     27%       94%                    37%                   76%                      31%                      60%              83%                         21.8
Thailand            19.4                     13%       93%                    23%                   43%                       4%                      41%              32%                         20.0
Scotland            23.3                     23%       91%                    71%                   84%                      83%                      71%              86%                         15.1
United States       23.5                     15%       93%                    73%                   91%                      51%                      81%              89%                         16.4
Slovenia            21.9                      8%       97%                    70%                   73%                      44%                      85%              79%                         19.2


Note: blank entries indicate no data available.
Appendix Table A2. Descriptive statistics for Age 13 cohort




                         Class size(students)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         desk
                                                secondary education


                                                                        secondary education




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Teacher experience
                                                                                                                 Lives with mother


                                                                                                                                                    home


                                                                                                                                                              House with calculator




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (in years)
                                                 Mother with at least




                                                                                                  Not working




                                                                                                                                                                                                             House with study
                                                                                                                                     More than 25 books at




                                                                                                                                                                                       House with computer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 House with dictionary
                                                                          Father with at least
Austria                 4.7                       57%                      63%                   17%            95%                    72%                   98%                      58%                      90%              97%                        32.4
Belgium (Fl)           17.2                       37%                      41%                   11%            96%                    75%                   97%                      67%                      96%              99%                        23.5
Belgium (Fr)           15.7                       44%                      46%                   21%            94%                    83%                   97%                      59%                      95%              96%                        35.0
Canada                 17.8                       60%                      55%                    8%            92%                    83%                   96%                      59%                      87%              95%                        23.3
Colombia               30.5                       30%                      31%                    6%            85%                    41%                   87%                      11%                      83%              95%                        22.6
Cyprus                 23.2                       22%                      24%                   18%            93%                    73%                   93%                      36%                      94%              95%                        27.2
Czech Republic         17.9                       53%                      47%                    3%            97%                    94%                   98%                      35%                      89%              94%                        22.9
Slovak Republic        20.6                       60%                      54%                    4%            96%                    86%                   98%                      32%                      86%              95%                        22.3
Denmark                18.0                       43%                      43%                   11%            92%                    83%                   95%                      72%                      94%              80%                        21.7
France                 21.6                       29%                      27%                   20%            92%                    73%                   95%                      47%                      92%              95%                        29.5
Germany                15.9                       24%                      28%                   15%            94%                    74%                   98%                      69%                      92%              96%                        43.5
Greece                 24.8                       37%                      40%                   24%            96%                    71%                   83%                      28%                      92%              96%                        13.5
Hong Kong              31.9                       26%                      30%                   17%            93%                    50%                   97%                      37%                      78%              97%                        13.5
Iceland                11.7                       42%                      51%                   11%            94%                    92%                   98%                      71%                      95%              91%                        31.1
Ireland                19.2                       49%                      44%                   10%            96%                    75%                   95%                      77%                      84%              97%                        21.8
Japan                  35.5                                                                      18%                                                                                                                                                       15.1
Korea                  52.9                       53%                      66%                   38%            94%                    80%                   91%                      38%                      95%              98%                        13.9
Latvia                 14.3                       48%                      41%                    2%            94%                    92%                   90%                      13%                      96%              91%                        28.0
Lithuania              15.4                       49%                      44%                    6%            96%                    77%                   85%                      44%                      93%              85%                        32.2
Netherlands            19.7                       50%                      54%                   13%            95%                    74%                   96%                      80%                      95%              96%                        20.2
New Zealand            20.8                       51%                      47%                    9%            92%                    87%                   96%                      59%                      87%              97%                        17.4
Norway                 14.6                       48%                      50%                    4%            95%                    91%                   96%                      63%                      97%              94%                        22.9
Portugal               22.2                       15%                      16%                   20%            94%                    61%                   98%                      39%                      82%              96%                        13.2
Romania                18.0                       39%                      40%                   11%            82%                    49%                   58%                      17%                      68%              55%                        26.2
Russian Federation     11.8                       78%                      70%                    4%            96%                    83%                   89%                      35%                      94%              85%                        59.7
Spain                  21.9                       22%                      27%                   16%            96%                    76%                   97%                      40%                      92%              99%                        25.8
Sweden                 13.6                       45%                      43%                    8%            94%                    87%                   98%                      58%                      98%              92%                        26.2
Switzerland            11.9                       49%                      56%                   15%            96%                    77%                   98%                      61%                      95%              97%                        24.5
Thailand               23.8                        9%                      15%                    2%            92%                    44%                   59%                       3%                      57%              59%                        46.0
England                21.8                                                                      15%            94%                    79%                   97%                      88%                      88%              95%                        25.5
Scotland               20.3                       32%                      30%                   17%            90%                    67%                   91%                      84%                      78%              90%                        23.9
United States          18.3                       75%                      70%                   10%            90%                    75%                   96%                      54%                      87%              95%                        27.0
Slovenia               21.3                       60%                      63%                    4%            97%                    80%                   97%                      46%                      93%              92%                        23.4

Note: blank entries indicate no data available.
