                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           IMF PROGRAMS: WHO IS CHOSEN AND WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS?


                                             Robert J. Barro
                                             Jong-Wha Lee


                                          Working Paper 8951
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8951


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




This research has been supported in part by a grant from the National Science Foundation. We would like
to thank Eduardo Borensztein, Jeffrey Frankel, Jeffry Frieden, Jinyong Hahn, Myoung-jae Lee, Greg
Mankiw, and seminar participants at Harvard University, the International Monetary Fund, the Korean
Econometric Society Workshop, and State University of New York at Buffalo for helpful discussions and
comments. Mohsin Kahn and Alberto Alesina helped us with data. Yunjong Eo provided valuable research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Robert J. Barro and Jong-Wha Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
IMF Programs: Who is Chosen and What Are the Effects?
Robert J. Barro and Jong-Wha Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 8951
May 2002
JEL No. F3, F4, O4



                                             ABSTRACT

        IMF lending practices respond to economic conditions but are also sensitive to political-economy
variables. Specifically, the sizes and frequencies of loans are influenced by a country’s presence at the
Fund, as measured by the country’s share of quotas and professional staff. IMF lending is also sensitive
to a country’s political and economic proximity to some major shareholding countries of the IMF -- the
United States, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. We measured political proximity by voting
patterns in the United Nations and economic proximity by bilateral trading volumes. These results are
of considerable interest for their own sake but also provide instrumental variables for estimating the
effects of IMF lending on economic performance. Instrumental estimates indicate that the size of IMF
lending is insignificantly related to economic growth in the contemporaneous five-year period but has a
significantly negative effect in the subsequent five years.




Robert J. Barro                                                         Jong-Wha Lee
Department of Economics                                                 Economics Department
Harvard University                                                      Korea University
Littauer Center 218                                                     Seoul, Korea
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu
       Participation in programs of the International Monetary Fund has become a

common choice for many countries in recent decades. Almost all developing countries

have received IMF financial support at least once since 1970. The few exceptions include

Botswana, Iran, Malaysia, and Paraguay. Therefore, one question is why so many countries

have sought financial assistance from the IMF. Under what circumstances is a country

more willing to come to the IMF for assistance and is the IMF more likely to agree on a

loan? When would a country benefit from participation in an IMF financial arrangement?

       This paper addresses these questions. We investigate the determination and effects

of IMF programs by using a cross-country panel data set, which comprises information on

130 countries over the last three decades.

       A number of studies, surveyed in Knight and Santaella (1997) and Bird and

Rowlands (2001), have investigated the determination of IMF financial arrangements. This

paper extends this work by including influences from institutional and political variables.

We find that each member country’s political connections to the IMF affect the probability

and size of an IMF loan. We gauge these political connections by institutional and

geopolitical variables, including the size of a country’s quota and national staff at the IMF.

We also consider each country’s political and economic proximity to some major

shareholding countries of the IMF—the United States, France, Germany, and the United

Kingdom.

       The quota determines each country’s voting power at the IMF. The national staff

variable is the share of own nationals among IMF economists. We find that higher values

of both of these variables tend to raise the probability and size of IMF lending. Thus,
greater influence in and connections to the IMF seem to matter for the IMF’s lending

decisions.

       A member country’s political and economic proximity to the IMF’s major

shareholding countries would be important for lending policy if the major countries exert

influence on the IMF’s decisions. In particular, these major countries would tend to lobby

for loans for countries to which they are linked by political or economic interests.

       We measure a country’s political proximity to the United States by the percentage

of times that the country voted in the U.N. General Assembly along with the United States.

As a proxy for a country’s economic proximity to the United States, we use the share of

bilateral trade with the United States in each country’s GDP. We construct analogous

political and economic linkage variables for the IMF’s major European shareholders,

France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. We find that the measures of political and

economic connections to the United States and, to a lesser degree, to the major European

countries play significant roles in raising the probability and size of IMF lending. Hence,

as an international organization influenced by the power of its major shareholding countries,

the IMF apparently takes politics into account when making decisions on loans.

       This political-economy analysis of IMF decision-making is of considerable interest for

its own sake. However, we also use this analysis to form instrumental variables to use to

estimate the effects of IMF lending on a country’s economic performance.

        Since its creation in 1944 at Bretton Woods, the role of the International Monetary

Fund and the effectiveness of its programs have been controversial. The IMF has claimed

to have contributed to the sustainable growth of its member countries by maintaining the




                                              2
stability of the international exchange and financial system and by providing financial

support and policy advice. However, critics say that the IMF has expanded its activities

into too many unproductive areas and perhaps caused more harm than good. They argue

that the availability of IMF financial support often permits governments to pursue

inappropriate policies longer than they otherwise would (Bandow and Vasquez, [1994]).

IMF programs are often asserted to be “anti-growth” and to hurt, especially, poor nations.

For example, IMF policies were claimed to make recessions only “deeper, longer, and

harder” (Stiglitz [2000]). The availability of IMF lending has also been depicted as a

source of “limitless bailouts” and “moral hazard” (Barro [1998]).

       The critical issue is whether participation in an IMF program helps a country to

improve its living standard in the long run. To gain more understanding of this issue, this

study investigates the effects of IMF financial arrangements on economic growth. Many

studies have used cross-country data to assess the economic effects of IMF programs.

These studies have encountered a number of difficulties. The central problem is the

separation of the effects of IMF programs from those of other factors. Program

participation typically applies to countries that self-select themselves based on their economic

and political circumstances. Specifically, countries that are experiencing economic difficulties

tend to turn to the IMF for help, and it would be unfair to blame the IMF for these pre-existing

conditions. Previous studies have tried to control for the endogeneity of IMF programs in

various ways, but we do not regard these attempts as successful.

       Our study extends the existing literature in the procedure for controlling for the

endogeneity of IMF lending. In our cross-country econometric framework, we use as




                                               3
instrumental variables the sizes of IMF quotas and professional staff and the political and

economic proximity to the United States and three major European countries. If we do not

instrument, then we find that an increase in IMF lending is associated with a contemporaneous

reduction of economic growth. However, after controlling for endogeneity with our

instrumental variables, we find no statistically significant impact of IMF lending on economic

growth in the contemporaneous five-year period. However, after controlling for endogeneity,

we find that IMF lending has a statistically significant negative effect on growth in the

subsequent five years. Our results contrast with the findings of recent studies that use other

procedures, but not good instrumental variables, to take account of endogeneity.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief discussion of the

characteristics of the IMF and its financial programs. Section II assesses the determinants of

IMF loan sizes, the frequency of participation in IMF programs, and the probability of IMF

loan approval. We study these processes by using Tobit and probit specifications for a cross-

country panel. Section III presents evidence on the effects of IMF programs on economic

growth. Concluding observations follow in Section IV.



I. The Characteristics of the IMF and its Financial Arrangements

1.1. The Organization of the IMF

       The IMF has become an almost universal financial institution, with its membership

rising from 44 states in 1946 to 183 at present. However, the members of the IMF do not

have an equal voice, unlike the General Assembly of the United Nations. Each member

country of the IMF contributes a quota subscription, as a sort of credit-union deposit to the




                                                4
IMF. Upon joining the Fund, a country pays 25 percent of its quota in the form of

international currencies or SDRs and the remaining 75 percent in its own currency. The

IMF’s total resources amounted to SDR 217 billion ($279 billion) in August 2001.1 The

quota is the basis for determining voting power: each member has 250 basic votes plus one

additional vote for each SDR 100,000 of quota. The initial quotas of the original members

were determined at the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944. The allocation was based

mainly on economic size, as measured by national income and external trade volume.

Quotas of new members have been determined by similar principles.

        The IMF charter calls for general quota reviews at intervals of not more than five

years. These reviews allow for adjustments of quotas to reflect changes in economic power.

There have been 12 general reviews since 1950, and 6 of these resulted in an increase in the

total size of quotas. Most of these overall increases featured equi-proportional increases of

quotas for the individual members (IMF [1998]).

        The highest decision-making body of the IMF is the Board of Governors, which

consists of one governor and one alternate for each member country. The Governors are

usually ministers of finance or sometimes heads of central banks of the member countries.

The Board of Governors delegates all except certain reserved powers to an Executive Board,

which makes the daily decisions. There are 24 Executive Directors. Eight Executive

Directors are appointed by the largest eight shareholders—the United States (37,149

million SDRs or 17.5% percent of the total IMF quotas), Japan (6.3% percent), Germany


1
 In 1969 the IMF created the Special Drawing Right (SDR) as a supplement to existing reserve assets. The
currency value of the SDR is determined daily by the IMF from the market exchange rates of a basket of five
major currencies.



                                                     5
(6.1%), France (5.1%), the United Kingdom (5.1%), Saudi Arabia (3.3%), China (3.0%),

and Russia (2.8%). The others are elected by sixteen groupings of the remaining countries.

       The major shareholders have strong influences on the IMF’s main decisions. Many

important decisions require special voting majorities of 85 percent. Hence, the United

States alone and a group of three European countries together have veto power at the IMF.

Although the managing director has traditionally been a European, the United States seems

to have exerted the strongest voice at the IMF and has sometimes openly wielded this

power to influence decisions.

       As of December 31, 1999, the IMF had a staff of 2297—693 assistant staff and

1604 professional staff. About two-thirds of the professional staff were economists (IMF

[2000, p.95]). The staff reflects the IMF’s membership, coming from about 120 countries,

but is concentrated in advanced countries. In 1999, among all professional staff, about 29%

were from the United States and Canada and about 33% were from Western Europe.

Among developing countries, India, China, Argentina, Peru, and Pakistan had relatively

large numbers of professional staff.



1.2. IMF Financial Policies and Facilities

       The basic conception of the IMF’s role, as envisioned at Bretton Woods in 1944,

was to guard an “adjustable peg exchange rate system” and provide short-term finance to

deal with temporary current-account deficits in advanced countries. Thus, with the

breakdown of the par adjustable peg system in 1973, the IMF lost its major role as the

guarantor of fixed exchange rates among advanced countries. Nevertheless, the IMF did




                                             6
not disappear, and its role expanded instead into many new areas. The collapse of the

Bretton Woods system was followed by oil price shocks, which led to severe payments

imbalances for a large number of developing countries. After the developing countries

recovered from the debt crisis of the 1980s, other problems arose, including the transitions

of the former Communist countries and the Asian financial crisis. Eventually, the IMF

evolved into the “crisis manager” and “development financier” for developing countries.2

           The primary role of the IMF is to provide credits to member countries in balance-of-

payments difficulties. Part of the credit is provided in relation to the quota of a member

country. The first tranche, 25% of the quota, is available automatically, without entailing

any discussion of policy. The use of IMF resources beyond the first tranche almost always

requires an arrangement between the IMF and the member country. Under an IMF

arrangement, the amount of resources committed is released in quarterly installments,

subject to the observance of policy benchmarks and performance criteria. This process is

often referred to as conditionality.

           Stand-by Arrangements (SBA) and the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) are the main

IMF programs designed to provide short-term balance-of-payments assistance to member

countries.3 The typical Stand-By Arrangement covers a period of 1 to 2 years, with

repayments scheduled between 3 1/4 and 5 years from the date of the borrowing. The

Extended Fund Facility program, introduced in 1974, was intended to provide somewhat

2
    See Krueger (1998) and Bordo and James (2000) for detailed discussions of the changing role of the IMF.
3
 A number of other short-term IMF arrangements have been introduced to supplement SBA and EFF. These
arrangements include the Supplemental Reserve Facility (SRF), the Country Stabilization Fund (CSF), the
Compensatory and Contingent Financing Facility (CCFF), and the Systematic Transformation Facility (STF).
See IMF (1998) for details.



                                                       7
longer-term financing in larger amounts. The EFF arrangement typically lasts up to 3 years,

with repayments scheduled over a period of 4 1/2 to 10 years.

        The SBA and EFF programs did not cover very low-income countries. Confronted

by increasing pressure, the IMF developed several new lending programs to provide long-

term loans at subsidized interest rates for poor countries. The Fund established the

Structural Adjustment Facility (SAF) in 1986 and the Enhanced Structural Adjustment

Facility (ESAF) in 1987. The interest rate charged is 0.5%, and repayments are scheduled

over 5-10 years after a 5-year grace period. Most ESAF cases were with sub-Saharan

African countries and former planned economies. In 1999, the ESAF was replaced by the

Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). Probably these activities should be

viewed more as foreign aid, rather than lending or adjustment programs.

        Table 1 shows the number and amounts approved for all types of IMF programs

over the period 1970 to 2000.4 Over the last three decades, a total of 725 programs were

approved. This total includes 594 short-term and mid-term stabilization programs (SBA

and EFF), which are the focus of our analysis. The number of these short-term programs

peaked in the early 1980s with the Latin American debt crisis. Although the number

declined subsequently, the average size of the loans jumped because of the financial crises

experienced by larger countries, such as Mexico, South Korea, Russia, Brazil, Argentina,

and Turkey.



4
 The amount of loan approved was not always drawn by the member country. This situation can arise if the
IMF terminated the arrangement because the borrower did not meet the conditionality, or if the country ended
up not using its full allotment. Sometimes a country utilized an IMF program to build credibility and did not
use the borrowing facility at all.



                                                      8
II. Determination of IMF Program Approval and Participation

2.1. Determinants of IMF Financial Arrangements

        Participation in an IMF program is a joint decision between a member country and

the IMF. Countries that are experiencing economic difficulties come to the IMF for a

financial arrangement. Then the IMF determines whether the country meets the Fund’s

criteria for approval.

        To capture the economic determinants of IMF lending, we use a number of standard

variables that can be found in the previous literature. Some of these factors can be viewed

as influences on a country’s demand for loans and others as effects on the IMF’s

willingness to supply loans. The variables included for each country and time period are

the level of international reserves in relation to imports, per capita GDP, the lagged growth

rate of GDP, and a dummy variable for whether a country is one of the rich OECD

countries.5




5
  Previous studies, such as Conway (1994) and Knight and Santaella (1997), include other measures of
economic performance, such as current-account deficits and inflation. We found that, once lagged GDP
growth and international reserves were considered, these variables did not contribute significantly to the
explanation of IMF lending. It is also likely that the occurrence of a currency or banking crisis induces
countries to seek IMF financial support. However, the appearance of these crises cannot be regarded as
exogenous to other economic events (see, for example, Frankel and Rose [1996]). Because of the
endogeneity of the crises, we did not include crisis dummy variables as explanatory variables for IMF lending.
If we add a dummy variable for the presence of a currency crisis to the regressions, it has statistically
significant positive effects on the probability and size of IMF lending. However, no substantial changes occur
in the estimated coefficients of the other explanatory variables that we consider. A dummy variable for
banking crises turns out to be statistically insignificant, once the currency-crisis dummy is included. Note
that IMF lending does not, by any means, accompany every currency crisis. Since 1970 only one-third of
currency-crisis observations were linked with IMF program participation in the same year or one year later
(see Park and Lee [2001]). On the other side, many IMF programs occur in the absence of a currency crisis.
Hutchison (2001) notes that, in a sample of 67 developing countries over the period 1975-97, only 18% of
IMF program participation observations were associated with currency crises.




                                                     9
       The key innovation of our analysis is that we model the IMF as a bureaucratic and

political organization. Hence, we include additional explanatory variables to reflect this

perspective. We include two measures of connection and influence with the IMF—the

sizes of a country’s IMF quota and professional staff. Then we include geopolitical

variables that measure a country’s political and economic proximity to major shareholding

countries of the IMF. These variables are based on patterns of U.N. voting and bilateral

trade flows.

       The first institutional variable is the country’s share of IMF quotas. This share

reflects a country’s voting power and also matters directly for a portion of the lending

available to a member. Our hypothesis is that, for given economic conditions, a higher

country quota raises the probability and size of an IMF loan.

       The second institutional variable is the share of a country’s nationals among the

IMF professional staff of economists. Officially, to avoid conflicts of interest, the IMF

does not allow staff members to have direct influence on lending decisions for their home

countries. Item 24 of the IMF Code of Conduct for Staff states: “The IMF will seek to

avoid assigning nationals to work on policy issues relating specifically to IMF relations

with their home country, unless needed for linguistic or other reasons.” However, from the

standpoint of having good information, the IMF would often like the input from the

nationals of a target country. Therefore, although own nationals cannot work directly as

desk economists or mission team members for their home countries, these nationals are

often sought out for comments on country programs. In addition, the presence of own

nationals on the staff can help a country to get more access to inside information and,




                                              10
thereby, make it easier to negotiate with the IMF on the terms of a program. Thus, overall,

our hypothesis is that, for given economic conditions, a larger national staff at the IMF

raises the probability and size of a loan.

         We measure the national staff for each country by the number of home-country

nationals currently working for the Fund. Unfortunately, we lack the information to refine

the staff data to consider ranks of positions. Also, it would be interesting to consider the

number of ex IMF staff economists who currently work in the governments of the various

countries. However, we lack the information to make this extension.

         One concern is that IMF quota and staff might reflect a member country’s size,

rather than political connections, per se. Therefore, our empirical analysis of IMF lending

also includes a direct measure of the size of the country—the level and square of the log of

total GDP.

         Another concern is that the number of country nationals on the IMF staff is

endogenously determined by the country’s involvement with IMF programs, rather than

vice versa. However, the effect of a country’s IMF program experience seems, in practice,

not to have a large impact on hiring of that country’s nationals. In particular, the

distribution of IMF staff by country is a highly persisting variable. The correlation between

the values in 1985 and in 1995 is 0.97 (0.91 in the sample of developing countries). For

this reason, lagged program participation turns out to lack explanatory power for the size of

the national staff.6


6
 If we run a regression with the log of IMF staff share as the dependent variable, the significant explanatory
variable, aside from the log of the lagged staff share, is the log of the IMF quota share. The estimated
coefficient on a measure of lagged program participation is positive but statistically insignificant.



                                                      11
         Similarly, there could be a concern that a country’s quota was endogenous, although

the tie to a country’s past program experience would seem doubtful in this case. In any

event, quotas are extremely persistent over time, with much of the allocations determined

by the rules set out in 1944 at Bretton Woods.

         The IMF is also a political organization governed by its major shareholders. For

example, a common claim is that the IMF plays the roles best suited to the national interests

of the United States. In the Cold War era, the IMF often supported countries—such as

Argentina, Egypt, and Zaire—that were important to the United States for foreign policy

reasons, despite the absence of effective reforms (see Krueger [1998] and Bordo and James

[2000]). In the 1994 Mexican crisis, the IMF stand-by program was of unprecedented scale,

amounting to $17.8 billion or 688 percent of Mexican’s quota at the IMF. No doubt this

loan resulted from the intense high-level diplomacy between the U.S. government and the

IMF. In one incident, the Clinton Administration exerted such strong pressure for rapid

action that the usual minimal notice to Executive Directors was not given. Hence, in

protest, some European executive directors abstained in the voting (Krueger [1998]).

         We use as a proxy for a country’s political proximity to the United States the

fraction of the votes that each country cast in the U.N. General Assembly along with the

United States.7 We constructed analogous variables for France, Germany, and the United



7
 We compiled data for 1975-85 on voting patterns in the United Nations from the Inter-University Consortium
for Political and Social Research of the University of Michigan. We then updated from on-line data available
at the United Nations (unbisnet.un.org). The variable that measures the political proximity with the United
States is the fraction of times that the United States and the country in question voted identically (either both
voting yes, both voting no, or both voting abstention [or non-participation]) in all General Assembly plenary
votes in a given year. Decisions adopted without votes and votes in which the country in question was not
eligible to participate were excluded. The results reported below do not change qualitatively if we use some



                                                       12
Kingdom. Our hypothesis is that greater political proximity to the United States or the

European countries will raise the probability and size of IMF lending programs.

         An analogous U.N. voting variable has been used to explain foreign-aid patterns in

research by Ball and Johnson (1996) and Alesina and Dollar (2000). A recent study by

Thacker (1999) used a U.N. voting variable to investigate the U.S. influence over the IMF’s

lending decisions.8

         We measure economic proximity to the United States by the ratio of the country’s

bilateral trade with the United States to the country’s GDP. We construct analogous

variables for the three Western European countries. Our hypothesis is that greater trade

relations with the United States or the European countries will raise the probability and size

of IMF loan programs.9



2.2. Empirical Framework

         We have compiled data from 1975 to 1999. Although data are available for most

variables and countries on an annual basis, we do not have annual observations for the IMF

staff, which was obtained at five-year frequencies. Since we thought that little information


alternative measures, for example, if we exclude non-participation or abstention.
8
  Thacker used only “key” U.N. votes, as designated by the U.S. Treasury. He then constructed the fraction of
the votes on these key issues that each country cast in the U.N. General Assembly along with the United
States. One problem with this procedure is that the designation of which votes are key is subjective. In any
event, we could not apply this approach because the U.S. Treasury information is available only since 1983,
and we also lack analogous information for the European countries. Thacker found that the level of his U.N.
voting variable was not significantly related to IMF lending. However, the first difference of his variable had
a significantly positive effect. We do not find this pattern with our specification and sample period.
9
 Thacker (1999) and Bird and Rowlands (2001) used U.S. exports to each member country as an explanatory
variable for IMF lending decision. They found unexpected negative coefficients.




                                                      13
would be gained from annual observations, we arranged all of the data at five-year intervals.

Hence, our panel covers 130 countries over the five five-year periods 1975-79, 1980-84,

1985-89, 1990-94, and 1995-99. The panel is unbalanced with a total of 603

observations.10

           We measure IMF loan program participation in three ways: loan size, participation,

and approval. The loan size variable is the period-average of the ratio of IMF loans to GDP,

all measured in U.S. dollars. Participation in an IMF program is the fraction of months

during each five-year period that a country operated under an IMF loan program. Thus,

participation varies (almost) continuously between zero and one. Approval is a binary

variable indicating that there was at least one new agreement on lending between the IMF

and a member country during a five-year period. Thus, the program approval variable

equals one if the IMF and the country made an agreement at any time during the five years.

In this paper, we consider only the short-term IMF stabilization programs (SBA and EFF).

As discussed before, there are substantial differences between stabilization programs and

structural programs.

           Using the size of IMF loans as the dependent variable, we specify a Tobit model to

take account of the censoring of the dependent variable at zero. The model is specified as



           (1)               Lit * = α + βX it + γZ it + δ * timet + uit ,

           (2)               Lit = max[0, Lit *] ,

where the dependent variable, Lit, is the loan-size variable for country i during period t.

10
     The sample excludes the countries that lacked IMF membership during each five-year period.



                                                       14
Lit =0 applies if the country did not have a loan agreement with the IMF during period t.

The vector Xit denotes the country-specific economic factors that influence the existence

and size of IMF programs. This vector includes the ratio of foreign reserves to imports, per

capita GDP, total GDP, lagged GDP growth, and the dummy for the group of advanced

OECD countries.11 The regression also includes period dummies (time) to control for

common effects of external factors such as world interest rates. The vector Zit comprises

the institutional and geopolitical factors that measure each country’s political-economy

connections to the IMF—the share of IMF quotas and staff, the political proximity to the

United States and the European countries (based on the U.N. voting patterns), and the

intensity of trade with the United States and the European countries. The variable uit is a

random error term.

        An evaluation of IMF program participation also requires a censored-regression

framework. The Tobit equation is specified as



        (3)               Fit * = α + βX it + γZ it + δ * timet + u it ,

        (4)               Fit = min[1, max(0, Fit *)] ,



where Xit, Zit, and time are defined as before. The dependent variable, Fit, is the fraction of

time for which country i participated in an IMF program during period t.




11
  This group consists of the countries other than Turkey that have been members of the OECD since the
1970s.




                                                    15
         Although loan size and IMF program participation are continuous variables,

program approval is a binary choice variable. In this case, we use a probit specification:



         (5)               I it * = α + βX it + γZ it + δ * timet + u it ,


                           I it = 1 if I it * > 0
         (6)
                               = 0 if I it * ≤ 0.



The dependent variable, Iit, equals one if country i made at least one loan agreement with

the IMF during period t and equals zero otherwise.

         The specifications in equations (1)-(6) can be viewed as reduced-form models that

reflect the demand for and supply of IMF loans. To minimize reverse-causality problems,

all explanatory variables are measured at the beginning of each period or as lagged values.

         We have tried various functional forms for each model and selected the ones that

delivered the best goodness-of-fit. It turns out that per capita GDP and the log of GDP each

enter as quadratics. The IMF quota share, the IMF staff share, the U.N. voting variables,

and the bilateral-trade-share variables enter as their log values.12

         The Tobit and probit estimation models apply to the panel data set of 130 countries

over the five five-year periods from 1975 to 1999. To estimate these systems, we use a

random-effects specification for the error terms. Our reasoning is that a country that is


12
  To keep the zero observations when making the log transformations, we added 0.0009 to each observation
of staff share, 0.0002 to each observation of quota share, and 0.0001 to each observation of bilateral trade
share. These values are the minimum non-zero observations for staff share, quota share, and bilateral trade
share in the sample. The results are not sensitive to the specific values added for the log transformations.



                                                      16
favored by the IMF in one period—due to unexplained factors—is likely to be similarly

favored in other periods.13 We have also estimated pooled Tobit or probit models in which

a robust variance matrix is used to account for any within-country correlation of the error

terms over time. With this alternative specification, the statistical significance of the

political-economy variables, especially the IMF staff share, rises substantially. The likely

reason is that the random-effects terms pick up a lot of the explanatory power of variables,

such as the shares of IMF staff and quotas, that tend to persist over time for a given country.

        The summary statistics for all variables are shown in Table 2. Over the sample

period, the average size of an IMF loan (including the zeroes) was 0.6% of GDP. Countries

on average participated in an IMF financial arrangement 19% of the time, and 36% of the

observations (for five-year periods) featured at least one IMF program approval.



2.3. Estimation Results for IMF Lending

        Table 3 presents estimation results for the Tobit equation for IMF loan size

(equations [1] and [2]). Consider first the results in columns 1-4. Column 1 excludes all

political-economy variables. Column 2 includes the IMF staff share and the U.N. voting

and trade intensity variables associated with the United States. Column 3 substitutes the

IMF quota share for the IMF staff share. Column 4 includes all four of these political-

economy variables.




13
 Random-effects Tobit or probit models assume strict exogeneity of the explanatory variables (see
Wooldridge [2002]).




                                                    17
         The lagged growth rate of GDP is significantly negative in all of the specifications.

The estimated coefficient in column 4 implies that, holding other variables constant, a

decline in GDP growth by 1 percentage point per year would increase the ratio of IMF

lending to GDP by 0.16 percentage point.

         The ratio of international reserves to imports is also significantly negative in all of

the specifications. The estimated coefficient in column 4 implies that a decrease in reserves

by one month of imports would raise the ratio of IMF lending to GDP by 0.2 percentage

point.

         The IMF loan size has a non-linear relationship with per capita GDP. In all

specifications, the level is significantly positive and the square is significantly negative.

(The two variables together are always jointly significant at a p-value less than 0.01.)

Hence, the probability of having an IMF program initially increases with per capita GDP

but later decreases. The estimated coefficients in column 4 imply that the switch occurs at

a per capita GDP of $2860 (1985 U.S. dollars), which is above the sample median of $2527.

The overall marginal effect of per capita GDP at the sample mean of $4481 is estimated to

be negative. At that point, an increase in per capita GDP by $1000 is estimated to decrease

the ratio of IMF lending to GDP by 0.3 percentage point.

         The positive relation between IMF lending and per capita GDP in the low range of

per capita GDP likely reflects the Fund’s reluctance to provide stabilization loans to

countries that are not creditworthy. The negative effect in the upper range of per capita

GDP likely signals the decreased demand for IMF loans among the rich countries, which

have other sources of credit.




                                                18
        We find that, after controlling for the log of per capita GDP and its square, the

dummy for the group of rich OECD countries has negative estimated coefficients in all of

the specifications. The estimated value is not statistically significant in columns 1-4 but is

marginally significant in some cases that we consider later.14 The negative coefficient on

the OECD dummy variable can be interpreted as another indicator of a low demand for

IMF loans by advanced economies.

        The log of total GDP enters as a level and its square. (Recall that we include these

variables mainly to be sure that the IMF quota and staff variables are not just proxies for

the scale of an economy.) The estimated coefficients are, in each case, positive for the

level of log(GDP) and negative for the square. The two coefficients are jointly marginally

significant in some cases, with p-values ranging from 0.04 in column 4 to 0.85 in column 2.

Thus, this scale variable appears not to be very important in the determination of IMF loan

size as a ratio to GDP. These variables turn out to be statistically more significant in some

of the systems for IMF program participation and approval.

        The results in columns 2-4 of Table 3 indicate that the political-economy variables

are important overall for explaining IMF lending decisions. When considered jointly, the

p-values for the statistical significance of these variables is between 0.0003 (column 4) and

0.014 (column 2)—see the line marked as p-value (a) in the table. If we consider the group

of these variables exclusive of the bilateral trade share with the United States, then the

p-values range from 0.0013 (column 4) to 0.048 (column 2)—see the line marked as

p-value (b).

14
  No substantial changes occur in the main results if we exclude the OECD dummy variable in the various
systems.



                                                    19
           In column 4, the economic proximity to the United States, as gauged by bilateral

trade, and the IMF quota share each have individually significantly positive estimated

effects at the 5% critical level. The estimated coefficients on the U.N. voting variable with

the United States and the IMF staff share are also positive and individually significant at

the 10% level.

           The estimated coefficients in column 4 imply that an increase in the log of the IMF

quota share by 1.24 (its standard deviation) raises the IMF loan size by 1.9 percent of GDP.

An increase in the log of the IMF staff share by 1.26 (the variable’s standard deviation) is

estimated to raise IMF lending by 0.4 percent of GDP.

           The results also indicate that IMF lending tends to increase when a country has high

political and economic proximity to the United States. An increase in the U.N. voting

variable for the United States by 0.48 (its standard deviation) is estimated to raise the ratio

of IMF lending to GDP by 0.4 percentage point. Similarly, an increase in the intensity of

trade with the United States by 1.5 (its standard deviation) is estimated to raise the ratio by

0.4 percentage point.

           Column 5 modifies the specification from column 4 to measure the U.N. voting and

trade intensity variables in relation to the IMF’s major European shareholders, rather than

the United States. The U.N. voting and bilateral trade variables are now averages for

France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. The estimated coefficient on the U.N. variable

for Europe is positive and marginally significant. The estimated effect of the European

trade variable is also positive but less statistically significant.15


15
     We report here only the results when the U.N. voting and trade variables are averages for the three



                                                         20
         Column 6 includes U.N. voting and trade intensity variables for the United States

together with those for the average of the European countries. In this setting, only the U.S.

trade intensity variable is individually statistically significant. However, the joint

significance of the political-economy variables is clear—the p-value is 0.0008 for all six

variables and 0.014 for the four variables exclusive of the two trade intensity measures.

         Figure 1 shows graphically the effect of each explanatory variable on the ratio of

IMF lending to GDP, based on the estimation results in columns 4 and 5 of Table 3. Since

the responses refer to a one-standard-deviation change of each explanatory variable, the

figure can be used to gauge the relative importance of each variable in influencing the size

of IMF loans.

         For example, based on column 4 of Table 3, a reduction in international reserves (by

one standard deviation or 2.9 months of imports) raises IMF lending by 0.5 percent of GDP.

A decline in GDP growth (by one standard deviation or 0.035) increases the IMF loan-to-

GDP ratio by 0.5 percentage point. An increase in the log of per capita GDP (by one

standard deviation or 4.7, starting from the sample mean) generates a reduction in the loan

size by 1.4 percent of GDP.

         Figure 1 also shows the effects from the political-economy variables. Again using

the estimates from column 4 of Table 3, an increase in the log of the IMF quota (by one

standard deviation or 1.24) has a particularly large effect—the loan-to-GDP ratio rises by


European countries. Since the U.N. voting variables for France, Germany, and the United Kingdom are
highly correlated (correlation coefficients above 0.95), it is hard to disentangle the effects for the individual
countries. The correlations between the U.N. voting variables for the United States and for each of the
European countries is much lower—ranging from 0.7 to 0.8. The trade intensity variables are substantially
less correlated than the voting variables, ranging from 0.03 (between the United States and France) to 0.45
(between France and Germany).



                                                        21
1.9 percentage point. The corresponding response to an increase in the log of IMF staff (by

one standard deviation or 1.26) is by 0.4 percent of GDP. If a country votes more often

with the United States in the United Nations (that is, the log of the variable rises by one

standard deviation or 0.48), then the IMF loan-to-GDP ratio rises by 0.4 percentage point.

The corresponding effect from a rise in the trade intensity variable for the United States (by

one standard deviation or 1.50) is an increase by 0.4 percentage point.

        For the European variables, we use the estimates shown in column 5 of Table 3. If

a country votes more often with the average of the European countries in the United

Nations (that is, the log of the variable increases by one standard deviation or 0.35), then

the IMF loan-to-GDP ratio rises by 0.4 percentage point. The corresponding effect from a

rise in the trade intensity variable for Europe (by one standard deviation or 1.0) is an

increase by 0.3 percentage point.

        Table 4 presents estimation results from the Tobit equations for IMF program

participation, as specified in equations (3) and (4). The results are, in most respects, similar

to those for loan size. For example, the p-values for joint significance of the political-

economy variables are all below 0.03. The estimated coefficients on the IMF quota share,

IMF staff share, and the U.N. voting variable with the United States are all positive and

individually at least marginally significant in columns 2-4. The estimated coefficient on the

U.N. voting variable for Europe is also significantly positive in column 5. However, the

trade intensity variables are not statistically significant in the specifications in Table 4.

Figure 2 illustrates the results graphically.




                                                22
         Table 5 presents the estimation results from the probit equations for the approval of

IMF programs, as specified in equations (5) and (6). The results are, in many respects,

similar to those found in the previous tables for loan size and loan participation. However,

the statistical significance of the political-economy variables tends to be less than that

found before. For example, in column 4, which uses the U.S. variables for U.N. voting and

trade intensity, the four political-economy variables are jointly significant with a p-value of

0.034. However, if the trade variable is omitted, then the remaining three variables are

jointly only marginally significant—the p-value is 0.096. Figure 3 shows the estimated

effects graphically.16



III. Effects of IMF Programs on Economic Growth

3.1. Methodological Issues

         A number of previous studies have used cross-country data to assess the effects of IMF

programs on economic performance, including economic growth, investment, inflation, and

the balance of payments. A variety of methodologies have been applied to these evaluations.

         An assessment of the impact of an IMF adjustment program requires an evaluation of

the performance of program countries in comparison with the performance that would have

prevailed in the absence of the IMF assistance. In other words, we have to evaluate whether

the IMF programs were associated with better or worse economic outcomes than would

otherwise have occurred. It is difficult conceptually and practically to construct this

counterfactual in order to disentangle the effects of IMF programs from those of other factors.

16
  The point estimate for the effect of European trade intensity in column 5 is negative—this result is not
shown in Figure 3.



                                                      23
       The basic problem is that IMF program participation is an endogenous choice, as

shown in the previous section. Program participation applies to countries that self-select

themselves based on their economic and political circumstances.

       Many studies have used the “before-after” approach or the “with-without” approach

to assess the impact of an IMF adjustment program (see the survey in Haque and Khan

[1998]). The before-after approach uses non-parametric statistical methods, which compare

performance during a program with that prior to the program. Thus, this approach assumes

that, if not for the program, the performance indicators would have taken their pre-crisis

values (at least up to random error terms). We regard this assumption as unreasonable

because participation in an IMF program typically reflects changed circumstances for a

country.

       The with-without methodology compares the behavior of key variables in the

program countries to their behavior in non-program countries, which constitute a control

group. Thus, this procedure assumes that only the exogenous imposition of an IMF

program distinguishes the program countries from the control group. We regard this

assumption as untenable, because participation in an IMF program typically reflects

circumstances that differ between program and non-program countries. Hence, we believe

that the before-after and with-without approaches do not adequately address the selection-

bias problem.

           Following Goldstein and Montiel (1986), a number of studies adopted a new

approach to assess the economic impact of IMF programs. This method is called the

Generalized Evaluation Estimator (GEE). This approach attempts to correct for the non-




                                             24
random selection of program countries by using the Heckman selection model. The GEE

method first estimates an equation for participation in an IMF program and then calculates

Heckman’s inverse Mills ratio, which gives an estimated probability of program

participation. Then the approach controls for non-random self-selection in the estimation

of the equations for economic performance by including the inverse Mills ratio in those

equations. Thus, this approach tries to control for non-random selection into IMF programs

by holding fixed a measure of the probability of this selection.

       The GEE method has, according to Haque and Khan (1998), become “the estimator

of choice in evaluating the effects of Fund-supported adjustment programs.” This situation

is surprising because the approach has obvious shortcomings. The basic problem is that the

method typically does not include variables in the selection equation that are excluded (on

reasonable grounds) from the economic-performance equations. Hence, identification

depends implicitly on auxiliary restrictions, for example, on assumptions about the

distributions of error terms and on the exclusion of non-linear terms in the performance

equations. Since these auxiliary assumptions tend to be fragile, the inclusion of an inverse

Mills ratio typically does not provide an adequate correction for selection bias.

       An alternative approach is the classical instrument-variables technique. If available,

an instrument that is exogenous to the dependent variable in an economic performance

equation can be used to control for the endogeneity of IMF lending. The only reason that

this method has not been the “estimator of choice” in evaluating IMF or other programs is

the lack of good instruments. We believe that our political and institutional analysis of IMF




                                              25
lending provides good candidates for instruments and, therefore, argues for the use of the

instrumental-variables technique to evaluate the economic effects of this lending.



3.2. Impacts of IMF Programs on Economic Growth

       In this section we investigate the effects of IMF lending programs on economic

growth. The existing literature provides conflicting results on the growth effects of IMF

programs, depending on the sample and methodology. According to Haque and Kahn

(1998), among eleven studies based on the before-after or with-without approach, only one

found a statistically significant positive impact. The others found either a zero effect or

weak positive impacts from IMF programs. However, given the underlying methodological

problems, it is unclear what to make of this record.

       Studies based on the GEE method present more diverse results. Kahn (1990)

reported that IMF program participation significantly lowered the growth rate in the

program year, but the adverse effects diminished over time. Przeworski and Vreeland

(2000) and Hutchison (2001) found that participation in an IMF program led to sizable

reductions in output growth. In contrast, Conway (1994) observed that participation in an

IMF program significantly raised the growth rate over the one to two years subsequent to

the program. Dicks-Mireaux, Mecagni, and Schadler (2000) also found statistically

significant beneficial effects of IMF structural-adjustment programs on economic growth.

Given the unclear basis for identification in these approaches, it is not surprising that the

conclusions are so varied.




                                               26
        We assess the effects of IMF program participation on economic growth by

extending previous work in several ways. Most importantly, we use an instrumental-

variables approach, using the instruments suggested by our analysis of the determinants of

IMF lending. The instruments that we employ are the IMF national staff and quota variables

and the variables that measure a country’s political and economic proximity to the United

States and the major European countries. As discussed before, these proximity variables are

based on the patterns in U.N. voting and bilateral trade.17

        Many previous studies used annual data to focus on the impact of IMF program

participation over relatively short time periods, mostly one or two years. However, it is

hard to distinguish long-term growth from business cycles at an annual frequency.

Therefore, our empirical analysis uses cross-country data at a five-year frequency. We use

panel data for over 80 countries, and we utilize the cross-country growth framework that

has been extensively investigated in the literature (see, for example, Barro [2000]). After

controlling for other growth determinants isolated in this previous work, we can assess the

impact of IMF program participation on growth over the contemporaneous five-year period

and for the subsequent five-year period.

        Since the general approach has been described in previous studies and is likely to be

familiar, we provide only a brief discussion. We include the following variables as

determinants of the growth rate of per capita GDP: (1) the log of initial per capita GDP; (2)

human resources (educational attainment, life expectancy, and fertility); (3) the ratio of

17
 We also include a dummy for IMF membership as an additional instrument in order to control for the non-
member countries that were not eligible for IMF loans. Since there are only three observations for non-
members in the sample, this IMF membership dummy does not play a significant role.




                                                   27
investment to GDP; (4) changes in the terms of trade (export prices relative to import

prices); and (5) institutional and policy variables (government consumption, a subjective

index of the rule of law, international openness, and inflation).18 For the measure of

educational attainment, we use the average years of school attainment of males aged 25 and

over at the secondary and higher levels. Government consumption is measured by the ratio

of government consumption (exclusive of outlays on education and defense) to GDP. The

rule-of-law index comes from an evaluation by an international consulting firm that

provides advice to international investors. The openness measure is the ratio of exports

plus imports to GDP, filtered for the usual effect of country size (the logs of population and

area) on this trade measure.

        Table 6 presents the regressions results. The dependent variables are the five-year

growth rates of per capita GDP for the periods 1975-80, 1980-85, 1985-90, 1990-95, and

1995-2000. Estimation is by three-stage least squares, using mostly lagged values of the

independent variables as instruments (see the notes to Table 6). Most explanatory variables

enter significantly with the expected signs. Initial per capita GDP, fertility, government

consumption, and inflation are significantly negative. Schooling, life expectancy,

international openness, and the growth rate of the terms of trade are significantly positive.

Some variables, notably the investment ratio, are statistically insignificant in these systems.


18
   In a preliminary version of this paper, we also included in the growth equations dummy variables for the
occurrence of currency and banking crises. We found, as in Barro (2001), that currency and banking crises
had significantly negative estimated coefficients in the contemporaneous five-year period. In the subsequent
five-year period, the impacts became positive but were smaller in magnitude than the initial effects. In the
present analysis, we exclude the currency and banking variables because they are endogenous—that is, they
would be related to current economic outcomes, such as the rate of economic growth. Moreover, we lack
adequate instruments for the currency and banking crisis variables.




                                                     28
       Our primary interest is in the impact of IMF programs. We focus on the effects of

IMF loan size and program participation because these variables seem to be more relevant

than program approval for the assessment of the effects of IMF programs on economic

growth.

       Column 1 of Table 6 includes as an independent variable the contemporaneous IMF

loan size as a ratio to GDP. Column 2 allows also for a lagged effect. In the estimation for

these columns, we include the actual values of current and lagged IMF loan size as a ratio

to GDP in the instrument lists. Thus, these results do not take account of the endogeneity

of IMF lending.

       Column 1 shows that the contemporaneous impact of IMF loan size on growth is

significantly negative. The estimated coefficient (-0.257, s.e. =0.062) implies that an

increase in IMF lending by 1 percent of GDP lowers the growth rate contemporaneously by

0.26 percentage point per year. However, our presumption is that this strong inverse

relation between IMF lending and growth reflects the endogeneity of the lending.

       Column 2 allows for contemporaneous and lagged effects of IMF lending. The

estimated contemporaneous effect is similar to that in column 1. The estimated lagged

effect is also negative, and the estimated coefficient is marginally significant at the 10%

level (-0.118, s.e.=0.063).

       Columns 3 and 4 include the IMF loan size and program participation together. The

idea is that the participation variable would pick up any effect of program involvement that

was independent of the size of the loan. In the estimation for these columns, the instrument

lists include current and lagged IMF program participation along with current and lagged




                                              29
loan size. That is, no correction for endogeneity applies. The regression results show that

the estimated coefficients on IMF program participation—contemporaneous and lagged—

differ insignificantly from zero. That is, IMF involvement, independent of loan size, does

not seem to be relevant for economic growth.

           In columns 5-8, the estimation technique changes to use as instruments the log of

the IMF staff share, the log of the IMF quota share, the log of the fraction of U.N. votes

along with the United States and the European countries, and the log of the intensity of

trade with the United States and the European countries.19 The actual values

(contemporaneous and lagged) of IMF loan size and participation are excluded from the

instrument lists.

           The results in column 5 should be compared with those in column 1. With the use

of the instrumental variables, the estimated coefficient on the contemporaneous IMF loan

size becomes smaller in magnitude than before and is now statistically insignificantly

different from zero (-0.122, s.e. =0.092). In column 6, which adds the lagged loan size, the

estimated coefficient on the lagged value is larger in magnitude than that in column 2 and is

now individually significant at the 1 percent level (-0.272, s.e.=0.097). Hence, an increase

in IMF lending by 1 percent of GDP is estimated to lower the growth rate in the subsequent

five-year period by 0.27 percentage point per year.

           Hence, where we use the political-economy variables as instruments, we find that

contemporaneous IMF lending is insignificantly related to growth (although the point

estimate is still negative). However, lagged lending has a larger negative effect than before.

19
     Columns 5-8 include contemporaneous and lagged values of these variables in the instrument lists.




                                                       30
In other words, although it is often argued that an IMF program retards economic growth in

the short run but improves it in the long run, our instrumental estimates suggest a different

pattern. We find that an IMF program may not have much deleterious effect in the short

run (over a contemporaneous five-year period) but does seem to have a substantial adverse

effect in the longer run (over the next five years).

        Columns 7 and 8 apply instrumental estimation to the systems that include current

and lagged IMF program participation. The point estimates for the participation variables

are negative, but the estimated coefficients are never statistically significant. Hence, we

still find that IMF program involvement does not seem to matter for growth independently

of the loan size.



IV. Concluding Observations

        We began by taking a political-economy approach to the IMF’s lending decisions.

Holding fixed a set of standard economic variables, IMF lending was influenced by a

country’s presence at the Fund, as measured by the country’s share of quotas and

professional staff. IMF lending was also sensitive to a country’s political and economic

proximity to some major shareholding countries of the Fund—the United States, France,

Germany, and the United Kingdom. We measured political proximity by voting patterns in

the U.N. General Assembly and economic proximity by bilateral trading volumes. The set

of political-economy variables was statistically significant overall for explaining the size of

IMF loans, the frequency of participation in IMF lending programs, and the probability of

IMF loan approval.




                                               31
       This political-economy analysis of IMF lending practices is of substantial interest

for its own sake. However, we also use the results to create a set of instrumental variables

to use to estimate the effects of IMF lending on economic growth. If we do not

instrument—that is, if the instrument lists include the IMF lending variables—then IMF

lending is estimated to have a substantial inverse relation to growth in the contemporaneous

five-year period. However, this relation likely reflects reverse causation, whereby adverse

economic conditions generate greater IMF involvement.

       The instrumental estimates indicate that the contemporaneous relation of IMF

lending to economic growth is statistically insignificant (although the point estimate of the

coefficient is still negative). However, IMF lending has a statistically significant negative

influence on economic growth in the subsequent five-year period. Therefore, although IMF

lending may not influence growth a lot in the short run, this lending seems to have a

substantial adverse effect in the longer run—that is, with a lag on the order of five years.

       We plan further research to assess the effects of IMF lending on other economic

variables, such as investment, inflation, fiscal deficits, and current-account deficits. We

plan also to apply methodologies analogous to the one developed in this study to evaluate

the economic effects of lending programs by the World Bank and of foreign-aid programs.




                                              32
                                        References



Alesina, A. and D. Dollar (2000). “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?” Journal

       of Economic Growth, 5, 33-64.

Ball, R. and C. Johnson (1996). “Political, Economic, and Humanitarian Motivations for

       PL 480 Food Aid: Evidence from Africa,” Economic Development and Cultural

       Change, 44, 515-547.

Bandow, D. and I. Vasquez, eds. (1994). Perpetuating Poverty: The World Bank, the IMF,

       and the Developing World, Washington D.C., CATO Institute.

Barro, R.J. (1998). "The IMF Doesn’t Put Out Fires, It Starts Them,” Business Week,

       December 7.

Barro, R.J. (2000). “Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries,” Journal of

       Economic Growth, March, 5-32.

Barro, R.J. (2001). "Economic Growth in East Asia Before and After the Financial Crisis,”

       NBER Working Paper 8330, June.

Bird, G. and D. Rowlands (2001). “IMF Lending: How Is It Affected by Economic,

       Political and Institutional Factors,” Journal of Policy Reform, 4, 243-270.

Bordo, M. and H. James (2000). “The International Monetary Fund: Its Present Role in

       Historical Perspective,” NBER Working Paper 7724, June.

Conway, P. (1994). ”IMF Lending Programs: Participation and Impact,” Journal of

       Development Economics, 45, 365-391.




                                            33
Dicks-Mireaux, L., M. Mecagni, and S. Schadler (2000). “Evaluating the Effect of IMF

       Lending to Low-Income Countries,” Journal of Development Economics, 61, 495-

       526.

Frankel, J.A. and A.K. Rose (1996). "Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An

       Empirical Treatment," Journal of International Economics, 41, 351-368.

Goldstein, M. and P. Montiel (1986). “Evaluating Fund Stabilization Programs with Multi-

       Country Data: Some Methodological Pitfalls,” IMF Staff Papers, 33, 304-344.

Haque, N. and M.S. Kahn (1998). "Do IMF-Supported Programs Work? A Survey of the

       Cross-Country Empirical Evidence," IMF Working Paper, WP/98/169.

Hutchison, M. (2001). “A Cure Worse Than the Disease? Currency Crises and the Output

       Costs of IMF-Supported Stabilization Program,” NBER Working Paper 8305, May.

IMF (1998). Financial Organization and Operations of the IMF, Pamphlet Series No. 45,

       1998.

IMF (2000). Annual Report 2000, Washington D.C.

Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (1992), United Nations Roll

       Call Data, 1946-1985, computer file, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Kahn, M.S. (1990). “The Macroeconomic Effects of Fund-Supported Adjustment

       Programs,” IMF Staff Papers, 37, 195-231.

Knight, M. and J. Santaella, (1997). “Economic Determinants of IMF Financial

       Arrangements,” Journal of Development Economics, 54, 495-526.

Krueger, A. (1998). “Whither the World Bank and the IMF?” Journal of Economic

       Literature, 30, 1983-2000.




                                            34
Park, Y.C. and J.W. Lee (2001). "Recovery and Sustainability in East Asia,” NBER

       Working Paper 8373, July.

Przeworski, A. and J.R. Vreeland (2000). ”The Effect of IMF Programs on Economic

       Growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 62, 385-421.

Stiglitz, J. (2000). “What I Learned at the World Economic Crisis,” The New Republic, 17

       April.

Summers, R. and A. Heston (1991). "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set

       of International Comparisons, 1950-1988," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May,

       327-368. An updated version (Mark 5.6) is available at www.nber.org.

Thacker, S.C. (1999). “The High Politics of IMF Lending,” World Politics, 52, 38-75.

Wooldridge, J.M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,

       Cambridge MA, MIT Press.




                                           35
       Table 1. Approval of IMF Programs, Fiscal Years 1970-2000
                            Number of programs approved
            (total amount committed under arrangements in million of SDRs)



                  Stabilization Programs        Structural Programs
     Period          SBA          EFF            SAF      ESAF/PRGF     Total

   1970-1974           82                                                  82
                    (4,913)                                             (4,913)
   1975-1979           83           7                                      90
                    (8,091)      (1,895)                                (9,945)
   1980-1984          116          26                                     142
                   (20,520)     (22,692)                               (43,213)
   1985-1989           90           3             29          7           129
                   (14,117)      (1,277)        (1,455)     (955)      (17,804)
   1990-1994           79          12              8         27           126
                   (14,974)     (14,479)         (130)     (3,309)     (32,893)
   1995-2000           72          24              1         59           156
                   (83,250)     (36,659)         (182)     (6,961)    (126,052)


Notes: An approval of an IMF program indicates that a new IMF financial arrangement
was approved for a country in the fiscal year (FY2000 corresponds to the period from May
1, 1999 to April 30, 2000). SBA is Stand-by Arrangement, EFF is Extended Fund Facility,
SAF is Structural Adjustment Facility, and ESAF is the Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility. The ESAF was replaced by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) in
1999.

Source: IMF (2000, Appendix Table II-1).




                                           36
            Table 2. Summary Statistics for Variables Used in Regressions


Variable                                              Mean     Median        σ
Loan size (ratio to GDP)                              0.006      0          0.017
Participation in IMF stabilization programs (EFF      0.187      0          0.282
and SBA only)

Approval of IMF stabilization programs (EFF and       0.358      0          0.480
SBA only)

GDP growth rate (lagged)                              0.012    0.013        0.035
International reserves (months of imports)            3.291    2.634        2.866
Real GDP per capita (1985 U.S. thousand dollars)      4.481    2.527        4.653
Log(real GDP) (1985 U.S. million dollars)             9.805    9.551        2.094
Group of advanced OECD countries                      0.179      0          0.384
IMF quota share (log)                                 -5.806   -6.162       1.240

IMF staff share (log)                                 -5.640   -5.795       1.256
Political proximity to the United States (log)        -1.433   -1.416       0.479
Political proximity to major Europe (log)             -0.883   -0.965       0.346
Intensity of trade with the United States (log)       -3.132   -3.090       1.503
Intensity of trade with major Europe (log)            -3.412   -3.332       0.980




                                                 37
                                       Notes to Table 2

       The sample consists of 603 observations for the five five-year periods from 1975 to
1999. Loan size is the period average of the ratio of IMF loans to GDP. Only the EFF and
SBA loans are included here. Participation is the fraction of time that a country was in an
IMF stabilization program in each five-year period. Approval is a dummy variable that
equals one if a new IMF stabilization program was approved at any time during each of the
periods. Data on GDP come from Summers and Heston (1991), PWT 5.6, and updates
based on GDP growth rates from the World Bank and IMF. The group of advanced OECD
countries consists of countries other than Turkey that have been members of the OECD
since the 1970s. The share of IMF staff nationals is the fraction of own nationals in IMF
economists. The share of IMF quota is the fraction of each country’s quota in the IMF total.
Political proximity to the United States is the log value of the fraction of times out of all
votes that each country voted in the U.N. General Assembly along with the United States.
Political proximity to major Europe is the average value of the political proximity measures
for France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Trade intensity with the United States is
the bilateral trade (exports and imports) between a country and the United States, expressed
as a ratio to the country’s GDP. Trade intensity with major Europe is the average value of
the trade intensity measures for France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. All variables
except the GDP growth rate and the IMF program approval, participation, and loan size are
the values at the beginning of each period. The GDP growth rate is the average over the
previous five-year period.




                                               38
                         Table 3. Determinants of IMF Loan Size


                         (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
GDP growth rate         -0.224       -0.196        -0.159      -0.157      -0.167     -0.164
                        (0.044)     (0.043)       (0.044)     (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.044)
International         -0.00205     -0.00184      -0.00186    -0.00188    -0.00194   -0.00176
reserves              (0.00055)   (0.00060)     (0.00060)   (0.00059)   (0.00060)   (0.00059)
GDP per capita          0.0072      0.0056        0.0051      0.0053      0.0060      0.0050
                       (0.0020)    (0.0024)      (0.0023)    (0.0023)    (0.0023)    (0.0023)
GDP per capita        -0.00099     -0.00089      -0.00092    -0.00093    -0.00096   -0.00090
squared               (0.00023)   (0.00025)     (0.00025)   (0.00024)   (0.00025)   (0.00024)
Log(GDP)                0.0067      0.0014        0.0059      0.0057      0.0097      0.0052
                       (0.0060)    (0.0073)      (0.0074)    (0.0072)    (0.0072)    (0.0072)
Log(GDP) squared      -0.00026     -0.00004      -0.00057    -0.00062    -0.00075   -0.00052
                      (0.00031)   (0.00038)     (0.00042)   (0.00041)   (0.00042)   (0.00042)
Group of advanced      -0.0085      -0.0131       -0.0110     -0.0135     -0.0197    -0.0172
OECD countries         (0.0082)    (0.0100)      (0.0098)    (0.0097)    (0.0105)    (0.0102)
Log(IMF quota)             --           --        0.0149      0.0149      0.0133      0.0130
                                                 (0.0049)    (0.0048)    (0.0052)    (0.0050)
Log(IMF staff)           --        0.0031             --      0.0032      0.0029      0.0030
                                  (0.0020)                   (0.0019)    (0.0020)    (0.0019)
Political proximity      --        0.0100        0.0090       0.0084          --      0.0036
to the U.S.                       (0.0055)      (0.0055)     (0.0055)                (0.0087)
Political proximity      --           --            --            --     0.0106       0.0076
to major Europe                                                         (0.0073)     (0.0117)
Intensity of trade       --        0.0024        0.0023      0.0024         --        0.0025
with the U.S.                     (0.0011)      (0.0011)    (0.0011)                 (0.0011)
Intensity of trade       --           --            --          --       0.0026       0.0024
with major Europe                                                       (0.0021)     (0.0020)
p-value (a)              --        0.014         0.0005      0.0003      0.0018       0.0008
          (b)                      0.048         0.0017      0.0013      0.0088        0.014
Number of obs.          603         603            603         603         603          603




                                           39
                                       Notes to Table 3

       The dependent variable is the average of the ratio of the amount of IMF loans (SBA
and EFF only) to GDP over the five-year periods 1975-1979, 1980-1984,…,1995-1999.
Tobit estimation with a random-effects specification was applied to the panel data for the
five five-year periods. The summary statistics for all variables are shown in Table 2. See
the notes to Table 2 for definitions of variables. Period dummies are included (not shown).
Standard errors of the estimated coefficients are reported in parentheses. The p-value (a)
indicates the significance level associated with the test of the joint hypothesis that the
coefficients on the included political-economy variables—IMF quota share, IMF staff share,
U.N. voting variable, and trade intensity variable—are all equal to zero. The p-value (b)
applies to the same group of variables except for the trade intensity variable.




                                               40
                  Table 4. Determinants of IMF Program Participation

                           (1)         (2)             (3)      (4)        (5)          (6)
GDP growth rate          -2.01        -1.97           -1.60      -1.59      -1.67     -1.64
                         (0.72)      (0.72)          (0.75)     (0.75)     (0.75)     (0.75)
International          -0.0306      -0.0298         -0.0292    -0.0298    -0.0308   -0.0292
reserves               (0.0105)    (0.0103)        (0.0104)   (0.0103)   (0.0103)   (0.0103)
GDP per capita           0.115       0.102           0.096      0.101      0.107      0.095
                        (0.045)     (0.043)         (0.044)    (0.043)    (0.043)    (0.043)
GDP per capita         -0.0180      -0.0173         -0.0176    -0.0178    -0.0180   -0.0172
squared                (0.0047)    (0.0045)        (0.0046)   (0.0045)   (0.0045)   (0.0044)
Log(GDP)                 0.222       0.192           0.244      0.239      0.299      0.242
                        (0.136)     (0.134)         (0.140)    (0.137)    (0.133)    (0.136)
Log(GDP) squared       -0.0082      -0.0078         -0.0133    -0.0140    -0.0165   -0.0136
                       (0.0071)    (0.0069)        (0.0080)   (0.0078)   (0.0078)   (0.0079)
Group of advanced        -0.14        -0.26           -0.21      -0.30      -0.38     -0.35
OECD countries           (0.18)      (0.18)          (0.18)     (0.18)     (0.19)     (0.19)
Log(IMF quota)              --          --           0.165      0.156      0.146      0.140
                                                    (0.093)    (0.092)    (0.095)    (0.094)
Log(IMF staff )           --         0.065              --      0.062      0.058      0.059
                                    (0.035)                    (0.035)    (0.035)    (0.035)
Political proximity       --         0.185          0.173       0.167         --     -0.016
to the U.S.                         (0.095)        (0.095)     (0.095)               (0.148)
Political proximity       --           --             --           --     0.286       0.308
to major Europe                                                          (0.126)     (0.197)
Intensity of trade        --        0.0273          0.0254     0.0260       --       0.0288
with the U.S.                      (0.0200)        (0.0202)   (0.0199)              (0.0200)
Intensity of trade        --           --              --         --      0.017       0.014
with major Europe                                                        (0.037)     (0.036)
p-value (a)               --        0.022           0.025      0.013      0.010       0.017
         (b)                        0.022           0.026      0.014      0.009       0.018
Number of obs.           603         603             603        603        603         603

Note: Participation is the fraction of time that a country was in an IMF stabilization
program in each five-year period. Tobit estimation with a random effects-specification was
used. See the notes to Tables 2 and 3 for additional information.




                                              41
                  Table 5. Determinants of Approval of IMF Programs

                           (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
GDP growth rate          -6.43       -6.22           -5.65      -5.61      -5.61     -5.54
                         (2.21)     (2.18)          (2.29)     (2.28)     (2.30)     (2.28)
International           -0.101      -0.091          -0.091     -0.091     -0.100    -0.092
reserves                (0.031)    (0.030)         (0.031)    (0.030)    (0.031)    (0.030)
GDP per capita           0.278      0.212          0.2001      0.210      0.263      0.210
                        (0.122)    (0.116)         (0.118)    (0.117)    (0.118)    (0.117)
GDP per capita         -0.0409     -0.0371         -0.0373    -0.0378    -0.0413   -0.0378
squared                (0.0126)   (0.0118)        (0.0121)   (0.0119)   (0.0122)   (0.0119)
Log(GDP)                  0.77       0.61            0.70       0.67       0.89       0.69
                         (0.37)     (0.36)          (0.38)     (0.37)     (0.37)     (0.37)
Log(GDP) squared       -0.0298     -0.0245         -0.0319    -0.0333    -0.0453   -0.0351
                       (0.0193)   (0.0187)        (0.0215)   (0.0211)   (0.0213)   (0.0212)
Group of advanced        -0.61       -0.83           -0.72      -0.85      -1.08     -0.93
OECD countries           (0.47)     (0.47)          (0.47)     (0.47)     (0.50)     (0.49)
Log(IMF quota)              --         --            0.23       0.22       0.26       0.24
                                                    (0.25)     (0.25)     (0.26)     (0.25)
Log(IMF staff )           --        0.144              --      0.143      0.146      0.142
                                   (0.099)                    (0.099)    (0.101)    (0.099)
Political proximity       --         0.49           0.49        0.46         --       0.13
to the U.S.                         (0.28)         (0.28)      (0.28)                (0.46)
Political proximity       --          --             --           --      0.70        0.59
to major Europe                                                          (0.39)      (0.63)
Intensity of trade        --        0.110          0.108      0.107        --        0.115
with the U.S.                      (0.059)        (0.060)    (0.059)                (0.059)
Intensity of trade        --          --             --         --       -0.029     -0.045
with major Europe                                                       (0.100)     (0.099)
p-value (a)               --        0.023          0.044      0.034      0.126       0.074
         (b)                        0.063          0.123      0.096      0.068       0.116
Number of obs.           603         603            603        603        603         603

Note: Approval is a dummy variable that equals one if a new IMF stabilization program
was approved in any year of each of the five-year periods. Probit estimation with a
random-effects specification was used. See the notes to Tables 2 and 3 for additional
information.




                                             42
               Table 6. Effects of IMF Programs on Economic Growth
         (panel of five 5-year periods for 81 countries over the period 1975-2000)

                                  (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)
Instruments                               Actual values of IMF loan size and
                                               program participation
Log(per capita GDP)            -0.0235          -0.0243        -0.0239          -0.0257
                               (0.0043)        (0.0043)       (0.0044)         (0.0045)
Male upper-level                0.0036          0.0033         0.0037           0.0037
schooling                      (0.0019)        (0.0019)       (0.0019)         (0.0019)
Log(life expectancy)             0.036           0.040          0.038            0.045
                                (0.019)         (0.019)        (0.020)          (0.020)
Log(total fertility rate)      -0.0258            -0.0266       -0.0253         -0.0262
                               (0.0063)          (0.0063)      (0.0064)        (0.0063)
Investment/GDP                   0.011             0.005         -0.009          -0.002
                                (0.033)           (0.032)       (0.034)         (0.033)
Government                      -0.078             -0.075        -0.079          -0.078
consumption/GDP                 (0.026)           (0.026)       (0.026)         (0.026)
Rule-of-law index               0.0056            0.0061        0.0057          0.0066
                               (0.0079)          (0.0078)      (0.0079)        (0.0078)
Openness measure                0.0141            0.0140        0.0143          0.0146
                               (0.0044)          (0.0043)      (0.0045)        (0.0044)
Inflation rate                 -0.0191            -0.0213       -0.0182         -0.0183
                               (0.0082)          (0.0079)      (0.0082)        (0.0078)
Growth rate of terms of          0.071             0.075         0.074           0.078
trade                           (0.026)           (0.026)       (0.026)         (0.026)
Contemporaneous IMF             -0.257             -0.243        -0.229          -0.222
loan                            (0.062)           (0.062)       (0.072)         (0.072)
Lagged IMF loan                    --              -0.118           --           -0.100
                                                  (0.063)                       (0.070)
Contemporaneous IMF               --                --          -0.0041         -0.0025
participation                                                  (0.0055)        (0.0057)
Lagged IMF                        --                --             --           -0.0035
participation                                                                  (0.0056)
p-value                         0.0001           0.0000         0.0001          0.0002




                                            43
                               Table 6, Continued

                              (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
Instruments                                    IMF quotas and staff,
                                   political proximity to the U.S. and Europe,
                                    trade intensity with the U.S. and Europe
Log(per capita GDP)         -0.0225            -0.0251        -0.0238       -0.0268
                            (0.0044)          (0.0043)       (0.0045)      (0.0046)
Male upper-level             0.0035            0.0031         0.0039        0.0036
schooling                   (0.0019)          (0.0019)       (0.0020)      (0.0019)
Log(life expectancy)          0.038             0.046          0.044         0.054
                             (0.020)           (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.020)
Log(total fertility rate)   -0.0265            -0.0278        -0.0254       -0.0264
                            (0.0065)          (0.0063)       (0.0066)      (0.0065)
Investment/GDP               -0.002             -0.007         -0.014        -0.020
                             (0.032)           (0.032)        (0.033)       (0.033)
Government                   -0.066             -0.062         -0.070        -0.067
consumption/GDP              (0.026)           (0.026)        (0.027)       (0.027)
Rule-of-law index            0.0091            0.0105         0.0084        0.0099
                            (0.0082)          (0.0080)       (0.0082)      (0.0081)
Openness measure             0.0143            0.0139         0.0147        0.0143
                            (0.0045)          (0.0043)       (0.0045)      (0.0044)
Inflation rate              -0.0182            -0.0196        -0.0170       -0.0188
                            (0.0067)          (0.0067)       (0.0068)      (0.0069)
Growth rate of terms of       0.074             0.082          0.081         0.089
trade                        (0.026)           (0.027)        (0.026)       (0.027)
Contemporaneous IMF          -0.122             -0.084         -0.039        -0.007
loan                         (0.092)           (0.096)        (0.108)       (0.112)
Lagged IMF loan                 --              -0.272            --         -0.265
                                               (0.097)                      (0.116)
Contemporaneous IMF             --                 --         -0.0125       -0.0115
participation                                                (0.0081)      (0.0087)
Lagged IMF                      --                 --             --        -0.0021
participation                                                              (0.0091)
p-value                       0.188             0.007          0.118         0.015




                                        44
                                       Notes to Table 6

       The system has 5 equations, corresponding to the periods 1975-80, 1980-85, 1985-
90, 1990-95, and 1995-2000. The dependent variables are the growth rates of per capita
GDP. Data on GDP through 1992 are from Summers and Heston (1991), Penn World
Table 5.6. Figures were updated through 2000 from the World Bank, World Development
Indicators, and the IMF, World Economic Outlook. The log of per capita GDP and the
average years of male secondary and higher schooling are measured at the beginning of
each period. The log of life expectancy at birth is an average for the previous five years.
The ratios of government consumption (exclusive of spending on education and defense)
and investment (private plus public) to GDP, the inflation rate, the total fertility rate, and
the growth rate of the terms of trade (export over import prices) are period averages. The
rule-of-law index is the earliest value available (for 1982 or 1985) in the first equation and
the period average for the other equations. The openness measure is the ratio of exports
plus imports to GDP, filtered for the estimated effects on this measure from the logs of
population and area.
       Estimation is by three-stage least squares. Instruments are the actual values of the
schooling, life-expectancy, openness variable, terms-of-trade variable, dummy variables for
prior colonial status (which have substantial explanatory power for inflation), and lagged
values of the log of per capita GDP, the government consumption ratio, the investment ratio,
and the rule-of-law index. The actual values of contemporaneous and lagged IMF loan size
and program participation (when the participation variables are included) are used as
instruments in columns 1-4. Columns 5-8 use as instruments the contemporaneous and
lagged values of the log of the IMF staff share, the log of the IMF quota share, the log of
the fraction of U.N. votes along with the United States and major Europe, and the log of the
trade intensity with the United States and major Europe. The IMF loan size and
participation variables are not included in these instrument lists. Individual constants (not
shown) are included for each period. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The p-
value indicates the significance level associated with the test of the hypothesis that the
coefficients on the IMF program variables included in each column are jointly zero.



                                               45
            Figure 1. The Increase in IMF Loan Size by


                                                         Having lower per
                                                           capita GDP

                     Having lower GDP
                          growth
                     Having lower
                     international
                        reserve
                                                                   Having more IMF
                                                                        Quota
             Having more
            national staff at
                 IMF
            Voting more with
            the United States

           Voting more with
            major Europe

           Trade more with
           the United States

       Trade more with
        major Europe

0   0.25       0.5         0.75           1   1.25        1.5       1.75      2




                                     46
          Figure 2. The Increase in IMF Program Participation by


                                                                        Having lower per
                                                                          capita GDP

                Having lower GDP
                     growth
                        Having lower
                        international
                           reserve
                                                    Having more IMF
                                                         Quota
                       Having more
                      national staff at
                            IMF
                      Voting more with
                       the United States

                               Voting more with
                                major Europe

          Trade more with
          the United States

    Trade more with
     major Europe

0           5                 10             15     20             25               30




                                        47
    Figure 3. The Increase in the Probability of IMF Loan Approval by




                                                                 Having lower per
                                                                   capita GDP

                      Having lower
                      GDP growth
                           Having lower
                           international
                              reserve
                           Having more IMF
                                Quota
                         Having more
                        national staff at
                             IMF
                            Voting more with
                            the United States

                                Voting more with
                                 major Europe

                   Trade more with
                   the United States

0                 5                         10              15                      20




                                       48
