NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AS SELF-DISCOVERY

Ricardo Hausmann
Dani Rodrik

Working Paper 8952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8952

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2002

We thank the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations for financial support, and Zoë McLaren and Anton
Dobronogov for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Ricardo Hausmann and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Economic Development as Self-Discovery
Ricardo Hausmann and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 8952
May 2002
JEL No. O0, L1

ABSTRACT
In the presence of uncertainty about what a country can be good at producing, there can be great
social value to discovering costs of domestic activities because such discoveries can be easily imitated.
We develop a general-equilibrium framework for a small open economy to clarify the analytical and
normative issues. We highlight two failures of the laissez-faire outcome: there is too little investment and
entrepreneurship ex ante, and too much production diversification ex post. Optimal policy consists of
counteracting these distortions: to encourage investments in the modern sector ex ante, but to rationalize
production ex post. We provide some informal evidence on the building blocks of our model.

Ricardo Hausmann
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
(617) 496-3740
ricardo_hausmann@harvard.edu

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
(617) 495-9454
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AS SELF-DISCOVERY
Ricardo Hausmann and Dani Rodrik
Introduction
The theory and practice of economic development have converged in the last two decades
on a remarkably simple view of growth fundamentals. Stated in its starkest form, this view is
that economic growth requires two things: foreign technology and good institutions. This
perspective is well grounded in the neoclassical model of economic growth, which predicts that
poor countries will experience rapid convergence with advanced economies once they have
access to state-of-the-art technologies and their governments respect property rights. From this
perspective, failure to grow can be attributed two one or both of two pathologies. One is the
“closed-economy” pathology, in which governments retard technological progress by reducing
access to foreign investment and imported capital equipment and intermediate goods. The other
is the “corruption” pathology, in which political leaders fail to respect property rights and screw
things up deliberately in order to enrich themselves and their cronies. The natural remedies for
these pathologies are economic openness and improved governance. With these remedies in
place, economic growth should follow naturally. In the words of a recent paper on growth:
“Once a developing country government establishes the rules to a fair game and ensures their
enforcement, it would be well advised to stand back and enjoy the self-generating growth” (Roll
and Tallbott 2001). Reforms in the areas of governance and openness have accordingly become
the cornerstones of development strategy in virtually every country during the last fifteen years.
Actual development experience presents at best an awkward fit with this conception of
growth basics. We point in particular to two important types of evidence that seem to us to run
counter to the consensus view. The first of these relates to the economic performance of Latin

2
American countries during the 1990s. By the standards of the consensus view, the quality of
policymaking in Latin America has been unmistakably and significantly better in the 1990s than
it was two or three decades before. For example, Morley et al.’s (1999) index of structural
reform1—measuring the degree to which government intervention has been reduced in trade,
finance, taxation, and ownership—shows the Latin American average rising steadily from
around 0.47 in the early 1970s (out of a maximum of one), to about 0.55 in the mid-1980s, and
then rapidly to 0.82 in 1995. Yet these economies’ response to the reforms has been extremely
disappointing. Economic growth in the 1990s has been on average much lower than in the
decades before 1980, even though the region was closed to trade and had poorer institutions by
most benchmarks in the earlier period. In fact, only three Latin American countries (Chile,
Uruguay, Argentina) have outperformed in the 1990s their record during 1950-1980. Of these
three, only Chile remains a clear success. Uruguay’s performance has hardly been exemplary, as
its growth rate looks good only in relation to an even worse performance prior to 1980. And
Argentina now lies in ruins. Why is growth so low in a region that has tried so hard to adopt the
consensus agenda?
The other side of the coin, and the second strand of ill-fitting evidence, is presented by
the experience of countries that have had greater success. Some of the most important among
these countries—South Korea and Taiwan since the early 1960s, China since the late 1970s, and
India since the early 1980s—have done extremely well under quite heterodox arrangements. All
these countries have emphasized exports and none grossly violated property rights. But their
strategies bear only passing similarity to today’s consensus precepts. South Korea and Taiwan
retained high levels of protection for a long time, and made active use of industrial policies.

1

Morley et al.’s index (1999) is based on Lora (1997). See also Lora (2001).

3
When Korea was hit with the Asian financial crisis in 1997, its economy had so many
institutional weaknesses by orthodox standards that many observers located the crisis’ roots in
Korea’s “governance” problems. China achieved phenomenal growth rates without formally
enacting private property rights—something that would have seemed impossible to many
economists had the Chinese miracle not taken place. India barely reformed its incredibly
cumbersome trade and industrial regime before its economy took off in the 1980s. And even
after more ambitious reforms were enacted in the early 1990s, the Indian economy remained
among the world’s most protected. Of course heterodoxy did not produce payoffs everywhere.
Most countries with protected economies and poor protection of property rights languished or
retrogressed. But the fact that the world’s most successful economies during the last four
decades prospered doing things that are more commonly associated with failure is something that
cannot be easily dismissed.
We present here a different perspective on economic development, one that has more
room for the Latin American and Asian “anomalies” noted above. Our focus is on a particular
type of learning that we believe has not received enough attention in the literature on economic
development: learning what one is good at producing.2 We emphasize that this a key challenge
in the process of transformation into a modern economy. Neither economic theory nor
management science is of much help in helping entrepreneurs (or the state) choose appropriate
investments among the full range of modern-sector activities, of which there could be tens of
thousands, once one moves beyond broad categories such as “labor-intensive products” or
“natural-resource based products.” Yet making the right investment decisions is key to future

2

For a paper that is focused on learning about the institutions that are appropriate to the local setting, see Mukand
and Rodrik (2002).

4
growth, as it determines the pattern of specialization.3 In these circumstances, there is great
social value to discovering that cut flowers, soccer balls, or computer software can be produced
at low cost, because this knowledge can orient the investments of other entrepreneurs. But the
initial entrepreneur who makes the “discovery” can capture only a small part of the social value
that this knowledge generates. As the cases we shall discuss in the empirical section of the paper
reveal, other entrepreneurs can quickly emulate such discoveries. Consequently,
entrepreneurship of this type—learning what can be produced—will typically be undersupplied,
and economic transformation delayed.
This perspective differs from the standard view in an important way. In the neoclassical
model, it is presumed that the production functions all extant goods are common knowledge.
Our starting point is that this is not a good assumption for developing countries. Much
technology is “tacit,” meaning that it cannot be easily codified into blueprints that allow easy
application (Nelson 1990, Evenson and Westphal 1995, Lall 2000). Moreover, even when the
production techniques used in the advanced countries are transparent to outsiders, their transfer
to new economic and institutional environments typically require adaptations with uncertain
degrees of success.4 This is an aspect of technology transfer that is amply documented in the
literature. In their survey on technology transfer, for example, Evenson and Westphal (1995)

3

This kind of indeterminacy of specialization is different from the indeterminacy that originates from scale
economies or learning-by-doing. The latter are the subject of Gomory and Baumol (2000): “Today there is not one
uniquely determined best economic outcome based on national advantages. Today’s global economy does not
single out a single best outcome, arrived at by international competition, in which each country serves the world’s
best interests by producing just those goods that it can naturally turn out most efficiently. Rather, there are many
possible outcomes that depend on what countries actually choose to do, what capabilities, natural or human, they
actually develop.” (Gomory and Baumol 2000, 5, emphasis in the original).
4

For an important theoretical analysis of “learning to learn,” and how its presence may be responsible both for lack
of convergence across countries and for specialization in production, see Stiglitz (1987). Zeira’s (1987) model of
investment, in which a firm does not know its profit function and can discover it only through investment, come
especially close to capturing the essence of our approach. In our model, unlike in Zeira’s, knowledge acquired in
the process of discovering one’s costs spills over to other potential entrepreneurs.

5
emphasize the role of domestic tinkering in the successful adoption of foreign technology. They
list such adaptations as “technological efforts related to raw material control, product and process
quality control, production scheduling, repair and maintenance, changes in production mix, as
well as others including episodic trouble-shooting to overcome problems encountered in the
course of operations” (1995, 2249).5 We shall discuss these issues at greater length when we
turn to empirical evidence.
If learning what a country is good at producing requires an investment and the returns to
that investment cannot be fully appropriated, the problem faced by potential entrepreneurs in
developing countries is identical to the problem faced by innovators in the advanced industrial
countries. However, the policy environments facing the “innovators” in the two settings are
quite different. Typically, the intellectual property regime protects discoverers of new goods
through the issuance of temporary monopolies, i.e., patents. But the investor in the developing
country who figures out that an existing good can be produced profitably at home does not
normally get such protection, no matter how high the social return.6 Indeed, ease of entry by
competitors (i.e., imitators) is normally judged to be an important indicator of how well markets
function—the lower the barriers to entry, the better. Free entry makes the non-appropriability
problem worse, and undercuts the incentive to invest in discovering what a country is good at
producing. Laissez-faire cannot be the optimal solution under these circumstances, just as it is
not in the case of R&D in new products.
5

Another source of uncertainty is about trading possibilities--whether there is adequate demand out there for a
particular product, for example. This type of informational problem is discussed in Rauch and Watson (2001) in
their model of “international trade intermediaries,” and “network intermediation.” Such entrepreneurship may be
under-supplied because intermediaries may not have enough incentive to maintain and expand their informational
networks.

6

As Evenson and Westphal (1995) note, the kind of local adaptations that are normally required “are seldom
associated with inventions that are patentable abroad. They do not yield improvements that are sufficiently
inventive relative to the known state of the art” (1995, 2249).

6
We develop a general-equilibrium framework in the next section to clarify the analytical
and normative issues. We begin with a small open economy that is initially specialized in
traditional activities where there is no uncertainty. There also exist a large number of modern
activities, as yet not exploited, all of which have an uncertain productivity. In the first period,
entrepreneurs have the option of setting up a “firm” of a fixed size and discovering the true costs
of production in the specific activity they have invested. In the second period, they can operate
as a monopoly, and choose to do so if their costs turn out to be lower than the relevant world
price. In the third period, costs of all active firms become common knowledge and there is free
entry, eliminating (through adjustments in wages) all excess profits. We characterize in this
setting both the laissez-faire equilibrium and the social optimum (in which the social planner can
allocate resources at will, but has no more information than is available to the private sector).
We highlight two failures of the laissez-faire outcome: there is too little investment and
entrepreneurship in the first period (unless the second period is “very long”), and too much
production diversification in the second. Optimal policy consists of counteracting these
distortions: to encourage investments in the modern sector ex ante, but to rationalize production
ex post.
Let us now return to the anomalies that we used to motivate this paper. What does our
framework have to say about the possible causes of the disappointing Latin American
performance? Our model offers three clues as to why the investment response may have been
anemic despite increased openness and improved institutions. First, and most significantly, the
binding constraints to growth may have been elsewhere. Entrepreneurship may have been
constrained by inadequate inducements to discover costs in new activities (given that the private
returns to such investments lie far below social returns), and not by inadequate property rights or

7
lack of access to imported technologies. Second, to the extent that market-oriented reforms have
increased the mobility of firms, they may have actually reduced incentives to invest in new
activities. Ease of entry speeds up emulation, and reduces the appropriability of cost discoveries.
In fact, if this is the case, reforms have a bigger payoff in the short run than in the long run: new
entrants exploit the benefits of past cost discoveries, but once these are exhausted, the economy
is dragged down by the lower efforts in innovation.7 Third, to the extent that the reforms have
increased productivity in traditional sectors alongside potential new activities, they may have
increased the resource cost of entrepreneurship in the modern sectors. What we can say, at the
very least, is that the reforms of the 1980s and 1990s have paid scant attention to the problem of
spurring investment in non-traditional activities when returns to entrepreneurship in such
activities are subject to non-appropriability for reasons that we highlight in this paper.
With regard to Asia, our framework helps us understand why the provision of rents by
governments (through trade protection, temporary monopolies, subsidized credits, and tax
incentives) has gone hand in hand with industrial growth and diversification. These rents may
have been needed to stimulate the cost discovery process. Detailed accounts documenting these
rents in South Korea and Taiwan (see for example Amsden 1989, Wade 1990, and Evans 1995)
are otherwise impossible to square with the conventional understanding of what constitutes
desirable economic policies. At the same time, our framework highlights how rents can backfire
if governments do not complement them with policies that rationalize industries and discipline
firms that end up with high costs. We would hypothesize that the absence of such discipline was

7

This is consistent with the evidence from Latin America. Initial estimates of the growth effects of reforms
(Easterly, Loayza and Montiel 1997, Lora and Barrera 1997, and Fernandez-Arias and Montiel 1997) found
relatively large and permanent effects. Using more recent data, Lora (2002) finds that the growth payoff to reform is
smaller and more transitory than originally estimated.

8
a hallmark of import substitution policies (ISI) in Latin America. We will come back to this
distinction after we develop our analytical framework.
The outline of the paper is as follows. We describe and analyze the formal framework in
the next section. Following a policy discussion, we then turn to some suggestive empirical
evidence. We provide evidence on three aspects of our framework in particular. First, we show
that there is a large element of uncertainty at a disaggregated level as to what a country will be
good at producing. Second, we discuss evidence relating to the difficulties entailed in importing
technology off-the-shelf. Third, we summarize some case studies of domestic technology
diffusion from successful incumbents to emulators.

Conceptual framework
We embed our policy analysis in a model of a small open economy with two sectors,
modern and traditional. We distinguish between these two sectors according to whether costs of
production are known. The modern sector is made up of n goods that are not currently produced,
and the costs of which are discovered only after production is attempted. Letting ci denote unit
costs of production of good i, we assume that costs depend on unobserved productivity
parameter θi in the following manner:
(1)

ci =

bw

θi

,

where w is the wage rate and b/θi is the number of workers needed to produce a single unit of the
good i. We have in mind many different types of uncertainty: producing a good that has not
been locally produced previously requires learning about how to combine different inputs in the
right way, figuring out whether local conditions are conducive to efficient production, and
discovering the true costs of production. We use uncertainty over θi as a proxy for all this. We

9
assume that the ex-ante distribution of θi is uniform over the interval [0, 1] and that the θi are
i.i.d. across the n sectors. Note that modern-sector production uses only labor and has constantreturns to scale technology once productivity is known.
The unobserved productivity parameters θi is a property of the individual goods, and not
of entrepreneurs: all entrepreneurs who run firms producing good i will operate with productivity

θi. We shall assume that each modern-sector firm is of a given size, fixed (by appropriate choice
of units) to one unit of good i’s output. Each entrepreneur can run one, and no more than one,
modern-sector firm.
Discovering θi requires setting up the firm, which in turn entails the hiring of b units of
labor. In this initial stage (period 1), the firm produces nothing. Let m denote the number of
entrepreneurs who choose to establish firms in period 1. The total amount of (sunk) investment
in the first period is correspondingly mbw. We will refer to m interchangeably as the quantity of
“investment” or “entrepreneurship.”
In period 2, θi become known for those m goods in which investments have been made.
Entrepreneurs have the option of producing a unit of the good and earning p (an exogenous price
fixed on world markets8), or, if unit costs bw/θi turn out to be larger than p, to close the firm at
no extra cost. In this period, there is no entry into the modern sector so that entrepreneurs who
produce will earn excess profits. (Even though p is fixed, so is output thanks to the assumptions
that firm size is fixed and an entrepreneur cannot run more than a single firm.) This transitional
period of monopoly profits can be motivated in one of two ways. It could be that it takes time

8

Note that these are goods that are already being produced in other, more advanced countries. So saying that there
are well-known, fixed prices is not at odds with the assumption that none of them are being produced at home
currently.

10
for the θi to become common knowledge. Alternatively, θi can be immediately known, but it
could take time for an “imitator” to set up a firm. We denote the length of period 2 as T.
Finally, in period 3 (which lasts until infinity), there is free entry into the modern sector,
and excess profits are eliminated. The latter happens in our case via upward adjustments in the
wage rate w.
The model is closed by describing production in the traditional sector. We assume that
the traditional sector operates under constant returns to scale, and employs labor and a fixed
factor. It will be convenient to use a specific functional form, so we write the production
function in the traditional sector as y = ( l − s )α , where l is the total labor force of the economy,

s is employment in the modern sector, and α is the factor share of labor in the traditional sector.
The diminishing marginal returns to labor in the traditional sector implies that the modern sector
faces a positively-sloped labor supply curve. Adjustments in wages will therefore play an
important equilibrating role for our economy. We assume that n is small relative to l , so that we
do not have to keep track of the implications for the labor force as the number of entrepreneurs,

m, varies. The price of the traditional sector is fixed at 1 as the numeraire.
Social optimality: The full-information case. Consider first the case of an omniscient
social planner, who not only can allocate production at will, but also has full knowledge of the θi
for all the sectors without any prior investment. The full-information social optimum is easy to
describe. Rank modern-sector goods by their θi , and let θmax denote the highest θi . Let h(s)
denote the value marginal product of labor in the traditional sector (h(s) = α( l − s )α-1). Then the
optimum is characterized by the following three conditions:
(2a)

pθ max
> h(l ) ⇒ s = l (full specialization in good with θi = θmax);
b

11

pθ max
≥ h(0) ⇒ 0 ≤ s ≤ l ;
b

(2b)

h(l ) ≥

(2c)

pθ max
< h(0) ⇒ s = 0 (full specialization in the traditional sector).
b

For modern-sector production to be viable, labor productivity in the good with θmax must be high
enough that condition (2c)—value marginal product of labor in the traditional sector exceeds that
in the modern sector even when the economy is completely specialized in the former sector—can
be ruled out. We assume this is the case. This leaves the other two possibilities, where the
economy either fully specializes in the θmax sector (2a), or is diversified between this and the
traditional sector (2b). Note that due to constant costs in the modern sector, it never pays for the
social planner to operate any modern-sector good with θi < θmax. If the modern-sector is active,
the optimal thing to do is to concentrate all resources in the θmax sector until either wages rise
sufficiently to equate the marginal value product of labor in the traditional sector or all labor is
exhausted.
Social optimality: Incomplete information. Now turn to a more realistic social planning
problem, where the planner can still allocate resources at will, but has to incur the same learning
costs as private entrepreneurs do. The planner has to decide how many investments, m, to
undertake in period 1. Each modern-sector good is ex-ante identical with an expected θ = ½.
However, once the productivity parameters of m of the goods are revealed, only the one with the
highest θi will matter: as before, the social planner will never want to produce a modern good
with a lower θi than the maximum that is already known. So what matters to the planner is not
the expected θi (which is independent of m), but the maximum of m draws (which does depend
on m). Let the latter be denoted by θ max (m) . Since the ex-ante distribution of θi is uniform over

12
[0, 1] and the draws are independent, the expected value of the rank statistic θ max (m) has the

)
)
simple form E( θ max (m) ) ≡ θ (m) = m/(1+m). We note that θ (m) is increasing in m, but at a
decreasing rate ( θ ' (m) > 0, θ ' ' (m)< 0 ). So the social planner gains by increasing investment in

first period learning, but there exist diminishing returns.
In period 1, mb units of labor are allocated to “investment” (s1 = mb, where a subscript
denotes the time period). First-period output is therefore:
(3)

y1 = (l − s1 ) β = (l − mb)α

Productivity in the modern sector on periods 2 and 3 is not known for sure ex ante, so a risk)
neutral social planner will use the expected productivity θ (m) to anticipate the future labor

market equilibrium. Labor allocation will be determined by setting the value marginal product
of labor equal in the two sectors in expected terms:
(4)

pθˆ(m)
= α (l − s 2 )α −1
b

Since the social planner will allow free entry starting from period 2 (and not period 3, as in the
decentralized case), there is no distinction between periods 2 and 3 in the social planning
problem, so we use the subscript “2” denote outcomes in both periods. Note also that we are
assuming a diversified equilibrium (corresponding to case 2(b) above). Equation (3) implicitly
defines s2 as an increasing function of m. Using (3), the (expected) outputs of the modern (x) and
traditional (y) sectors can be expressed in turn by
α −1 

s2θˆ(m) θˆ(m)   pθˆ(m)  
x2 =
l−
=
b
b   αb  


1

(5)

α

(6)

 pθˆ(m)  α −1
α

y2 = (l − s2 ) = 

 αb 

13
Since the social planner faces an intertemporal trade-off, we need to specify a discount
rate. For reasons that will become clear later, it is convenient for our purposes to specify the
discounting in the following way. Let the discount factor between period 1 and 2 be given by δ,
while the instantaneous discount rate is ρ. We shall express the present discounted value from
the vantage point of period 1 of a stream of continuous payments K that are received during
period 2 and 3 as δK/ρ . (Obviously, δ is a function of both ρ and the “length” of period 1.
Since we treat both of the latter as constants, there is no harm in treating δ as a constant as well.)
The social planner’s maximand can now be written as the present discounted value of
production evaluated at world prices:
(7)

max W = y1 +
m

δ
( y + px2 )
ρ 2

with y1, y2, and x2 as defined in (3), (5), and (6). The associated first-order condition is given by:
(8)

δ p ˆ
s2θ ' (m) − αb(l − mb)α −1 = 0,
ρb

where s2 is as defined implicitly by (4). The first term in this equation expresses the marginal
benefit of first-period investment: an increase in m increases expected future productivity in the
modern sector, a gain that is spread over the equilibrium level of future employment in the
modern sector (s2). The latter feature introduces an element of increasing returns to scale to
investment, since s2 is itself an increasing function of m. The countervailing forces are the
)
diminishing return to θ (m) and the rising marginal cost of drawing labor away from the

traditional sector (captured by the second term in (8)). We assume these countervailing forces
dominate, so that the second-order condition is satisfied and we have an interior solution. It is
easy to verify, under these conditions, that the social planner’s choice of m, as defined implicitly
by (8), is increasing in p and decreasing in b.

14
Decentralized equilibrium. We now characterize the market equilibrium under the
conditions discussed previously, namely that the entrepreneurship decision is decentralized and
there is no entry (“imitation”) during period 2. That means that any entrepreneur who decides to
produce in period 2 earns a monopoly profit during the length T of the second period. Since the
expected productivity is θ = ½, expected profits equal π = p −

bw2

θ

= p − 2bw2 , where w2 is the

(expected) equilibrium wage that prevails in period 2. The present discounted value of these
profits, since they accrue only for a time of length T, equals

δ
δ
(
1 − e − ρT )π ≡ R(T )π , with
ρ
ρ

R(0)=0, 0<R(T)<1, and R’(T)>0. Under free entry, expected profits are just offset by the
investment cost that each entrepreneur incurs in setting up a firm in period 1. The condition for
zero-profits ex ante is therefore given by:
(9)

δ
R(T )( p − 2bw2 ) − bw1 ≤ 0 ,
ρ

with the equation holding as an equality whenever m>0. Even though m does not appear
explicitly here, this equation determines the quantity of aggregate investment since m affects the
level of wages in periods 1 and 2 through the labor-market constraint.
The labor-market clearing equation for period 1 is:
(10)

w1 = α (l − mb)α −1 .

To determine the corresponding equation for period 2, we need to know the proportion of
investments that actually lead to production. Once bw is sunk, an entrepreneur will choose to
~
remain in the modern sector as long revenues cover variable costs. Denote by θ the limit

~ bw
~
productivity such that this is true, i.e. θ = 2 . All entrepreneurs who draw θ i ≥ θ will choose
p

15
to produce in the second period. Therefore the expected level of employment in the modern
~
bw
sector in period 2 is s2 = (1 − θ )mb = (1 − 2 )mb . The labor-market equilibrium in this period
p
can then be written as
α −1



bw
w2 = α  l − [1 − 2 ]mb 
p



(11)

.

Equations (9), (10), and (11) determine the three endogenous variables in the system, m, w1, and
w2.
Outcomes in period 3 can be determined separately, but are not needed for our purposes.
We just note that with free entry in the third period, all but the highest productivity firm close
down, and imitation drives profits in that activity down to zero. The mechanism that achieves
rationalization of production is this: lower productivity activities are driven out as wages get bid
up by the entry of more firms into the highest-productivity activity. Since entrepreneurs make
zero profits in period 3, the investment level is determined only by outcomes in periods 1 and 2.
We now discuss the salient features of the decentralized equilibrium. First, note from (9)
that m=0 for T sufficiently close to zero. The interpretation is straightforward: entrepreneurs
earn monopoly profits only during the duration of the second period. If the length of this period
shrinks to zero, there is no incentive to invest in discovering costs. If imitation is immediate, the
equilibrium level of investment and entrepreneurship is zero. Second, over the range of T for
which m>0, m, w1, and w2 are all increasing in T. That is, investment increases as the monopoly
period is extended. Third, as long as monopoly prevails, modern-sector production is diversified
and does not specialize in the good with the highest (known) productivity. Once imitation kicks
in with free entry, production in the modern sector is rationalized and only highest-productivity
activity survives.

16
Compared to the social optimum discussed previously, therefore, the decentralized
equilibrium suffers from two distinct inefficiencies. First, the level of investment and
entrepreneurship in the market equilibrium (call it mc) does not coincide with that required for
social optimum (call it m*). This can be verified easily by comparing the first-order condition of
the social planner (eq. 8) with the free entry condition of market equilibrium (eq. 9). Note that
the second term is the same for the two equations (substitute (10) into (9)), but that the first,
capturing the benefits of investment, differ. The planner cares about the economy-wide benefits,
while the entrepreneur cares about monopoly profits. Where mc stands in relation to m* is
ambiguous in general. If monopoly profits are short-lived (T is small), then mc < m*, and there is
too little investment and too few entrepreneurs in the market equilibrium. This is the case that
motivates the analysis of this paper. On the other hand, if free entry is delayed for very long (T
is large), then mc > m*, and there is over-investment motivated by the pursuit of monopoly
profits.
The second source of inefficiency is the existence of monopoly power in period 2. In our
framework, the costs of monopoly arise not from price-setting behavior (which is constrained by
the small-open economy assumption), but from the fact that restricted entry yields too little
specialization within the modern sector. Monopoly prevents the flow of resources into the
highest-productivity activity, and allows activities that will not eventually survive to do so.
The bottom line of the framework is that as long as T is non-zero but not too large, the
laissez-faire equilibrium delivers (a) too little investment and entrepreneurship, and (b) too much
production diversification in the modern sector.

17
Policy issues
The key policy recommendation that comes out of our framework is that governments
need to play a dual role in fostering industrial growth and transformation. They need to
encourage entrepreneurship and investment in new activities ex ante, but push out unproductive
firms and sectors ex post. This is of course easier said than done. The specifics of how this can
be managed is likely to differ considerably from country to country, depending on administrative
capability, the prevailing incentive regime, the flexibility of the fiscal system, the degree of
sophistication of the financial sector, and the underlying political economy. Governments
without adequate capacity to exercise leadership over their private sectors are likely to mess
things up rather than do better. But there are examples to suggest that the job can be done.
In attempting to promote innovation, governments have used a variety of instruments
such as trade protection, public sector credit, tax holidays, and investment and export subsidies.
Clearly, all appropriate policy interventions need to increase the expected pay-off to innovation.
~
However, interventions typically create other distortions. For example, they may lower θ by

making less productive activities privately profitable, inefficiently increasing the heterogeneity
of the modern sector. Moreover, if the instrument does not adequately discriminate between
innovators and copycats, it will promote early entry, thus limiting the benefits to innovators
while increasing the social cost of the intervention since copycats will get part of the resources
transferred.
Interventions can be further classified in two groups, depending on whether they
compensate innovators in case they fail (i.e. in case they draw a low θ ), or increase the payoff in
case they successful. The first type of interventions is likely to create moral hazard, but the
second type will not help those who lack the resources to finance activities in period 1.

18
Thus, for example, temporary trade protection is far from an ideal instrument. It may
increase expected profits of innovators, but it does so only for firms selling in the local market.
Moreover, since it does not discriminate between innovators or copycats, it promotes early entry,
thus lowering the expected payoff to innovation while inefficiently channeling resources to
copycats. Moreover, as protection gets extended to intermediate goods, innovation will tend to
focus on domestic markets, instead of new export activities. Since domestic markets are small
relative to world markets, the social returns to innovation are likewise smaller. Hence, trade
protection is not an efficient way of promoting self-discovery.
Export subsidies avoid the anti-export bias of trade protection, but do not discriminate
~
between innovators and copycats. They also lower θ , promoting excessive diversification. One

advantage of exports subsidies is that they can be relatively good at discriminating between
successful and unsuccessful performers ex post. Low-cost producers are more likely to incur the
sunk costs of exporting. Therefore providing subsidies contingent on exporting can allow policy
makers to sort out firms and sectors that are high productivity from those that aren’t. This
strategy was actively used by the South Korean and Taiwanese governments during their
industrial drives in the 1960s and 1970s.
By contrast, public sector credit or guarantees operate by transferring part of the risk of
failure to the government: if the project is successful, the loan gets repaid; if it is not, then the
firm will default. Credit has the advantage that it can be made discretionary and thus, it can be
targeted on innovators and not to copycats. In fact, in Latin America during the heyday of
industrial policy, it was common for development banks to require that no other domestic
supplier existed before granting financial support. When market reforms were introduced in the
early 1990s, this policy was seen as particularly inadequate: it limited entry and competition.

19
However, in the context of our model, this is precisely what is needed: public resources should
be concentrated on the first entrants. Moreover, judgment can be used in choosing ideas that
promise the greater social benefits. However, with discretion come problems of political
influence, corruption or at least moral hazard.
Policy instruments can also differ with respect to elements that are required to impose
discipline. For example, tariff protection and export subsidies need to be taken away at some
point in time. The latter will be under fiscal and international pressure to disappear. The former
may require more political effort. Firms used to government loans need to be let go: at some
point in time loans cannot be rolled over forever and the firm needs to be required to return the
loan or declare default. A brief summary of the costs and benefits of these different types of
policies is presented in the table below.

Increases payoff to
innovation
by…
Can
discriminate
between
innovators and
copycats
Other
distortions to
innovation
Action required
to impose
discipline

Trade
protection

Export
subsidies

…increasing
the returns to
success and
~
lowering θ
No

…increasing
the returns to
success and
~
lowering θ
No, but better
at rewarding
high
productivity
activities

Biased against
export activities
Lowering
tariffs

Lowering
subsidies

Government
loans and
guarantees
…lowering the
losses in case of
failure and
~
lowering θ
Yes

Distorts risk
assessments
(moral hazard)
Cut funding

What stands out in many discussions of East Asia is how governments in the region were
unusually good at supplying the requisite discipline:

20
Where Korea differs from other developing countries in promoting big business was the
discipline the state exercised over these chaebols by penalizing poor performance and
rewarding only good ones… The government as the controller of commercial banks was
in a powerful position to punish poorly managed firms by freezing bank credit. As a
result only three of the largest 10 chaebols in 1965—Samsung, Lucky-Goldstar, ans
Ssangyong—remained on the same list 10 years later. Similarly, seven of the largest 10
in 1975 remained on the same list in 1985.” (Kim 1993, 363).
The Korean government was quick to shelve its plans for supporting particular firms or
industries when new information suggested that productivity would lag (Westphal 1981, 34).
The development of textile industry in Taiwan in the 1950s provides a particularly clear example
of the strategy suggested by our framework. The Taiwanese government subsidized entry into
the industry by supplying inputs and spinning mills, providing working capital, imposing import
restrictions, and buying up the resulting production. Local production grew spectacularly as a
result. But the government also subsequently restricted entry and tried to prune the nonproductive firms (see Evans 1995, 57, and Wade 1990, 79). Japan used a similar combination of
state promotion/protection followed by rationalization in the computer industry (Evans 1995,
101).
Consider on the other hand Latin America during its import-substituting industrialization
(ISI) period. Latin American ISI produced many successful firms, but also an industrial structure
that was too diversified—too many low productivity firms alongside the high performers (see for
example Dahlman and Frischtak 1993, 424-5). Discipline was to come to Latin America in the
1990s in the form of trade openness, and many of the low-productivity firms were eventually
driven out. Countries such as Argentina, Brazil, and Chile deepened their specialization in
capital-intensive, natural resource based industries, while others like Mexico and the smaller
Central American countries increased their focus on assembly industries servicing the U.S.
market (Katz 2001). But, as our framework suggests, openness and institutional reform were not

21
enough to spark a significant new wave of entrepreneurship and investment in non-traditional
activities.
A crude, but useful characterization of the policy environments in East Asia and Latin
America, as viewed from the perspective of our framework, would be as follows. East Asian
governments provided their firms during the 1960s and 1970s with both promotion (the carrot)
and discipline (the stick). Against this benchmark, Latin American industrial performance has
fallen short because of varying shortcomings. Under ISI, Latin America was marked by plenty
of promotion, but too little discipline. In the 1990s, Latin America has considerable discipline
(provided through competitive markets and open trade), but too little promotion.

Empirical evidence
It is difficult to provide direct empirical evidence for the model we have developed here
because much of our story has to do with outcomes that are not observed: the failure to develop
non-traditional activities because of inadequate incentives to invest in learning what one is good
at producing. Our argument rests on the idea that the returns to entrepreneurship of this
particular kind are easily competed away by free entry. Looking for systematic evidence that
successful investments are rapidly copied is a self-defeating strategy because there shouldn’t be
much evidence of this sort to the extent that our model does capture an important part of reality.
Entrepreneurial initiatives of this kind should tend to remain episodic, almost random events—
not systematic ones. We shall discuss a number of such cases below. Similarly, if we were to
learn that many successful new firms from developing countries operate with technologies that
are hard to copy or have devised successful strategies of product differentiation (with protection

22
against entry imitative entry)9, this apparently contradictory finding may in fact be quite
consistent with our model. After all, a direct implication of our argument is that only
investments that provide such protection will be undertaken in equilibrium.
So we are forced to take an indirect route to the empirical evidence. We proceed by
providing support separately for three propositions that we consider to be building blocks for our
argument. First, there is a large element of uncertainty as to what a country will be good at
producing, once we move beyond broad aggregates such as “labor-intensive manufactures” to
specific products. Second, there are significant difficulties entailed in importing technology offthe-shelf, with successful local adaptation requiring considerable domestic tinkering. Third,
domestic imitation often proceeds quite rapidly when the first two difficulties are overcome,
bidding away the rents of the early incumbents. None these propositions is individually
controversial. As we highlight below, it is easy to find broad support for all of them in the
literatures on international trade, technology transfer, and economic history.

Predicting comparative advantage
The factor-endowments model is reasonably good at predicting the broad structure of
comparative advantage for developing countries. Leamer’s (1984) classic work, for example,
shows that the pattern of global commodity trade is well explained by the distribution of resource
endowments across countries. In this work, Leamer aggregates traded products into 10
commodities (petroleum, raw materials, forest products, tropical agriculture, animal products,
cereals, labor intensive, capital intensive, machinery, and chemicals) and factors of production
into 11 resources (capital, three types of labor, four types of land, coal, minerals, and oil). Wood

9

See for example the discussion of Spain’s sparkling wine and publishing industries in Guillén (2001, chap. 4).

23
and Mayer (1999) and Mayer and Wood (1999) show that the developing countries’ pattern of
specialization--labor-intensive manufactures versus natural resource-based products--depends
critically on their ratio of human capital endowment to land.
However, for entrepreneurs trying to decide what they should invest in, these kinds of
findings are hardly helpful. Consider the information technology sector in India, which
represents a shining example of technological success in a low-income country. The industry
has grown from a very modest base in the early 1980s to export more than $6 billion of software
by 2000. Yet India is a country that one would have hardly expected to have a comparative
advantage in a technology-intensive sector (Kapur 2002). India ranks low in terms of
conventional indicators of IT penetration, has failed to develop leadership in other high-tech
sectors, and is relatively well endowed in unskilled (rather than skilled) workers. Until recently,
government policies have not been particularly friendly to investors in that sector. Yet
Bangalore-based companies like Infosys and Wipro have managed to create successful business
models that have been widely emulated not only by other local entrepreneurs, but also by foreign
companies investing in India.
After the fact, it is not difficult to enumerate some of the features that account for this
success: the time-zone difference that allows the processing to be done in Bangalore before the
West Coast of the U.S. is back at work in the morning, the linkages with the Indian diaspora in
Silicon Valley, the facility with the English language, the establishment of the Indian Institutes
of Technology, and even the departure of IBM in the late 1970s which gave Indian engineers a
head-start with UNIX-based software development (Kapur 2002). Ex ante, however, few of
these advantages were as visible. As Narayana Murthy, who founded Infosys with six other

24
software professionals in 1981, once put it to an interviewer, “[our] objective was to conduct an
experiment ….” (Nasdaq International Magazine 1999, emphasis added).
Even if we consider IT in India as an anomaly, the predictions of the factor-endowments
are too coarse to have much operational value. Knowing that Bangladesh’s comparative
advantage lies in labor-intensive manufactures and not in high-tech machinery is useful for sure,
but that still leaves hundreds, if not thousands, of different types of activity up for grabs. The
six-digit Harmonized Schedule (HS), which most countries use to assess customs duties,
comprises around 5,000 different commodity groups. The United States reports its trade
statistics in an even more detailed form, using a 10-digit system resulting in about 8,000
commodity groups. These statistical conventions reflect the tremendous variety of products that
are “out there” and which newcomers could in principle invest in. Neither trade theorists nor
management consultants can be good guides as to whether Bangladesh should produce hats or it
should produce bed sheets instead. There is much randomness in the process of discovering
what one can be good at. Evenson and Westphal (1995) summarize the firm-level studies thus:
...the body of case study research and anecdotal evidence includes numerous cases of
failure to achieve the minimum mastery needed to attain the levels of productivity
expected when the physical investment was undertaken. It also includes numerous cases
of unforeseen success in achieving sufficient mastery to exceed the expected levels of
productivity. In the former cases there is no technological development to benefit from
subsequent investments in implementing the same or similar technology. In the latter
cases there is technological development so that subsequent investments are implemented
with increasing efficiency due to the spillovers from previous experience. (1995, 226263)
As it turns out, Bangladesh is very good at producing hats—more specifically “hats and
other headgear, knitted or from textile material not in strips” (HS 650590)—which constitute
Bangladesh’s third most important export item to the U.S. after men’s cotton shirts and trousers.
And it is not very good at producing bedsheets—specifically “bedsheets, pillowcases and bed

25
linen (incl. sets) – woven, not printed – cotton” (HS 630231)—of which it exports only a
miniscule amount. Is this a predictable result of innate comparative advantage? Consider
Pakistan, which is not too dissimilar to Bangladesh in its economic circumstances. Pakistan
exports a large quantity of bedsheets, but few hats. Since these commodities are fairly
standardized and labor-intensive, it is difficult to believe that the resource endowments and cost
structures of the two countries predispose them in any predictable way to specialize in one but
not the other. More likely, existing patterns of specialization are the consequence of historical
accidents and serendipitous choices by entrepreneurs.
The case of hats and bedsheets constitutes not the exception but the rule. Table 1 lists the
top 25 export items for Bangladesh and Pakistan in the U.S. market, to make the point that the
export structures of these two similar countries are surprisingly different at the level of 6-digit
HS categories. In fact, only six products are in the top 25 for both countries (these are identified
by bold letters). Among Pakistan’s major exports, curtains (HS 630392) and soccer balls (HS
950662) are some others that Bangladesh exports either very little or none at all.
We repeat the exercise in Tables 2 and 3 for two other pairs of countries in different parts
of the world and at different levels of incomes: Honduras versus the Dominican Republic and
Taiwan versus South Korea. Once again, these are pairs of countries that would be expected to
have fairly similar patterns of specializations. At a sufficiently aggregated level, that is certainly
true. Honduras and the Dominican Republic concentrate on garment exports, while Taiwan and
Korea focus on computer products. But at the level of individual products, there are again
striking differences. In 2000, the Dominican Republic exported $119 million worth of footwear
uppers (HS 640610) to the U.S. while Honduras exported none. Honduras is a major exporter of
ignition wiring sets (HS 854430) whereas the Dominican Republic barely exports any. Taiwan

26
exported $279 million worth of bicycles to the U.S. against Korea’s $623 thousand. Korea
exports a lot of air conditioning machines; Taiwan very few. The overlap among the top 25
exports of these two pairs is somewhat larger than in the case of Bangladesh/Pakistan, but far
from overwhelming—9 out of 25 for Honduras/Dominican Republic and 10 out of 25 for
Taiwan/South Korea.10
Suppose we take export performance in different product categories as a measure of a
country’s relative productivity across these categories. Then these statistics reveal that the range
of products countries end up becoming good at producing is quite narrow. Exports are typically
highly concentrated, even in rich and relatively diversified countries. This is shown in Figure 1,
which displays the cumulative share of the top export items for the six countries mentioned
above. The figure also includes German exports for comparison purposes. The top 4 export
commodities account for around 40 percent of South Korea’s and Honduras’ total exports to the
U.S. market, and 30 percent of the other countries’. The cumulative share of the top 25 export
items ranges from a high of 83 percent for Honduras to a low of 43 percent for Germany, with
the figure for all others lying above 60 percent (save for Taiwan).
The message we take from these numbers is twofold. First, for all economies except
possibly the most sophisticated, industrial success entails concentration in a relatively narrow
range of high-productivity activities. Second, the specific product lines that eventually prove to
be hits are typically highly uncertain and unpredictable.

10

Edward N. Wolf reports a related finding in chapter 11 of Gomory and Baumol (2000). Wolf shows that the
industrial structures of the advanced industrial countries have not converged even though aggregate total factor
productivity and relative factor endowments both have. Patterns of specialization are divergent, and once set,
remain stable.

27
Absorbing foreign technology
Neoclassical models of trade and economic growth presume not only that production
functions are known, but that they are identical across countries. Absent government-imposed
barriers, once an innovator figures out how to produce something, the same technology quickly
becomes available for adoption by followers in other countries.11 In reality, the problem of
mastering modern production techniques is greatly complicated by the tacit elements in
technology. This aspect of technological development is well recognized in discussions of
technology transfer by development economists and economic historians. In a survey for the
Handbook of Development Economics, for example, Evenson and Westphal express the point
clearly:
… much of the knowledge about how to perform elementary processes and about how to
combine them in efficient systems is tacit, not feasibly embodied and neither codifiable
nor readily transferable. Thus, though two producers in the same circumstances may use
identical material inputs in conjunction with equal information, they may nonetheless
employ what are really two distinct techniques owing to differences in understanding of
the tacit elements. … Even supposing that [currently existing techniques] represent
optimal solutions for the circumstances in which they are respectively used, it does not
follow that they must necessarily be optimal with respect to different circumstances
where they have not been previously tested…. Once technology is understood in these
more complex terms, it is quite obvious that investments in technology are made
whenever it is newly applied, regardless of the novelty of the application. Learning about
technology and problem solving using the knowledge acquired in mastering technology
are not costless, even if the choices made in realizing the technique to be used are
identical in generic terms to choices previously made elsewhere…. A stream of
investments over time is typically required to overcome tacitness and thus achieve
mastery. Not only is much technology tacit, so too is much knowledge about the
specifics of local circumstances and about the ways that differences in circumstances
affect the productivity of particular techniques. Tacit knowledge can only be acquired
through investments in learning.… (Evenson and Westphal 1995, 2212-2214)

11

There have been some interesting departures from these assumptions in the recent literature. For example Basu
and Weil (1998) and Caselli and Coleman (2000) both focus on differences that arise in per-capita GDP due to
differences in “appropriate technologies.” However, neither paper considers the role played by uncertainty in
technology adoption.

28
This lengthy quote expresses well many of the points we have tried to capture in our
stylized model above. Entrepreneurs in developing countries who start to produce standardized
goods that have long been on the scene in more advanced countries are forced to make
technological investments even though the goods in question may not be new in any sense.
These investments require discovering the tacit elements of technology and adapting them to the
local environment. That in turn entails a process of experimentation and learning. As Lall puts
it, “enterprises may not be able to predict if, when, how, and at what cost they would learn
enough to become fully competitive, even when the technology is well known and mature
elsewhere” (2000, 17). There is really no such thing as off-the-shelf technology.
One of the best-studied cases of technology transfer in economic history concerns the
cotton textile industry. Cotton mills in Britain’s Lancashire were the world leader in this
industry until well into the 20th century. The diffusion of technology from Lancashire to other
regions—India, Japan, the United States—makes for a fascinating story about the role of local
capabilities in recipient countries. Lancashire’s technological mastery resided in mule spinning.
It gave rise not only to British dominance in world markets for cotton textiles, but also to the
establishment of a capital-goods export industry which sold textile machinery and expertise to
other countries. Lancashire firms such as Platt would supply foreign buyers a full technological
package, complete with equipment, know-how, training, and even managers and skilled workers.
Thanks to this, countries around the world had in principle access to the “same” technology that
was available to Lancashire textile producers. In the case of India, for example, an important
textile producer in its own right, Clark and Woolcott (2001, 10-11) note that “up to at least the
1940s there is no sign of any Indian lag in the types of machinery employed compared to the
advanced economies.” Yet productivity and profitability in Indian mills remained a fraction of

29
the levels in Lancashire, a failure that Clark and Woolcott attribute to India’s “inability to
employ the technology effectively” (2000, 10-11). Saxonhouse and Wright have studied the
history of the cotton textile industry in detail by analyzing the records of the textile machinery
exporters from Lancashire. They too note the heterogeneity in performance across countries
despite the access to identical technologies, and they observe: “the diversity of experience among
the newly emerging industries make it clear that progress was a two-sided affair, a mutual
adaptation between machines and local conditions” (2000, 10).
Japan, which started out way behind India, was able to overtake India in the early part of
the 20th century and become a strong competitor of Britain. Japanese progress was based not on
the British mule-spinning technology, but on American-style ring spinning. The story of Japan’s
cotton textile industry is an intricate one involving both entrepreneurial ingenuity and state
initiative. The beginning of the industry can be dated to 1872 when the Meiji government took
over a small private mill with the intent of making into a model factory that would inspire private
investment in similar enterprises. While not a huge commercial success, the factory proved to be
a major popular attraction: “Such large crowds gathered outside to gawk at the mill that it
decided to charge a fee of ten sen for a tour” (Fletcher 1996, 53). The government started more
model factories, purchased spindles from England, and sold them to local entrepreneurs on very
easy terms (providing 10-year loans at zero interest) (Fletcher 1996, 54). The state-initiated
projects were unable to operate the imported technology efficiently, and after the 1880s the
government ceased direct assistance to cotton spinning. It was private firms with independent
operations and using variants of ring-spinning technology that came to dominate the Japanese
industry. Saxonhouse and Wright attribute Japan’s success to the Japanese producers’ skill in

30
adapting the American techniques to “an entirely different economic and cultural environment”
(2000, 10).
Japan’s experience with steel had many of the same elements. Early, “off-the-shelf”
imports of foreign technology during the Meiji period did not produce results until Japanese
engineers were able to adapt production processes to local conditions. Odagiri and Goto (1993,
90-91) describe the Meiji government’s efforts. In 1874, the Meiji government overrode a local
engineer’s more modest plans, and built a large steel furnace in Kamaishi using British
equipment and engineers. The plant had to be closed down after 196 days of operation because
of problems with local supplies of fuel: charcoal availability was inadequate, and when the fuel
source was switched to coke, the coke that could be obtained proved to be of poor quality. The
plant was restarted several years later after a smaller furnace based on local technology was
introduced. When in 1896 the government decided to build an integrated steel mill in Yawata,
“the lesson of Kamaishi appears to have been forgotten” (Odagiri and Goto 1993, 91). A
German company was hired to make the plans, equipment was brought in from Germany, and
German engineers and managers were put in charge. But the quality of coke in Japan differed
from that in Germany, making steel production very difficult. The mill was forced to shut down
within a year. Once again, the plant had to be reconfigured by domestic engineers to make the
furnaces more appropriate to Japanese coke.
The more recent history of East Asian and Latin American countries in the postwar
period is also replete with experiences that highlight the importance of local adaptation of
technology. Amsden (1989, 278) relates the story of Korean shipbuilder Hyundai, which
established its first shipyard in the early 1970s using imported designs from a Scottish firm
Scotlithgow. Because Scotlithgow had small capacity, the Scottish firm’s technique relied on

31
building the two halves of the ship separately, and then putting them together. When Hyundai
followed the same approach, trying to replicate all specifications in detail, it turned out that the
Korean workers could never make the two halves fit just right. There was more to the
technology than following the blueprint; the tacit knowledge required in building the ships could
not be transferred. Hyundai eventually became the world’s largest shipbuilder, but only after it
made a large investment in in-house design and research capabilities.
The Hyundai story is broadly indicative of Korea’s experience with regard to technology
imports: “It is a striking fact that formal purchase of technology in complete packages through
such means as turnkey plant contracts and licensing, plus their functional equivalent—direct
foreign investment—accounts for only a modest share of the technology that has been mastered
in Korea…” (Evenson and Westphal 1995, 2263-64). Similarly, in Taiwan, “activities such as
imitating, copying, or limited improvement of the existing foreign product (i.e., various reverse
engineering tactics), were the major sources of acquiring foreign technologies” (Hou and Gee in
Nelson, 390).
Even in technologically lagging countries, significant amount tinkering normally takes
place in order to adapt imported techniques. In Argentina, “many of the newly erected firms
found themselves needing to gradually develop ‘in house’ technological capabilities in areas
such as product design, production engineering, industrial planning, and organization where
‘from the shelf’ technology was not particularly well suited, given the highly idiosyncratic nature
of the local production structure” (Katz and Bercovich in Nelson 455; see also Katz and
Kosacoff 2000). These instances show how local firms have to engage in a series of
improvements to enhance productivity even when the technology is standardized and
implemented in the form of turnkey plants (see also Kim in Nelson 365). According to Evenson

32
and Westphal (1995, 2241): “Plants established under turnkey projects … often continue years
later to produce well under their design capacity owing to insufficient local effort to develop the
requisite production capabilities.”
Domestic spillovers and imitation
There is a large body of anecdotal evidence on the process of technology diffusion from
successful first-comers to later imitators. In their review of literature on technology transfer,
Evenson and Westphal (1995) cite several cases. They discuss the case of a successful foreignowned farm machinery producer in Brazil, which progressively lost market share to indigenous
producers as the latter first imitated and then adapted the multinational’s models, making them
better suited to local conditions. Within twenty years, local firms came to dominate the market
for all but the most complex models (Evenson and Westphal 1995, 2257). Another case involves
rice-threshing technology:
… the key activity enabling Philippine rice producers to benefit from rice threshing
technology developed in Japan was the adaptive invention of a prototype thresher at
IRRI. Using this prototype, local inventors made the specific adaptations required to
enable the economic use of threshers in the many different circumstances in which they
are now used in the Philippines. (ibid, 2261)
Note that the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) is a non-profit, public entity. Had a
private producer instead played IRRI’s role, it would have been unable to appropriate much of
the social returns due to the rapid entry of imitators.
The diffusion occurs typically, but not exclusively, through the turnover of skilled
workers and managers who have acquired the requisite expertise on the job. Indeed, the
poaching of such employees by later entrants is one of the most important competitive threats
that pioneering firms face. The early Japanese experience with cotton textiles again provides an
interesting illustration. A private enterprise, Osaka Spinning Co., Ltd., became so profitable in

33
the 1890s that its success “produced fifteen firms more or less modeled upon that firm”
(Yonekawa 1982, 29). The high priority that these early investors attached to retaining their
skilled workers is evident from the statutes of the Japan Spinners Association—the industry
association that was established in 1882 by the director of one of the early government-owned
mills: “The most specific provisions [in the Association’s regulations] … aimed at preventing
firms from raiding skilled workers from each other and from hiring troublemakers” (Yonekawa
1982, 56).
The practice of raiding pioneering firms’ workers has not lost its attractions over the
years. In Korea, for example, it is the main channel through which technology has diffused
within the domestic economy. According to Dahlman et al., when they establish new lines of
production Korean firms, “simply offer higher salaries to engineers and other technicians from
other local firms, technicians already skilled in the installation and operation of the new process
being adopted” (1985, 45).12 Most late entrants poach personnel from incumbents—initially
state enterprises and later on other private enterprises—to set up their own facilities (Kim 1993,
365). In Taiwan, labor mobility appears to have played a similar role, particularly in diffusing
technology from the local subsidiaries of foreign firms to other domestic firms (Hou and Gee
1993, 389). In the Indian IT industry, poaching of workers by late entrants and employees
leaving to start their own companies are among the main headaches faced by established firms
(Lateef 1997, Forbes Global 1998).
Consider the garment industry in Bangladesh, which is a well-studied case of industrial
take-off (Rhee 1990). At the origin of the Bangladeshi garment “miracle” lies a largely
serendipitous investment made by a local entrepreneur in a joint venture with Dawoo of Korea.
12

As Dahlman et al. note, “such footloose personnel can speed diffusion considerably, but they also discourage
investments by firms in their human capital” (1985, 45).

34
As Rhee makes clear in his account, few local investors had shown interest in garments, and
Daewoo did not hold very high hopes for the project either. (Daewoo’s interest in investing in
Bangladesh derived from other reasons). But once the venture, called Desh, proved successful,
imitation was very rapid: “…115 of the initial corps of 130 workers trained by Daewoo in Korea
left Desh at different times following the end of the Desh-Daewoo agreement to set up their own,
often competing, garment exporting firms” (Rhee 1990, 341). [See the story of the Mohammadi
company in the paper.] As a result, the industry grew from a handful of factories in 1979 to
more than 700 exporters by 1985 (ibid). The spread of know-how from the workers initially
trained by Desh was critical—much more so than the availability of capital and other resources.
Once it became common knowledge that Bangladesh had a profitable market niche in garments,
the industry took off like a mushroom. But note as well that, as our previous review of export
statistics for Bangladesh, has highlighted, the consequence of all this was not a generalized
enhancement of industrial capacity in manufactures, or even in all types of labor-intensive
manufactures. The spillovers to other types of manufacturing seem to have been very limited,
and Bangladeshi exports remain extremely undiversified.
Or consider the Colombian cut flower industry, the story of which is told in Rhee and
Belot (1990). How did Colombia get from nowhere to being the largest supplier of cut flowers
to the U.S.? Once again, it was a single entrepreneur that was responsible for it all. Thomas
Kehler, an American businessman in Colombia, happened to be looking for a business
opportunity. He and some partners did a feasibility study, jointly put up an initial investment of
$100,000, and set up Floramerica in 1969. By 1986, annual sales had risen to $50 million, and
this produced a tremendous demonstration effect:
Other companies have copied Floramerica’s production and marketing methods; this
dynamic process has been facilitated by the movement of key staff who embodied the

35
know-how accumulated at Floramerica… David Cheever, one of the founders of
Floramerica, left the company after two years to become a consultant to the growing
Colombian flower industry. By assisting in the start-up of many new flower companies,
he has been a driving force in diffusing know-how accumulated in Floramerica
throughout the country. Second, two salesmen at Floramerica’s Miami sales office left
the company ….” (Rhee and Belot 1990, 31).
By 1990, there were about 250 flower export firms in Colombia, the vast majority of which were
fully Colombian-owned (ibid).13

Concluding remarks
We have focused here on a neglected aspect of economic development. Learning what
one if good at producing is an important determinant of structural change, but it is also one that
is unlikely to be adequately provided under laissez-faire. The social returns to such learning are
likely to be much larger than the private returns, as successful “discoveries” of what can be
produced at low cost can be easily imitated in general.
There is a role here for government policy, but it is not a simple one. Optimal strategies
have to complement the promotion of “new” activities with the pruning of investments that turn
out to be high cost ex post. That in turn requires the government to exercise a certain amount of
discipline over the private sector. This is a task at which many governments have proved
inadequate. But in the absence of a policy framework that is cognizant of this obstacle, adoption
of good institutions and openness to foreign technology may well prove insufficient to spark a
sustained process of economic transformation and growth.

13

For more examples of how competitive industries are often started as a result of efforts by individual
entrepreneurs who combine vision and expertise, see Rhee and Belot (1990). Rhee and Belot call these “catalysts.”

36
REFERENCES
Amsden, Alice H., Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, Oxford University
Press, New York and Oxford, 1989.
Basu, Susanto, and David N. Weil, “Appropriate Technology and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November 1998.
Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur John Coleman II, “The World Technology Frontier,” NBER
Working Paper 7904, September 2000.
Clark, Gregory, and Susan Wolcott, “One Polity, Many Countries: Economic Growth in India
1873-2000” in Dani Rodrik, ed., Analytical Case Studies on Growth, 2001, forthcoming.
Dahlman, Carl, Bruce Ross-Larsen, and Larry Westphal, “Managing Technological
Development: Lessons from the Newly Industrializing Countries,” World Bank Staff Working
Paper No. 717, 1985.
Easterly, W., N. Loayza and P. Montiel, “Has Latin America’s Post-Reform Growth Been
Disappointing?” Journal of International Economics, Supplement 43(3-4), 1997, 287-312.
Evenson, Robert, and Larry E. Westphal, “Technological Change and Technology Strategy,” ch.
37 in Jere Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 3A,
Amsterdam, North-Hollan, 1995, pp. 2209-2229.
Fernández-Arias, E., and P. Montiel, “Reform and Growth in Latin America: All Pain, No
Gain?” Research Department Working Paper 351. Washington, DC: Inter-American
Development Bank, Research Department, 1997.
Fletcher, W. Miles III, “The Japan Spinners Association: Creating Industrial Policy in Meiji
Japan,” Journal of Japanese Studies, 22:1, Winter 1996, 49-75.
Forbes Global, “Big Bang in Bangalore,” 11/2/1998.
Gomory, Ralph E., and William J. Baumol, Global Trade and Conflicting National Interests, The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2000.
Guillén, Mauro F., The Limits of Convergence: Globalization and Organizational Change in
Argentina, South Korea, and Spain, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 2001.
Hou, Chi-Ming, and San Gee, “National Systems Supporting Technical Advance in Industry:
The Case of Taiwan,” in Richard R. Nelson, ed., National Innovation Systems: A Comparative
Analysis, Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford, 1993, 384-413.
Kapur, Devesh, “The Causes and Consequences of India’s IT Boom,” India Review, vol. 1, no.
2, April 2002, 91-110.

37

Katz, Jorge, and Bernardo Kosacoff, “Technological Learning, Institution Building and the
Macroeconomics of Import Substitution,” chap. 2 in Enrique Cardenas, Jose Antonio Ocampo,
and Rosemary Thorp, eds., An Economic History of Twentieth-Century Latin America, vol 3:
Industrialization and the State in Latin America, The Postwar Years, Palgrave, Hampshire, 2000.
Katz, Jorge M., Structural Reforms, Productivity and Technological Change in Latin America,
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago, Chile, 2001.
Lall, Sanjaya, “Technological Change and Industrialization in the Asian Newly Industrializing
Economies: Achievements and Challenges,” in L. Kim and R.R. Nelson, eds., Technology,
Learning and Innovation, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2000, 13-68.
Lateef, Asma, “Linking up with the global economy: A case study of the Bangalore software
industry,” New Industrial Organization Programme, DP/96/1997, International Institute for
Labour Studies, International Labor Organization, 1997.
Leamer, Edward E., Sources of Comparative Advantage: Theory and Evidence, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1984.
Lora, Eduardo, “Structural Reforms in Latin America:What Has Been Reformed
and How to Measure it”, Research Department Working Paper 350. Washington, DC: InterAmerican Development Bank, Research Department, 1997.
Lora, Eduardo, “Structural Reforms in Latin America: What Has Been Measured and How to
Measure It,” Research Department Working Paper 466, Washington, DC: Inter-American
Development Bank, December 2001.
Lora, E., and F. Barrera, “A Decade of Structural Reforms in Latin America: Growth,
Productivity and Investment are Not What They Used to Be.” Research Department Working
Paper 350. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank, Research Department, 1997.
Lora, Eduardo and Ugo Panizza, “Structural Reforms in Latin America under Scrutiny,” mimeo,
Inter-American Development Bank, 2002.
Mayer, Jörg, and Adrian Wood, "South Asia's Export Structure in a Comparative Perspective,"
IDS, Sussex, 1999, 1-45. http://www.ids.ac.uk/ids/publicat/wp/wp91.pdf
Morley, Samuel A., Roberto Machado, and Stefano Pettinato, “Indexes of Structural Reform in
Latin America,” ECLAC, Santiago, Chile (LC/L.1166), January 1999.
Mukand, Sharun, and Dani Rodrik, “In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence,
Experimentation, and Economic Performance,” January 2002.
Nasdaq International Magazine, #24, September 1999.

38
Nelson, Richard R., “On Technological Capabilities and their Acquisition,” in R. Evenson and
G. Ranis, eds., Science and Technology: Lessons for Development Policy, Westview Press,
Boulder, CO, 2000, 71-80.
Odagiri, Hiroyuki, and Akira Goto, “The Japanese System of Innovation: Past, Present, and
Future,” in Richard R. Nelson, ed., National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis,
Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford, 1993, 76-114.
Rauch, James E., and Joel Watson, “Entrepreneurship in International Trade,” University of
California at San Diego Economics Discussion Paper 2001-20, December 2001.
Roll, Richard, and John Tallbott, “Why Many Developing Countries Just Aren’t,” unpublished
paper, November 13, 2001.
Saxonhouse, Gary, and Gavin Wright, “Technological Evolution in Cotton Spinning, 18781933,” unpublished paper, Stanford University, January 2000.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., “Learning to Learn, Localized Learning and Technological Progress,” in P.
Dasgupta and P. Stoneman, eds., Economic Policy and Technological Performance, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1987, 125-153.
Westphal, Larry E., “Empirical Justification for Infant Industry Promotion,” World Bank Staff
Working Paper No. 445, March 1981.
Wood, Adrian, and Jörg Mayer, "Africa's Export Structure in a Comparative Perspective," IDS,
Sussex, September 1999, 1-38. http://www.ids.ac.uk/ids/global/pdfs/wood2a.pdf
Yonekawa, Shin-ichi, “The Growth of Cotton Spinning Firms: A Comparative Study,” in A.
Okochji and S. Yonekawa, eds., The Textile Industry and its Business Climate, the International
Conference on Business History 8, University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 1982, 1-44.
Zeira, Joseph, “Investment as a Process of Search,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 95, no. 1,
1987, 204-210.

Table 1: Comparison of top 25 export items to the U.S in 2000: Bangladesh and Pakistan (US$ million)
A. Bangladesh
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

HS Code and Product
620520 - MENS/BOYS SHIRTS - WOVEN - COTTON
620342 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
650590 - HATS AND OTHER HEADGEAR - KNITTED OR FROM TEXTILE MATERIAL NOT IN STRIPS
620462 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
030613 - SHRIMPS AND PRAWNS - FROZEN
620630 - WOMENS/GIRLS BLOUSES, SHIRTS AND SHIRT-BLOUSES - WOVEN - COTTON
611030 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
611020 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - COTTON
620193 - MENS/BOYS ANORAKS, SKI AND WIND JACKETS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES - WOVEN - MAN-MADE FIBRES
620343 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
610821 - WOMENS/GIRLS BRIEFS AND PANTIES - KNITTED - COTTON
620293 - WOMENS/GIRLS ANORAKS, SKI AND WIND JACKETS AND SIMILAR ARTICLES - WOVEN - MAN-MADE FIBRES
620920 - BABIES GARMENTS (INCL COATS AND SNOWSUITS) AND CLOTHING ACCESSORIES - WOVEN - COTTON
621111 - MENS/BOYS SWIMWEAR - WOVEN
621142 - WOMENS/GIRLS COVERALLS, SMOCKS AND GARMENTS NES - WOVEN - COTTON
620640 - WOMENS/GIRLS BLOUSES, SHIRTS AND SHIRT-BLOUSES - WOVEN - MAN-MADE FIBRES
620821 - WOMENS/GIRLS PYJAMAS AND NIGHTDRESSES - WOVEN - COTTON
620530 - MENS/BOYS SHIRTS - WOVEN - MAN-MADE FIBRES
620463 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
630622 - TENTS - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
620452 - WOMENS/GIRLS SKIRTS AND DIVIDED SKIRTS - WOVEN - COTTON
611120 - BABIES GARMENTS (INCL HOSIERY) AND CLOTHING ACCESSORIES - KNITTED - COTTON
620469 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - TEXTILE NES
621040 - MENS/BOYS SNOWSUITS AND SIMILAR GARMENTS NES - WOVEN - COATED FABRICS
610510 - MEN'S/BOYS SHIRTS - KNITTED - COTTON
SUB-TOTAL
OTHERS
TOTAL (ALL PRODUCTS)

Bangladesh exports
236.2
183.9
175.1
148.5
145.2
141.4
123.3
99.4
82.0
61.4
51.5
48.7
36.9
35.7
35.7
34.1
31.6
31.3
31.3
31.2
25.5
23.7
23.2
20.6
20.6
1878.1
540.3
2418.4

Pakistan exports
34.5
70.9
0.7
17.2
7.5
11.4
5.6
284.1
2.6
20.0
0.7
2.4
5.5
0.7
24.9
0.7
3.6
2.4
6.8
0.6
4.5
11.7
0.9
0.9
172.4
693.4
1474.0
2167.4

B. Pakistan
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

HS Code and Product
611020 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - COTTON
610510 - MEN'S/BOYS SHIRTS - KNITTED - COTTON
630260 - COTTON TERRY TOWELS AND HOUSEHOLD LINEN OF COTTON TERRY FABRICS
570110 - CARPETS - WOOL/ FINE HAIR - KNOTTED
630710 - INDUSTRIAL SHOP TOWELS (FLOOR/DISH CLOTHS, DUSTERS AND CLEANING CLOTHS)
620342 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
420310 - ARTICLES OF APPAREL OR CLOTHING (EXCEPT GLOVES) - LEATHER
630210 - BEDSHEETS, PILLOWCASES AND BED LINEN (INCL SETS) - KNITTED OR CROCHETED
520819 - COTTON (>85%) FABRICS - WOVEN NES - UNBLEACHED - <200 G/M2
610910 - T-SHIRTS, SINGLETS AND OTHER VESTS - KNITTED - COTTON
620520 - MENS/BOYS SHIRTS - WOVEN - COTTON
520812 - COTTON (>85%) FABRICS - PLAIN WEAVE - UNBLEACHED - 100-200 G/M2
630221 - BEDSHEETS, PILLOWCASES AND BED LINEN (INCL SETS) - WOVEN, PRINTED - COTTON
630222 - BEDSHEETS, PILLOWCASES AND BED LINEN (INCL SETS) - WOVEN, PRINTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
711319 - ARTICLES OF JEWELLERY - PRECIOUS METALS (OTHER THAN SILVER)
621142 - WOMENS/GIRLS COVERALLS, SMOCKS AND GARMENTS NES - WOVEN - COTTON
520512 - COTTON (>85%) YARN - SINGLE, UNCOMBED 714.29-232.56 DECITEX - NON-RETAIL
901890 - INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES USED IN MEDICAL, SURGICAL OR VETERINARY SCIENCES NES (INCL PARTS)
520839 - COTTON (>85%) FABRICS - WOVEN NES - DYED 1 COLOR - <200 G/M2
950662 - OTHER INFLATABLE BALLS FOR SPORTS
630392 - CURTAINS (INCL DRAPES), INTERIOR BLINDS AND BED VALANCES - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
630231 - BEDSHEETS, PILLOWCASES AND BED LINEN (INCL SETS) - WOVEN, NOT PRINTED - COTTON
521021 - COTTON (<85%) /MAN-MADE FABRICS - PLAIN WEAVE - BLEACHED - <200 G/M2
630790 - MADE UP ARTICLES OF TEXTILE MATERIALS NES (INCLUDING DRESS PATTERNS AND SHOE LACES)
620343 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
SUB-TOTAL
OTHERS
TOTAL (ALL PRODUCTS)

Source: Trade Data Online from Industry Canada (http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrkti/tdst/engdoc/tr_homep.html)

Pakistan exports
284.1
172.4
138.0
100.8
85.9
70.9
70.3
50.9
39.1
34.7
34.5
32.6
31.3
30.5
25.7
24.9
24.2
24.1
23.4
23.2
22.6
21.8
21.4
20.3
20.0
1427.7
739.8
2167.4

Bangladesh exports
99.4
20.6
19.6
0.0
11.1
183.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
14.9
236.2
2.7
4.2
0.0
0.0
35.7
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.7
61.4
690.7
1727.7
2418.4

Table 2: Comparison of top 25 export items to the U.S in 2000: Honduras and Dominican Republic (US$ million)
A. Honduras
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

HS Code and Product
610910 - T-SHIRTS, SINGLETS AND OTHER VESTS - KNITTED - COTTON
611020 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - COTTON
620342 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
610711 - MEN'S/BOYS UNDERWEAR - KNITTED - COTTON
621210 - BRASSIERES
610990 - T-SHIRTS, SINGLETS AND OTHER VESTS - KNITTED - TEXTILE NES
610510 - MEN'S/BOYS SHIRTS - KNITTED - COTTON
620520 - MENS/BOYS SHIRTS - WOVEN - COTTON
090111 - COFFEE - NOT ROASTED, NOT DECAFFEINATED
030613 - SHRIMPS AND PRAWNS - FROZEN
080300 - BANANAS, INCLUDING PLANTAINS - FRESH OR DRIED
620462 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
854430 - IGNITION WIRING SETS AND OTHER WIRING SETS USED FOR VEHICLES, AIRCRAFT OR SHIPS
621010 - RAINCOATS AND GARMENTS NES MADE UP OF TEXTILE FELTS AND NONWOVEN TEXTILE FABRICS
240210 - CIGARS, CHEROOTS AND CIGARILLOS (CONTAINING TOBACCO)
610822 - WOMENS/GIRLS BRIEFS AND PANTIES - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
620343 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
611030 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
610821 - WOMENS/GIRLS BRIEFS AND PANTIES - KNITTED - COTTON
620530 - MENS/BOYS SHIRTS - WOVEN - MAN-MADE FIBRES
610462 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - KNITTED - COTTON
030611 - ROCK LOBSTER AND OTHER SEA CRAWFISH - FROZEN
080719 - MELONS OTHER THAN WATERMELONS - FRESH
610342 - MEN'S/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - KNITTED - COTTON
620711 - MENS/BOYS UNDERWEAR - WOVEN - COTTON
SUB-TOTAL
OTHERS
TOTAL (ALL PRODUCTS)

Honduras exports
499.1
458.7
142.6
133.1
128.0
122.6
121.0
112.1
97.2
83.6
76.1
74.7
57.9
54.8
49.8
49.6
47.9
45.8
45.4
39.0
34.7
26.4
22.7
20.7
20.1
2563.7
526.3
3090.0

Dominican Republic
exports
173.7
118.1
493.0
123.7
144.6
20.8
14.0
21.6
3.2
0.4
2.8
247.8
0.0
7.6
191.5
37.5
194.5
23.8
36.3
13.6
19.6
0.0
5.9
18.2
2.9
1915.2
2468.8
4384.0

B. Dominican Republic
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

HS Code and Product
620342 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
901890 - INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES USED IN MEDICAL, SURGICAL OR VETERINARY SCIENCES NES (INCL PARTS)
620462 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - COTTON
620343 - MENS/BOYS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
240210 - CIGARS, CHEROOTS AND CIGARILLOS (CONTAINING TOBACCO)
610910 - T-SHIRTS, SINGLETS AND OTHER VESTS - KNITTED - COTTON
621210 - BRASSIERES
711319 - ARTICLES OF JEWELLERY - PRECIOUS METALS (OTHER THAN SILVER)
610711 - MEN'S/BOYS UNDERWEAR - KNITTED - COTTON
640610 - PARTS OF FOOTWEAR - UPPERS (EXCLUDING STIFFENERS)
611020 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - COTTON
853620 - AUTOMATIC CIRCUIT BREAKERS - VOLTAGE NOT EXCEEDING 1,000 VOLTS
170111 - CANE SUGAR - RAW
720260 - FERRO-NICKEL
650590 - HATS AND OTHER HEADGEAR - KNITTED OR FROM TEXTILE MATERIAL NOT IN STRIPS
620333 - MENS/BOYS JACKETS AND BLAZERS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
853690 - OTHER APPARATUS - FOR SWITCHING, PROTECTING OR CONNECTING ELECTRIC CIRCUITS - NOT EXCEEDING 1,000 V
850440 - ELECTRIC STATIC CONVERTERS (INCL POWER SUPPLIES, RECTIFIERS AND INVERTERS)
611592 - SOCKS AND STOCKINGS - KNITTED - COTTON
620463 - WOMENS/GIRLS TROUSERS, OVERALLS AND SHORTS - WOVEN - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
611120 - BABIES GARMENTS (INCL HOSIERY) AND CLOTHING ACCESSORIES - KNITTED - COTTON
610822 - WOMENS/GIRLS BRIEFS AND PANTIES - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
610821 - WOMENS/GIRLS BRIEFS AND PANTIES - KNITTED - COTTON
611241 - WOMEN/GIRL SWIMWEAR - KNITTED - SYNTHETIC FIBRES
610832 - WOMENS/GIRLS PYJAMAS AND NIGHTDRESSES - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
SUB-TOTAL
OTHERS
TOTAL (ALL PRODUCTS)

Source: Trade Data Online from Industry Canada (http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrkti/tdst/engdoc/tr_homep.html)

Dominican Republic
exports
493.0
339.9
247.8
194.5
191.5
173.7
144.6
142.3
123.7
119.2
118.1
82.4
78.0
70.5
57.0
51.5
51.1
48.3
46.4
42.3
38.8
37.5
36.3
34.6
33.5
2996.4
1387.6
4384.0

Honduras exports
142.6
0.0
74.7
47.9
49.8
499.1
128.0
0.0
133.1
0.0
458.7
0.0
4.4
0.0
1.1
2.8
0.0
0.0
11.2
13.2
18.0
49.6
45.4
4.2
3.2
1687.1
1402.9
3090.0

Table 3: Comparison of top 25 export items to the U.S in 2000: Taiwan and South Korea (US$ million)
A. Taiwan
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

HS Code and Product
847130 - PORTABLE COMPUTERS (WEIGHT 10-KG OR LESS) WITH AT LEAST A CPU, A KEYBOARD AND A DISPLAY
847330 - PARTS AND ACCESSORIES OF AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING MACHINES (INCL COMPUTERS) AND UNITS THEREOF
854213 - MONOLITHIC DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS - METAL OXIDE SEMICONDUCTORS (MOS TECHNOLOGY)
847160 - INPUT OR OUTPUT UNITS FOR COMPUTERS AND OTHER DATA PROCESSING MACHINES
854230 - MONOLITHIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS NES (OTHER THAN DIGITAL)
852510 - TRANSMISSION APPARATUS - FOR FAX, TELEVISION AND RADIO TRANSMITTERS
853400 - PRINTED CIRCUITS
847180 - OTHER UNITS (EXCL STORAGE AND INPUT/OUTPUT UNITS) OF AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING MACHINES
851750 - MODEMS AND OTHER APPARATUS FOR CARRIER-CURRENT LINE SYSTEMS OR FOR DIGITAL LINE SYSTEMS NES
850440 - ELECTRIC STATIC CONVERTERS (INCL POWER SUPPLIES, RECTIFIERS AND INVERTERS)
852390 - PREPARED UNRECORDED MEDIA FOR SOUND RECORDING OR OTHER PHENOMENA (EXCL CINEMATOGRAPHY) NES
611030 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
731815 - OTHER BOLTS OR SCREWS NES (WITH OR WITHOUT THEIR NUTS OR WASHERS) - IRON OR STEEL
846591 - SAWING MACHINES FOR WORKING WOOD, CORK, BONE. HARD RUBBER, HARD PLASTICS OR SIMILAR HARD MATERIALS
871200 - BICYCLES AND OTHER CYCLES
848180 - TAPS, COCKS, VALVES AND OTHER SIMILAR APPLIANCES, NES
950691 - ARTICLES AND EQUIPMENT FOR EXERCISE, GYMNASTICS AND ATHLETICS
731814 - THREADED SELF-TAPPING SCREWS - IRON OR STEEL
847170 - STORAGE UNITS FOR COMPUTERS AND OTHER DATA PROCESSING MACHINES
853669 - ELECTRICAL PLUGS AND SOCKETS - FOR VOLTAGE NOT EXCEEDING 1, 000 VOLTS
940320 - METAL FURNITURE NOT FOR OFFICE USE
731816 - NUTS - IRON OR STEEL
847150 - DIGITAL PROCESSING UNITS WITH OR WITHOUT REST OF SYSTEM
940360 - WOODEN FURNITURE FOR OTHER USE
852540 - STILL IMAGE VIDEO CAMERAS AND OTHER VIDEO CAMERA RECORDERS
SUB-TOTAL
OTHERS
TOTAL (ALL PRODUCTS)

Taiwan exports
3796.1
3769.2
3343.0
1220.7
1151.4
908.7
895.9
892.7
614.4
486.8
447.7
385.7
318.4
286.6
278.8
277.7
271.0
260.9
229.9
215.4
206.2
203.0
202.2
193.1
189.4
21045.0
19469.2
40514.2

South Korea exports
320.7
2824.3
6525.7
2236.1
586.9
37.4
226.9
112.3
43.0
62.4
6.7
366.5
20.6
0.0
0.6
74.4
4.1
3.9
826.8
18.0
14.5
13.7
1245.3
8.5
271.2
15850.5
24449.8
40300.3

B. South Korea
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

HS Code and Product
854213 - MONOLITHIC DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS - METAL OXIDE SEMICONDUCTORS (MOS TECHNOLOGY)
870323 - MOTOR VEHICLES - SPARK IGNITION - CYLINDER CAPACITY 1500-3000 CC
852520 - TRANSMISSION/RECEPTION APPARATUS - FOR CB/AMATEUR RADIOS, FAX, CELLULAR PHONES AND THE LIKE
847330 - PARTS AND ACCESSORIES OF AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING MACHINES (INCL COMPUTERS) AND UNITS THEREOF
847160 - INPUT OR OUTPUT UNITS FOR COMPUTERS AND OTHER DATA PROCESSING MACHINES
847150 - DIGITAL PROCESSING UNITS WITH OR WITHOUT REST OF SYSTEM
847170 - STORAGE UNITS FOR COMPUTERS AND OTHER DATA PROCESSING MACHINES
271000 - PREPARATIONS OF/NON-CRUDE PETROLEUM OILS AND OILS OBTAINED FROM BITUMINOUS MINERALS
854230 - MONOLITHIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS NES (OTHER THAN DIGITAL)
870322 - MOTOR VEHICLES - SPARK IGNITION - CYLINDER CAPACITY 1000-1500 CC
851650 - MICROWAVE OVENS - DOMESTIC
611030 - SWEATERS, SWEATSHIRTS AND WAIST-COATS - KNITTED - MAN-MADE FIBRES
847130 - PORTABLE COMPUTERS (WEIGHT 10-KG OR LESS) WITH AT LEAST A CPU, A KEYBOARD AND A DISPLAY
852540 - STILL IMAGE VIDEO CAMERAS AND OTHER VIDEO CAMERA RECORDERS
841510 - AIR CONDITIONING MACHINES (AIR CONDITIONERS) - WINDOW OR WALL TYPES, SELF-CONTAINED
620530 - MENS/BOYS SHIRTS - WOVEN - MAN-MADE FIBRES
852190 - VIDEO RECORDING OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS - EXCLUDING MAGNETIC TAPE-TYPE
853400 - PRINTED CIRCUITS
852990 - PARTS (EXCLUDING AERIALS) FOR RADIO, TELEVISION, RADAR AND OTHER SIMILAR APPARATUS
401110 - NEW PNEUMATIC TIRES OF RUBBER - FOR USE ON MOTOR CARS (INCL STATION WAGONS AND RACING CARS)
852110 - VIDEO RECORDING OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS - MAGNETIC TAPE TYPE
870899 - OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS NES
481011 - PAPER (WOODFREE) - COATED - FOR WRITING/PRINTING - <150 G/M2
841430 - COMPRESSORS OF A KIND USED IN REFRIGERATING EQUIPMENT
847149 - OTHER COMPUTERS OR DIGITAL AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING UNITS PRESENTED IN THE FORM OF SYSTEMS
SUB-TOTAL
OTHERS
TOTAL (ALL PRODUCTS)

Source: Trade Data Online from Industry Canada (http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrkti/tdst/engdoc/tr_homep.html)

South Korea exports
6525.7
4281.3
2916.3
2824.3
2236.1
1245.3
826.8
599.9
586.9
542.8
486.8
366.5
320.7
271.2
262.6
257.9
235.9
226.9
187.4
181.1
172.5
148.2
143.8
139.0
131.1
26117.3
14183.1
40300.3

Taiwan exports
3343.0
0.4
58.2
3769.2
1220.7
202.2
229.9
1.1
1151.4
0.0
0.6
385.7
3796.1
189.4
1.2
18.0
16.5
895.9
123.0
43.6
6.3
150.7
2.8
17.2
87.5
15710.6
24803.6
40514.2

Figure 1: Export concentration in selected countries
0.9

cumulative shares of exports to the U.S. in 2000

0.8

0.7

0.6
Honduras
Dominican Rep.
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Taiwan
S. Korea
Germany

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
no. of 6-digit HS products

