                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE COMPLEXION GAP: THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF COLOR AMONG FREE
         AFRICAN AMERICANS IN THE RURAL ANTEBELLUM SOUTH


                                          Howard Bodenhorn


                                         Working Paper 8957
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8957


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




I thank Tim Conley, Stanley Engerman, Farley Grubb, James Irwin, Whittington Johnson, Kyle Kauffman,
Sumner LaCroix, Robert Margo, Michelle McLennan, Carolyn Moehling, Anthony O'Brien, and Joel
Williamson for comments on an earlier draft. Financial assistance from the Robert King Mellon Foundation,
the John M. Olin Foundation, the Economic History Association, and Lafayette College is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Complexion Gap: The Economic Consequences of Color among
Free African Americans in the Rural Antebellum South
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 8957
May 2002
JEL No. N3, J7, Q1



                                              ABSTRACT

        Historians of U.S. race relations typically portray southern whites as reluctant to recognize or act
favorably upon complexion-based differences within the African American community. Historians
contend that mixed-race African Americans (mulattoes) received few advantages as a result of their partly
white heritage. This paper shows that a there was a distinct complexion gap in late antebellum America.
Mulatto men were more likely than black men to own farms or operate them as tenants, whereas black
men were more likely to find employment as farm laborers throughout their lives. Quantile regressions
also reveal a complexion gap in wealth accumulation. Mulattoes acquired more property than blacks,
particularly at the upper end of the wealth distribution. Thus, an analysis of data included in the 1860
census implies a complex social hierarchy based on subtle gradations in skin color. At the upper end of
the wealth distribution, light-complected mulattoes demonstrated a greater propensity to socioeconomic
advancement than dark-complected blacks.




Howard Bodenhorn
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042-1776
and NBER
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu
                              Whether by design or happenstance, it was costly to be black even in

                              the black community. (Johnson 1996, p.78)



Introduction

       Historians of nineteenth-century race relations emphasize the primacy of complexion not only

in interactions between whites and African Americans but between African Americans of different

colors as well. Americans of both races demonstrated clear preferences for light skins, and African

American leaders were disproportionately drawn from the light-skinned segment of the population.

This phenomenon is well documented for antebellum U.S. cities, Britain's Caribbean colonies, and

large parts of Central and South America. Charleston's mulatto elite, for example, aligned

themselves politically and socially with the city's white leaders, and the organization that best

symbolized Charleston's mixed-race elite, the appropriately named Brown Fellowship Society,

admitted only fair-skinned mulattoes. A regular event on New Orleans' social calendar was the so-

called quadroon ball where wealthy white men courted eligible, light-skinned African American

women and paid for the privilege of taking a mulatto mistress (Williamson 1984, p. 23).

       Subtle complexion distinctions did not fall strictly within the purview of New Orleans and

Charleston sophisticates. Bogger (1997, p. 104) found that Norfolk, Virginia's African Americans

were deeply color conscious, especially when choosing a marriage partner. Horton (1993)

documented mulatto advantages in Cincinnati, Buffalo, and Boston. Hershberg and Williams (1981)

uncovered a similar effect in nineteenth-century Philadelphia. Litwack (1961, p. 182) concluded that

light skin might not guarantee African American success, but it opened some doors normally closed


                                                 2
to blacks. Johnson (1996, pp. 16-17) found that in Savannah "color was a greater obstacle to social

interaction among people of African origin than either culture or legal status."

       Even though they argue that the early nineteenth century urban African American community

operated within the context of an intricate socioeconomic hierarchy based on subtle gradations in

skin complexion, historians argue the same sorts of complexion-based differences failed to appear

in the rural Upper South (e.g., Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina) during the antebellum era.

Mencke (1979, pp. 18-19) wrote that whites in the Upper South were not inclined to distinguish

mulattoes from blacks. The entire class of free African Americans was "viewed as a social sore, a

dark, threatening force potentially fomenting rebellion among the slave population." Davis (1991,

pp. 26, 31, 33-34), too, argued that Upper South whites drew no effective color distinctions, certainly

none significant enough to provide light-skinned mulattoes with any sort of social or economic

advantage. Horowitz (1973, p. 515) drew the traditional interpretation in starkest relief. He argued

that in Britain's Caribbean colonies, the mulatto group grew ever more esteemed, elevated to a

distinct intermediate class, even while Upper South mulattoes were being pushed down into a mass

of "blackness" -- a downward push that began in the colonial period and continued throughout the

subsequent two centuries.

       Utilizing information collected from the 1860 manuscript census records of twenty-six rural

southern counties, this article builds on other recent studies which show that the traditional

interpretation is debatable.2 Evidence from the population and agricultural censuses show that



  2
    Komlos (1992) and Bodenhorn (1999a, 1999c) find that light-skinned African Americans
were taller than blacks. For those unfamiliar with the methodology and basic findings of
historical anthropometry, good introductions are Steckel and Floud (1997) and Komlos and Cuff
(1998).

                                                  3
mixed-race men moved from farm laborers to tenancy earlier and in greater proportions than black

men. Similarly, a greater proportion of mulatto men ultimately owned their own farm than did black

men. It is not surprising then that mulatto heads of households accumulated significantly more

personal property than black-headed households. Using quantile regression methods, this article

reports a marked complexion gap in the upper half of the African-American wealth distribution of

the antebellum Upper South. Thus, color was as important a determinant of race relations in the

rural Upper South as it was in the urban Lower South. Historians failed to recognize this

complexion gap because an outspoken, socially visible, and politically active mulatto elite never

emerged in rural areas, but the emergence of a visible mulatto elite and the primacy of color were

not synonymous in southern society.



Miscegenation and Mulattoes in the Upper South, 1620-1860

       Africans first arrived in the Virginia colony in 1619 or 1620 and almost immediately began

forming intimate relationships with whites. Guild (1969, p.21) found that the first reference to an

African American in Virginia's legislative record appeared in 1630 and represented the opening salvo

in a long battle against miscegenation. The colonial council ordered Hugh Davis to be soundly

whipped for lying with a black woman, an act he was forced to publicly acknowledge on the

Sabbath. A decade later, Robert Sweet was forced to do penance in church for getting a black

woman with child. The woman was whipped.

       Concerns with miscegenation ultimately provoked a significant colonial departure from

English legal tradition. Tradition held that a child's status followed the father's. In miscegenation

cases identification of the father was often problematic, thus it was simpler to inhere the mother's


                                                 4
status to the child. In 1662 Virginia law made the mulatto child of a slave woman a slave (Guild

1969, pp. 23-24). Until 1691 the mulatto child of a white woman was free, but an assembly act of

that year imposed a penalty of five years' forced servitude on the white mother and thirty years of

servitude on the mulatto child (Guild 1969, pp. 24-25; Davis 1991, p. 33).

          Although they labeled it servitude, most colonials treated it as de facto slavery. Many

masters kept their mulatto servants in lifetime bondage, others released them only when forced by

the courts to do so. Ann Redman's case is instructive. Ann, a mulatto woman and daughter of an

English woman, was ordered "freed from slavery and discharged from the service of Thomas Lloyd"

of Richmond County, Virginia who had previously refused to release her (Johnston 1970, p. 178,

emphasis added).3 Courts were forced to intercede in many instances because masters sometimes

sold these servants to others, representing them as bona fide slaves. The practice became serious

enough that in 1765 the legislature levied punishments for failing to release mulatto children on their

thirty-first birthday or selling them to others without notifying the buyer of their true status (Guild

1969, p. 58). While it has been true in all epochs, the dictum that children should choose their

parents carefully applied with particular force in colonial Virginia.

          Interracial affairs, once discovered, carried a stigma in the U.S. not seen in other slave

societies. In the British West Indies and Portuguese South America, gender imbalances among

whites led to widespread miscegenation. It was likely that European planters in the West Indies and

elsewhere were initially as squeamish about racial mixing as their North American counterparts, but

demographic forces quickly overcame reservations. Horowitz (1973) and Degler (1971) argue that

by the mid-eighteenth century, miscegenation between white planters and black slaves was


  3
      Johnston (1970) reports several other similar cases.

                                                   5
widespread, mulatto progeny commonplace, and manumission the rule.

       The same was not true in North America. Despite more balanced gender ratios, whites and

blacks carried on illicit affairs that resulted in mulatto children. To many contemporary southerners,

miscegenation was reprehensible, but manumitting the progeny was a singularly dangerous,

antisocial act. Degler (1971, pp. 194-195) argues that most whites believed it better that half-white

offspring live a lifetime in bondage than have free society populated with mixed-race African

Americans. Virginia law discouraged manumission, first by requiring planters to post bonds

guaranteeing that the manumitted slave would not become a charge on the county's poor relief rolls,

then in 1806, by requiring manumitted slaves to emigrate within twelve months of manumission or

face sale back into slavery (Guild 1969, p. 72). Few masters would free a slave only to see her sold

into the service of another, perhaps someone less kind.

       Not unexpectedly, legislative attempts to thwart miscegenation failed. According to the 1860

census, the Upper South was home to more than 61,000 free mulattoes (36 percent of the free

African-American population) and 102,000 mulatto slaves (11 percent of slaves). But it seems likely

that the 1860 census underreported mulattoes relative to blacks. Registers of free African Americans

taken from sixteen Maryland counties imply that more than 44 percent were free mulattoes (Komlos

1992, p. 303).   Similarly, Bodenhorn (1999a) reports that registers from twenty-three Virginia

counties described about 63 percent of free-born African Americans as mulatto. Census enumerators

were asked to distinguish between mulattoes and blacks and they apparently tended to identify only

the fairest complected African Americans as mulatto.4


  4
   This reporting bias may strengthen the results reported below if census marshals, in fact,
identified only the lightest African-American as mulattoes. To the extent that complexion
preferences operated, they should have been strongest for the lightest complected.

                                                  6
       A thorny political and moral issue revolved around how to define this mixed-race population.

Some historians argue that the so-called "one drop rule" (a single drop of black blood made one

black) that became the standard under Jim Crow had antebellum, perhaps even colonial, roots (Davis

1991, pp. 31-34; Degler 1971, pp. 241-243; Mencke 1979, pp. ix-x). Davis (1991, pp. 33-34) argued

that the one drop rule became the accepted social standard by the early eighteenth century, but he

recognized that the mulattoes' legal status remained in flux throughout most of the eighteenth

century. Degler (1971, pp. 241-243) cites southern case law from the eighteenth and nineteenth

centuries to support his contention that blacks and mulattoes were, as far as southern law and

southern society was concerned, one and the same.

       Degler's seems an extreme interpretation given that in 1785 Virginia legally defined a person

as black if he or she had one black grandparent (Guild 1969, p. 29). For many southerners, this

dividing line between white and black was still too generous. Williamson (1984, p. 13) contends

that a one-quarter delineation created a distinct class of people "who were significantly black, visibly

black, and known to be black, but by the law of the land and the rulings of the court had the

privileges of whites." Most whites preferred sharper distinctions. Historians insist that Upper South

whites may have been forced to recognize the distinction de jure, but refused to do so de facto.

Instead, Upper South race relations aimed to make all African Americans black even while Lower

South whites elevated mulattoes to a distinct intermediate class (Horowitz 1973, p. 515).

       Horowitz (1973) and Mencke (1979) argue that differences in the attitudes toward mulattoes

of Upper and Lower South whites arose out of regional differences in mulatto ancestry. As

previously noted, West Indian and Lower South mulattoes tended to be the offspring of wealthy

white men and black women, either slave or free. Thus, mulattoes were the progeny of the elite,


                                                   7
were recognized as such and provided with many of the advantages that followed from having a

wealthy parent. Nearly all were manumitted, most were educated, many even inherited from their

father's estates. Upper South mulattoes, on the other hand, were more likely to be the offspring of

poor whites and even poorer slaves.         Mixed-race people of the Upper South, then, were

overwhelmingly poor and carried a mark of poverty throughout their lives.

       For many historians, portraying Upper South white society as decidedly monochromatic

follows from the incongruence of mulattoes and slavery that made many Upper South whites

uncomfortable. Nevertheless, some slaves were at least partially white. Although the censuses are

imperfect sources, the 1850 census identified about 10 percent of Virginia's slave population as

mulatto. By 1860 about 15 percent were so identified. In other Upper South and border states, the

proportions were higher yet; close to 20 percent in Kentucky and Missouri (Mencke 1979, p. 21).

No amount of moral maneuvering and no legalism could hide the fact that some slaves were part

white, but if law or society recognized these people as white (of any degree), the premise that only

blacks were slaves would have been violated. To ease their consciences, it was imperative to view

those with even the smallest trace of black heritage as black. To do otherwise would have been to

enslave whites as well as blacks. Defining all African Americans as black maintained the fiction that

blacks were slaves and slaves were black.

       Upper South whites, then, are portrayed as unremitting in their efforts to disavow the

mulattoes' white heritage and historians are nearly as unremitting in their efforts to portray Upper

South whites in this way. In summarizing his thesis, Degler (1971, p. 102) states that there "are two

qualities in the United States racial pattern: white and black. A person is one or the other; there is

no intermediate position." The evidence presented below belies this interpretation. Both the African


                                                  8
American and white communities drew more sophisticated color distinctions. Both groups

recognized subtle gradations rather than sharp lines. Contemporary whites, in fact, commonly

described African Americans as black, brown, copper, olive, nutmeg, ginger, chestnut, and yellow,

among others. Of course, observing differences and acting on them were different things, but the

evidence suggests that the white and the African American communities both saw and acted on

complexion differences. Finding that both communities recognized gradations should not come as

a surprise. Few things are either-or, black-white; most demonstrate subtle gradations. Upper South

society’s response to mulattoes (the personification of color gradation) was more complex than

previously believed.



Assessing the 1860 Census as a Data Source

         Data on the occupations and personal wealth of free blacks and mulattoes living in the

antebellum South were taken from a sample of twenty-six rural southern counties included in the

1860 manuscript census.5 Because most free African Americans lived in the Upper South, the

sample is heavily weighted with counties from that region, including eight from Maryland, nine from

Virginia, five from North Carolina, two from Kentucky, and one each from Tennessee and Louisiana.

Summary statistics reported in Table 1 outline the information collected on about 7,000 African-

American households, divided into four groups: households headed by mulatto men; households

headed by mulatto women; households headed by black men; and households headed by black

women. It is a large cross-section of free African-American households and should therefore be

representative of their experience in the antebellum Upper South.


  5
      For an explanation of the sampling procedure see Bodenhorn (1999b).

                                                9
       Recent research, however, has questioned just how representative samples drawn from the

census manuscripts may be. Three types of shortcomings are fairly well documented for the

manuscript censuses -- underenumeration, misreporting, and missing data -- and each has distinct

implications for sample reliability. If enumeration errors were random, statistical inferences would

be relatively unaffected. The extant research, however, suggests that enumeration problems were

sometimes extensive and generally nonrandom. Estimates of underenumeration range from about

9 percent to 23 percent, depending on geographic region and the group under consideration (Adams

and Kasakoff 1991; Steckel 1991, p. 588). The poor, the unskilled, the young, the mobile, residents

of large cities and the frontier, and minorities were all more likely to be overlooked by census

enumerators than middling class, educated, skilled workers who had resided in the same small

community for several years.

       Knowing that poor, unskilled, minorities were more likely to be underenumerated than others

raises several potential red flags for a sample of free African Americans drawn from the 1860

manuscript census because all fell into at least one category. Free African Americans were less

skilled, on average, than whites; they are believed to have been less wealthy; and they were

unquestionably in the minority. At the same time, free African Americans tended to belong to more

accurately enumerated groups; state- and county-level legislation rendered them relatively immobile,

and they tended to reside in long-established, stable, small rural communities. Thus, determining

the extent to which southern free African Americans were underenumerated requires comparisons

to alternative sources of information.

       Fortunately for the historian, white concerns with the activities and movements of free blacks

meant that a great deal of information was gathered about them. In addition to the registration


                                                 10
requirement (Maryland, Virginia, and some North Carolina communities required this), Virginia

required court clerks to compile an annual census of free African Americans residing within their

jurisdiction, identifying each individual by name, age, and occupation. Most of these lists are lost,

but the 1860 list for Fauquier County, Virginia is extant, rendering comparison to the census easy.

       The 1860 census manuscript for Fauquier County enumerated 121 African American

household heads. Only 49 of those householders were identified in the clerk's list. The clerk's list

did not separately identify household heads so it does not allow us to determine the extent to which

the census underenumerated heads of households, but this (small) piece of evidence induces some

confidence in the census's coverage.

       A second independent source of information on free African Americans is the state tax lists.

Virginia imposed special head taxes on free African American men. In addition to property taxes,

a legislative act of 1852 imposed a $1.00 head tax on every black man between 21 and 55 years

(Virginia 1852, pp. 4-5). In 1859 an additional $0.80 head tax was imposed on the same group

(Virginia 1859/60, p. 59).6 Given the discriminatory taxes payable by free African Americans, it

would be reasonable to assume, as Blocker (1996, p. 25) has, that county tax collectors, being

entrusted with a fiduciary responsibility, "had a stronger interest than census enumerators in

identifying all property holdings," making the tax lists more complete and accurate than the census

enumerations.

       The results of matching the 1860 Virginia personal property tax lists (in which the head taxes


  6
   The $0.80 head tax was potentially quite onerous. It implied that a 21 year old African-
American owning no taxable property whatsoever was forced to pay a tax equivalent to that paid
by William R. Fleming, a white man living in Goochland County, who was taxed 80 cents on 3
hogs (worth $10), 7 head of cattle ($85), 1 clock ($5), and other household furnishings ($150).
Virginia (1860).

                                                 11
were also recorded) with the 1860 census population manuscripts for five Virginia counties belie

Blocker’s expectation. Census marshals enumerated 576 households headed by male African

Americans, 481 of which reported personal property holdings.7 The five county tax assessors

recorded only 317 (55 percent) of households enumerated in the census. This suggests that census

under-enumerations were modest and random so that statistics derived from the census should be

unbiased to the extent that the reported information is indeed accurate.

         But another oft-noted problem with manuscript censuses is the extent to which and the

direction in which they misreported socioeconomic variables, such as age, wealth, and occupation.

Steckel (1991) found evidence (direct and indirect) of age-heaping, especially at ages ending in 0,

2, and 5. There are few alternatives sources to which to compare ages, but the Fauquier County clerk

reported ages in his annual enumeration of 1860. The census marshal's and the county clerk's

reported ages are in general agreement, although the census did report a greater proportion of ages

ending in 5, which should not bias age-dependent calculations, but simply reduce their precision so

long as approximately equal proportions of ages were rounded up as rounded down.

         Although the 1860 federal manuscript census has come under attack as a reliable statistical

source, it emerges here as in Blocker (1996, pp. 33-34), despite known and unknown enumeration

problems, as a "more complete and accurate tabulation" than most alternatives, such as property tax

lists.   The comparison sources in this instance (Virginia state tax lists and county clerk's

enumerations) have their own shortcomings, and the census stands out as a superior source. It is as

Donald Parkerson (1991, pp. 514-15) noted a matter of perspective. Is the census glass partly empty,


   7
     The five counties are Accomack, Campbell, Fauquier, Goochland, and Stafford. Not all county personal property tax lists are
available because the Library of Virginia's microfilming project is not yet complete. Female-headed households are excluded
because the state taxed only males and male-headed households.

                                                              12
or is it nearly full? He concluded that it is remarkable just how full the census glass actually is.



The Complexion Gap and the Agricultural Ladder

       Agricultural historians have long relied on the metaphor of the agricultural ladder, likening

socioeconomic advance in an agricultural community to movement to ever higher rungs on a ladder

(Bogue 1963; Winters 1978, 1987). The simplest version of the ladder thesis, like that presented in

Atack (1989) posits three steps: agricultural laborers occupy the lowest rung of the ladder, tenants

occupy the intermediate rung, and owner-operators occupy the highest rung. Other versions posit

longer ladders with more rungs. Laborers may be hired by the day, the season, or the year.

Similarly, tenants may be sharecroppers, share tenants, or cash renters; part-owners might own only

a fraction of the land they farm and rent the remainder; and owners can be mortgaged or hold their

real property in fee simple. Regardless of the number of rungs or the distance between them, the

essential thesis is that socioeconomic advance occurs through successive upward movement from

landless laborer to outright owner.

       Outright ownership was clearly the preferred state of affairs for most rural folk, but many

worked as farm laborers and farm tenancy occurred throughout the antebellum South (Reid 1976).

Tenancy provided access to farm land to those unable to purchase their own (Winters 1987, p. 37).

Simultaneously, it produced income for owners unwilling or unable to farm their own land, and this

may have opened the niche exploited by Upper South African Americans. Contemporary reports in

such disparate outlets as the Baltimore American (9 June 1859) and the Virginia House (Journal

1847/48, p. 20) remarked that, in the absence the region’s free African Americans, large tracts of the

region's arable land would have gone untilled. Moreover, migrants might rent for a year or two to


                                                  13
determine if the land and the neighborhood suited their needs. Tenancy, too, may have served an

educational or apprenticeship-type function even while young men acquired the wherewithal to buy

their own farms.

       Because antebellum censuses did not explicitly report on land tenure, inferences about it are

based on subjective interpretations of imperfect and inexplicit data.8 The long-held view is that

tenancy was rare in the antebellum South, but Winters (1987) argues that it was common.9 Based

on a study of eight counties in Tennessee, which Winters contends provide a representative cross-

section of the noncotton South, he finds that tenancy rates in 1850 and 1860 ranged from a low of

3.9 percent to a high of 29.2 percent. In a similar study of sixteen Georgia counties in 1860, Bode

and Ginter (1986, pp. 180-81) found tenancy rates ranging between 3.4 and 42.6 percent. Although

tenancy rates varied dramatically, Winters (1987, p. 40) as well as Bode and Ginter concluded that

farm renting and tenancy were an "integral part of the agricultural structure" of the antebellum South.

Whites were moving up the agricultural ladder. The question is: Were African Americans able to

do so as well?

       Before that question can be answered satisfactorily, several issues of interpretation need to

be resolved. The fundamental problem facing researchers using antebellum censuses is how to treat

people identified as farmers in the population manuscripts and not enumerated in the agricultural



  8
    Even with explicit enumeration of land tenure in postbellum censuses, agricultural and
economic historians still debate the exact meaning of the terms employed by census enumerators.
Alston and Kauffman (1998) and Irwin and O'Brien (1998, 1999) offer recent reinterpretations
based on alternative definitions of seemingly straight-forward terms. A close reading of the
literature reveals that interpreting the manuscript censuses is as much art as science.
  9
    Gray (1933), Ransom and Sutch (1977), and Owsley (1949) offer versions of the traditional
interpretation.

                                                  14
censuses. (The opposite case of appearing in the agricultural census and not in the population census

occurs very infrequently.) Nearly as many methods have been devised for dealing with these so-

called "farmers without farms" as there have been researchers using the censuses. Allan Bogue

(1963), for instance, labeled individuals described as farmers in the population census without a

corresponding entry in the agricultural census as hopeful farm laborers. Bode and Ginter (1986)

argue that some of these men were surely tenants. Atack (1989, p.9) is uncomfortable with Bogue's

treatment of landless farmers as laborers, but remains reluctant to classify them as tenants. He

therefore excludes them from his analysis. Bogue's method produces a lower bound estimate of

tenancy and an upper bound estimate of farm laborers. Atack's estimates produce lower bounds for

both tenancy and laboring. Bode and Ginter's methods produce intermediate estimates.

       Instead of adopting a previously used classification scheme a priori, it seemed more

reasonable to let the data provide some insight on how best to treat variously identified individuals,

particularly since any classification will be used to describe a previously ignored population of free

African Americans. Table 2 provides sample averages for different groups arrayed according to

occupational descriptions given in both the population and agricultural censuses of 1860. In nearly

every county, enumerators separately identified "laborers" and "farm laborers." Given that the

sample is drawn from predominantly rural, agricultural counties, it seems likely that most laborers

(row 1a) were farm laborers (1b), but the fact that the same enumerators labeled them differently

seems curious. Nevertheless, the group of laborers and the group of farm laborers appear to be very

similar. Although laborers were about 2 years older and had acquired about $20 more real property,

the percentage of blacks exceeds 80 percent in both groups, both had 4.8 household members, and

both had acquired about $67 in personal property. Because of their similarities, the two groups are


                                                 15
combined in row 1. Doing so creates an upper bound estimate of farm laborers, which also results

in lower bound proportional estimates of tenants and farmers.

       Row 2 in Table 2 reports information on tenants, which are defined as individuals identified

as farmers in the population census and who appeared in the agricultural census without real property

in the population or agricultural censuses. This is similar to Bogue's definition. Similarly, farmers

(row 4) are those identified as farmers in the population census and who appeared with real property

values in both the population and agricultural censuses. It is the individuals reported in row 3, or

"farmers without farms," that are vexing. These men were identified as farmers and reported positive

real estate holdings in the population census, but could not be matched to the agricultural census.

Comparing their characteristics with those of tenants and farmers suggest that farmers without farms

formed an intermediate class, most likely engaged in agriculture under some form of tenancy. They

tended to be lighter complected than laborers and farmers, but darker than tenants. They were about

4 years younger than farmers and about 1.5 years older than tenants. They lived in smaller

households than either tenants or farmers, but larger households than laborers. They held about the

same dollar value of personal property as tenants, but much less than farmers. Finally, those

reporting real estate holdings reported about $200 more than tenants, but about $300 less than

farmers. Thus, these farmers without farms held substantial wealth, both real and personal, so

excluding them from the analysis seems likely to misrepresent farm tenure in the antebellum South,

so they are included as a separate category.10

       How and to what extent did blacks and mulattoes move up the agricultural ladder in the



  10
   Houdek and Heller (1986) argue that even the most liberal definition of tenants based on
manuscript census labels probably underestimates the extent of tenancy in 1860.

                                                 16
antebellum South? If the complexion gap operated in the rural Upper South, mulattoes should have

climbed the agricultural ladder faster than blacks and reached higher rungs more often. If white land

owners believed mulattoes more capable and thus more likely to succeed as independent or semi-

independent farm operators, white landowners should have been more likely to enter into a tenant

relationship with light-skinned African Americans. If whites behaved in this manner, mulattoes

would achieve tenant status earlier and to a greater extent than blacks. Similarly, if ownership

required mortgage credit, biases among white lenders would have led them to lend more willingly

to mulattoes than blacks, implying that mulatto ownership would occur earlier and in larger

proportions among mulattoes than blacks.

       Table 3 provides unconditional estimates of rates of farm laboring, tenancy, farmers without

farms, and ownership per thousand population for each complexion and quinquennial cohort.11

These estimates reflect a notable complexion gap. At nearly every cohort after age 24, laboring rates

for mulatto men are well below those of black men, often by as much as 250 per 1000 at age.

Equally notable is the much more rapid movement up the ladder from laborer to tenant among

mulattoes than blacks. Tenancy rates among mulattoes increased from about 78 per thousand (or 215

per thousand if we accept that farmers without farms were tenants of some sort) among mulatto men

age 20-24 to 148 per thousand (or 333) at age 30-34, after which tenancy rates changed little. Black

men were much less likely to rise even to tenant status. Tenancy rates among 20-24 year-olds were

only 18 per thousand (or 98) at 20-24 years and rose only to 35 per thousand (or 111) at 30-34 years,

at which time tenancy rates also generally stabilized.


  11
    It should be noted that these statistics do not account for state of residence, age, or time since
manumission. Estimates of wealth accumulation, provided below, account for the two former
effects. The latter is not known and cannot be determined.

                                                  17
       Ownership rates also demonstrate a marked complexion gap. Mulatto men were more likely

to own their own farms than black men at nearly every age. Neither blacks nor mulattoes in their

twenties were likely to own a farm with ownership rates well below 100 per thousand for both

groups. Mulatto men, however, were more likely to acquire their own farm in their thirties and

forties. Ownership rates among mulatto men in the 35-39, 40-44, and 45-49 cohorts were twice or

more those of black men as were those of mulatto men in their late fifties and late sixties. (The

smaller gap for the 50-54 and 60-64 cohorts are likely the result of relatively small numbers of

mulatto men in those cohorts.)

       Clearly, both blacks and mulattoes were capable of climbing the agricultural ladder. Most

began at the unquestioned bottom of the agricultural ladder, as farm laborers, and many remained

there throughout their lives. But many made modest strides up the ladder. For mulattoes, tenancy

rates increased 140 percent between the 20-24 and the 45-49 cohorts. For blacks, tenancy rates

increased 207 percent. It was in achieving land ownership, however, that mulattoes showed a

definitive advantage. Ownership rates increased 640 percent for mulattoes between the 20-24 and

45-49 cohort; for blacks, ownership rates increased a more modest but nonetheless notable 410

percent.

       While the evidence provided in the 1860 census is suggestive of life-cycle effects, it is not

definitive. Artificially constructed cohorts, like those use here, provide a rough proxy for the actual

life-cycle experiences that will be better understood only through longitudinal studies. Over the

course of the nineteenth century several things changed that may have had differential cohort effects.

A brief post-Revolutionary manumission wave was gradually replaced with anti-manumission

attitudes and laws designed to check the practice. Such changes surely changed the nature of


                                                  18
manumission and freedom, changes that are not captured in this analysis. Additionally, each

constructed cohort was at a different point in its life-cycle as it passed through the agricultural

depression of the late 1830s and early 1840s. Passing through this period at different ages may have

had differential cohort effects. Younger cohorts that came of age in the post-depression era may

have found it easier to acquire property than those unfortunate enough to have passed through their

mid-thirties to mid-forties (the ages at which most cohorts began buying their first firms) during the

depression. Only further research, particularly true longitudinal studies, will answer these questions.

One potential data source are the state tax records, which provide annual assessments on real and

personal property

       A meaningful comparison with whites' ascent up the ladder in the antebellum Upper South

awaits further research, but the available evidence suggests that mulattoes, despite their advantages,

lagged behind whites. While Atack's (1989) and Winter's (1987) estimates are not directly

comparable because they do not report on laborers and exclude farmers without farms, their results

imply that blacks and mulattoes were more likely than whites to remain tenants. If Atack's methods

and classifications are used instead of those discussed above, mulatto ownership rates fall well short

of northern men.12 Atack estimates ownership rates for the 20-24 cohort of northern whites at a

remarkable 691 per thousand; Upper South mulattoes achieved ownership rates of only 286 per

thousand. Still, Upper South mulattoes age 45-49 realized an ownership rate of 593 per thousand

at 45-49 years compared to 868 per thousand for northern whites. Certainly, southern mulattoes, no


  12
    Atack (1989), table 2, ignores laborers and farmers without farms and creates three
categories: tenants, part-owners, and owners. Part owners are cases where farm value in the
agricultural census exceeded real estate holdings enumerated in the population manuscript.
Atack's belief is that these men farmed their own property and leased or tenanted additional
acreage.

                                                  19
matter how privileged relative to blacks, labored under the burden of dark skin in a society structured

on racism, but given the burdens they faced it is remarkable that nearly 60 percent of all mulatto farm

operators owned their own farms. Historians, it seems, have been too quick to deny free African

Americans an agency they clearly retained.



The Complexion Gap and Wealth Accumulation

       Because mulattoes were more likely than blacks to rise from farm laborers to tenants and,

ultimately, to farm ownership, mulattoes also accumulated more personal property. It was not

enough to acquire some real estate, either through tenancy or outright ownership. Although farm-

making costs were relatively low in the long-settled Upper South, regular farm operations required

farm implements, tools, animals, feed and seed inventories, and household items. For farmers,

climbing the ladder was usually associated with the acquisition and accumulation of personal

property as either a production or consumption complement for real property. For nonfarm rural

Americans upward occupational mobility implied similar accumulations. Fortunately, the 1860

manuscript census provides data to investigate the rate and nature of personal property accumulation

by the Upper South's free African Americans.

       In addition to the age and occupation data previously discussed, the other critical variables

reported in the 1860 manuscript censuses were real estate and personal wealth entries. Economic

historians frequently use this data, but concerns are often raised about their accuracy. Moreover,

many census marshals returned complete information on some households but failed to enter any

value in either wealth column for others. The exact meaning of this missing data has eluded

researchers. Does a missing value imply zero wealth? Does it imply very low wealth, so low that


                                                  20
it was not worth the marshal's effort to estimate it? Does it imply that households concealed or

obscured wealth from an authority figure who may have reported them to the tax collector? Or, does

it imply neglect or oversight on the marshal's part? It was probably a combination of all these

reasons, but the first is the most common assumption, one that may bias the results.

       Sometimes, the missing observations are simply excluded from statistical analyses. But

doing so is likely to impart an upward bias to wealth estimates if low-wealth households were more

likely to have an unrecorded value than middling or wealthy households. Others assume that missing

observations effectively imply zero wealth holding. This assumption imposes a downward bias if

unrecorded wealth values were low but nonzero. Even though Steckel (1994) found a 40 percent

nonresponse typical, it seems unlikely that 40 percent of American households owned nothing.

Instructions given the census marshals, however, may have induced them value and enumerate only

property liable to state or local taxation rather than all property.13 In this case $0 may have been an

accurate valuation, and the marshals may have chosen to leave blanks rather than report zeros.14

       Complementary evidence suggests that households with unrecorded wealth were low-wealth


  13
     Marshals were instructed to estimate the value of property as assessed for taxation after
adding "the proper amount to the assessment, so that the return should represent as well the true
intrinsic value" since assessed values were often below market values. U.S. Census Office
(1862, p. 79). It is possible, however, that census estimates include more than taxable property.
At another place, marshals were instructed to estimate and record the value of all personal
property, which was "to include the value of all property, possessions, or wealth of each
individual which is not embraced in the column previous [real estate], consist of what it may; the
value of bonds, mortgages, notes, slaves, live stock, plate and jewels, or furniture; in the fine the
value of whatever constitutes the personal wealth of individuals" (Conley and Galenson 1994, p.
149). Even this alternative instruction closely accords with the list of taxable property in
Virginia, so Virginia marshals may have estimated only taxable property rather than all
personalty.
  14
    One enumerator in Virginia recorded 4 zeros in the personal wealth column in addition to
leaving many others blank.

                                                  21
households that, in fact, owned little taxable property. As a check on the census enumerators'

practices, male heads of households listed in the 1860 census in five Virginia counties were linked

to that state's 1860 personal property tax lists. Although both lists ostensibly reported the same thing

(the value of personal property), it was unlikely that both sources would return the same value for

a given household. Virginia (1852) taxed only selected personal property, including slaves over 12

years, farm animals (the first $100 worth was exempt), carriages, watches and clocks, pianos and

harps, gold and silver plate and jewelry, household and kitchen furniture, and financial assets. For

those householders reporting personal property wealth in both sources, census estimates were

consistently higher than taxable valuations, suggesting that census marshals included estimates of

at least some property not subject to taxation.

        The more interesting cases, however, are those households with no wealth estimates recorded

in the census that nevertheless appear in the personal property tax lists. Of 227 such cases, 183 had

no taxable personal property. Eight were assessed on $10 or less. Twenty-five householders were

assessed on values between $11 and $25; eight others on less than $50 in taxable personalty.

Although this implies that unrecorded observations in the census represent low values, it does not

necessarily imply zero personal wealth. It must also be kept in mind that a zero personal property

assessment did not imply zero personal property ownership. In Virginia, clothing, live stock worth

less than $100, and an uncountably finite number of other goods were not subject to state tax.

Moreover, census enumerators (and tax assessors, for that matter) may not have estimated modest

holdings. Thus unreported personalty data should not be taken to imply $0 in actual property

ownership, though it is likely that census enumerators censored at the low end of the wealth

distribution. That is, they failed to report small or, perhaps, hard to value holdings.


                                                  22
       Although plausible explanations can be constructed for the missing data, the issue at hand

is that missing data makes statistical inference problematic, especially when familiar least-squares

or maximum likelihood methods are used. Recent research by Conley and Galenson (1994; 1998)

offers a reasonable estimation alternative to ordinary least squares (OLS), namely quantile or least

absolute deviation (LAD) methods. Because such a large percentage of households (regardless of

nativity and residence) appear in the census without personal property estimates, the use of OLS or

maximum likelihood methods create several problems. First, regardless of sample size, the

estimated coefficients will be biased and inconsistent. Second, most wealth studies employ semi-

logarithmic regression specifications, which require imputation of some positive value for zero and

unrecorded wealth values to make the logarithmic transformations possible and, as Conley and

Galenson (1994, p. 155; 1998, p. 474) demonstrate, regression coefficient estimates differ depending

on the exact imputation.

       A third shortcoming of OLS or ML estimation, even if it produced unbiased and consistent

estimates, is that the conditional mean of the wealth distribution may not be the most useful or

informative statistic. Wealth and income studies are instructive when they inform about wealth at

several different quartiles, deciles, or centiles. It is common, in fact, for studies like those of

Buchinsky (1994), Katz (1998), and Goldin and Katz (1999) to highlight the gap between the highest

and lowest deciles or quartiles. LAD or quantile regression can simultaneously deal with missing

or censored data and allow for direct computation of different centiles, deciles, or quartiles

depending on the researchers' needs and the quality of the underlying data.

       Intuitively, the purpose of either LAD or OLS regression is the same, namely to describe the




                                                23
central tendency of the data.15 OLS estimates the mean of the dependent variable, conditional on the

values of the independent variables. LAD techniques, on the other hand, estimate the median (or any

other centile) given the values of the independent variables. Median (0.5 quantile) regression

estimates a hyperplane through the data that minimizes a weighted sum of the absolute residuals

rather than one that minimizes the sum of the squared residuals. More formally, if we define ei = yi -

3j $j xij. The familiar OLS solution is to minimize 3eiNei with respect to the $’s. LAD estimation,

on the other hand, minimizes 3i *ei *wi, where wi = 2q if ei > 0 or 2(1-q) if ei # 0. The STATA

“qreg” command calculates the weights appropriate to the specified percentile (or quantile) and

solves the minimization problem using a linear programming algorithm.

          The theory of LAD actually predates OLS, and recent research has shown that LAD has

several advantages under certain conditions.16 Brown (1985, p. 418) notes that median-based

procedures are more resistant to a breakdown of basic assumptions than are mean-based procedures,

making LAD particularly attractive in the presence of large outliers. A related advantage of LAD's

robustness properties, is that LAD procedures can be used to deal with missing observations, where

missing data is replaced by arbitrary values that can be varied to yield bounds on significance levels.

A third, a particularly useful feature, is that the procedure is easily generalized to estimate quantiles

other than the median. If we want to estimate the 85th percentile, an appropriate set of weights are

devised so that 85 percent of the residuals are negative. Thus, LAD estimates are robust to outliers



  15
    This and subsequent paragraphs describe quantile regression in an intuitive manner. Those
interested in the details and the mathematical derivations should see Koenker and Bassett (1978),
Buchinsky (1994), Brown (1985), Emerson and Hoaglin (1983), STATA (1995), and Koenker
and Hallock (2001).
  16
       Koenker and Bassett (1978) discuss Laplaces's LAD derivation dating to 1818.

                                                   24
(which we have), missing observations (which we also have), and can generate estimates of wealth

at different points in the distribution. In particular, it can estimate the coefficients of a regression

so long as that line lies completely above or below the censoring point. OLS regression cannot, so

its results depend on the exact censoring point (see Conley and Galenson 1994; 1998 for a more

complete description of this problem).

        Despite its potential advantages, LAD estimation should not necessarily be viewed as the

single best solution to the data problems inherent in the use of census information. LAD estimates

require significant computing power and multiple regression procedures awaited the implementation

of computer-powered linear programming algorithms developed in the 1970s.                     A second

disadvantage is that LAD estimation procedures can, except under very stringent conditions, generate

nonunique solutions.17 A third disadvantage of the procedure actually follows from one its

advantages: although LAD procedures place little weight on large residuals (outliers), it weights very

small residuals heavily (Emerson and Hoaglin 1983, pp. 189-90). Finally, it must be remembered

that quantile regression does not really solve the censoring problem, except by focusing on points

in the wealth distribution above the censoring point. This may or may not interesting (it is in the

present case), but it still does not allow us to discuss the effect of a given variable on the entirety of

the wealth distribution because the entire distribution is not accurately or wholly observed. In short,

though LAD methods are less sensitive than OLS methods to missing or censored data, the missing

data problem is still not completely resolved.

        Before estimating LAD regressions, it was necessary to assign values to the missing personal


  17
     The STATA qreg procedure warns the user when alternative solutions exist at a given
iteration. In the present case, the warning was returned in only a few instances, mostly in the
estimation of quantiles near the censoring point.

                                                   25
property data cells. The available data was used to predict a likely censoring point.18 Table 4 reports

the frequency distribution of personal wealth for black and mulatto households. It is readily seen that

a majority of southern free African Americans owned less than $500 in personal wealth, and many

had accumulated less than $100. Ultimately, about 38 percent of householders returned no personal

wealth information whatsoever.

       Although the exact censoring point cannot be determined unambiguously, the data provide

some very good clues. Marshals in Dorchester County, Maryland and Fauquier and Warren, Virginia

were particularly vigilant, recording wealth estimates for 94.5 percent of enumerated households.

Comparisons of the frequency distributions of these three counties with the remaining 23 reveal that

most censoring occurred at the low end of the distribution. In Dorchester, Fauquier, and Warren

counties, 2.8 percent of households held $5 or less in personalty compared to only 0.5 percent in the

other 23 counties. Censoring was even more pronounced at slightly higher wealth levels. In the

three counties, 21.3 percent of households returned $6-$10 in wealth; 25.1 percent returned $11-$25,

compared to 2.7 and 11.9 percent in the other 23 counties. The likelihood of enumerator censoring

increased at the low end of the wealth distribution, particularly for holdings of less than $10. Based

on this low-end censoring, quantile regressions were estimated assuming the censoring point was

$2, $5, or $10.19


  18
    Conley and Galenson (1998) used the lowest reported value. In this case, two enumerators
actually returned a value of $0 for a handful of households, even while they provided several
dozen missing observations. Thus it seems unlikely that $0 was the actual censoring point.
  19
     The regression parameters were estimated by substituting the censoring point for the missing
data points. Conley and Galenson used a slightly different method, but Conley (private
correspondence 7 July 1999 and 17 August 1999) believed that my method is appropriate so long
as the estimated centile did not fall below the censoring point for any observation. Because only
centiles in the upper half of the distribution are estimated, this is unlikely to have occurred. As

                                                  26
       LAD regressions included several variables likely to influence the pattern of personal

property accumulation. Age and its square were included as independent variables because extensive

research by labor historians has shown that wealth accumulation over a lifetime is largely consistent

with the well-known life-cycle hypothesis, which typically manifests itself as an inverted U-shaped

age-wealth profile. Because rural Upper South African Americans are commonly portrayed as

children of poverty, they probably received few and modest intergenerational transfers so that

twenty-year-olds should have few assets. Moreover, restrictions on educating African Americans

meant limited human capital accumulation except for apprenticeships in a few semi-skilled and

skilled occupations, and relegated most to a lifetime of backbreaking labor and an inability to amass

great personal wealth. Still, we expect that pattern to hold. Even poor people accumulate as they

age, though clearly not as rapidly as wealthier individuals.

       If a complexion gap operated in the rural Upper South, more mulattoes than blacks should

have been better able to rise above the ranks of manual laborer. And, in fact, mulattoes were less

likely than blacks to report their occupation as laborers (see Table 1). Mulattoes and blacks were

about equally likely to obtain work as seamen. Mulattoes were more likely to acquire skills and

report a skilled occupation, or a mercantile or professional employment. Moreover, as the previous

section made clear, mulattoes were more likely to become farm tenants and farm owners. Thus

occupations are divided into ten broad categories and included as independent regressors. To capture


expected, the STATA qreg algorithm returned parameter estimates for lower quantiles when the
lower censoring points were used. At very low quantiles (i.e., 0.4 and below), however, the
procedure returned parameter estimates but no significance levels, implying that the quantile fell
below the censoring point. Parameter estimates at the upper quantiles were little affected by
altering the censoring point. The $5 and $10 censoring points were chosen based on evidence in
Table 4. The $2 censoring point was used because several marshals each reported a handful of
$2 estimates.

                                                 27
any effects of the complexion gap beyond its direct influence on an individual's ability to acquire

human capital or follow an occupation a separate dummy variable (BLACK) was included to capture

the effect. It is expected that the coefficient will be negative and both statistically significant and

economically meaningful.

       A family size variable equal to the number of people residing in the household was also

included in the regression. It is not clear a priori how household or family size might affect wealth

accumulation. On one hand, larger households may have been capable of putting more people to

work, improving the family’s ability to accumulate. On the other hand, households may have had

larger numbers of unproductive members, namely the very young or the elderly, which may have

inhibited wealth accumulation.20

       Finally, dummy variables for state of residence were included to capture any state-specific

effects on an individual's ability to accumulate property. Most southern states passed laws

attempting to limit the geographic mobility of African Americans. Others passed laws barring

African Americans from certain occupations. Both sorts of laws certainly restricted African-

American advance if jobs and incomes demonstrated noted geographic or sectoral shifts. The

dummy variables should capture the impact of different laws and customs as well as differential

enforcements of similar laws (such as nonimmigration laws).

       Based on the availability of data and the likelihood of low-end censoring, quantile regressions


  20
     Two additional variables often included in such regressions -- literacy and mobility -- were
not included. First, very few free African Americans were recorded as literate. It may have been
that very few were literate, or it may have been that census marshals, knowing that it was against
the law to educate free blacks, simply did not bother to ask them if they were literate. Mobility
was excluded because state laws prohibited interstate migration (laws which may not have been
fully obeyed) and because most census marshals recorded state of birth, not county, so that
intrastate migration (that most likely among free African Americans) is unknown.

                                                  28
were estimated for $2, $5, and $10 censoring points (because of their similarities at upper quantiles,

only the $2 censoring point regressions are reported). Regressions were estimated in semi-log form

(the dependent variable is the natural log of personal wealth). Parameter estimates for selected

quantiles as well as OLS estimates for comparative purposes, are reported in Table 5. Most of the

estimates accord with prior expectations.

       For both men and women, the age-wealth profile exhibited the usual pattern of increasing at

a decreasing rate up to age 55 or 60 and then turning down after age 60 at some quantiles. As

expected, farm owners of both genders held significantly more wealth than unskilled laborers. A 40

year old mulatto male farmer at the 75th quantile, for example, owned $260 more than an mulatto

male laborer; a 40 year old mulatto female farmer at the same quantile owned $220 more than a

mulatto female laborer, holding all else constant. Not surprisingly, among males, watermen, skilled

artisans, and merchants/professionals amassed significantly more property than unskilled laborers.

       The female occupation coefficients reveal some surprising effects. Domestic servants and

washerwomen, for instance, are often believed to have been unskilled workers who eked out a bare

subsistence at the margins of southern society. Regression estimates largely refute that belief. At

most estimated quantiles, domestic servants, washerwomen, and seamstresses accumulated

significantly more property than simple laborers. Though domestic service and washing were hardly

skilled occupations, engaging in them implied a greater ability to accumulate property than having

no particular occupation. African American women working in service occupations (principally,

nurses, midwives, and boarding house operators) also accumulated significantly more than unskilled

women.

       The regressions also reveal some important regional effects in wealth accumulation. African-


                                                 29
American men living in Louisiana and Tennessee acquired significantly more personal property than

men living in Maryland. Men living in Virginia and North Carolina, on the other hand, amassed

significantly less property at nearly every quantile than Maryland men. Household sizes were also

significant determinants of wealth accumulation. The positive coefficients suggest that larger

households had more individuals bringing income into the household.

       The regressions also reveal that blacks acquired significantly less personal wealth than

mulattoes.21 Table 6 reports the predicted wealth holdings by complexion and gender at selected

quantiles, assuming they were 40 years old and operated a farm, either as owner or tenant. The

complexion gap was large indeed at the upper end of the distribution. At the 95th quantile, black

men had about 83 percent of the personal property of mulatto men. The complexion gap was similar

down to the 85th quantile. At the 75th quantile and below, black men had about 92 percent of

mulatto wealth.    At the median, black wealth increased to about 93 percent of mulatto wealth,

which is consistent with the gap at the conditional mean shown in the OLS and robust regression

results. Both OLS and robust regression estimates place black wealth at about 95 percent of mulatto

wealth. The advantage of quantile regression thus becomes clear. At the conditional median and

conditional mean, wealth was similarly distributed. At the upper end of the wealth distribution, on



  21
     Historians familiar with postbellum censuses have sometimes argued that census
enumerators were more likely to label wealthier African Americans as mulattoes regardless of
their actual complexion or heritage. If true, this would produce spurious results when regressing
complexion on wealth. To check for this possibility, probit regressions were estimated with
complexion as the dependent variable. Independent regressors included all those used in Table 5
plus the natural logarithm of personal wealth. For male-headed households, the estimated wealth
coefficient was small and insignificant at usual levels [p value of 0.29]. For female-headed
households, the coefficient was also small and insignificant [p value of 0.19]. It seem unlikely
that the regression results are spurious. I thank Anthony O'Brien for reminding me of this
concern among historians of the postbellum South.

                                                30
the other hand, mulatto men had significantly more property than black men. The table also reports

the unconditional mean as well as three quantiles, showing the advantages of quantile regression.

       Among female-headed households the complexion gap takes a form somewhat different than

that found among male-headed households. At the 95th quantile, black households had 80 percent

of the wealth of a mulatto, female-headed household. At the 85th quantile, black wealth fell to 65

percent of mulatto wealth; at the 75th, black household wealth rose to about 70 percent of mulatto

wealth. At the 60th quantile, it rose to about 88 percent. At the conditional mean of the wealth

distribution (OLS and robust regression estimates), the complexion gap also demonstrates an

especially marked gender gap. Whereas the complexion gap nearly disappeared among men at the

mean, it remained at about 20 percent among women.

       Despite mulatto women’s ability to accumulate more personal wealth than black women,

mulatto women lagged behind mulatto men, even black men. Table 6 shows the gender gap in

wealth accumulation. At every quantile, male-headed households had more personal wealth than

female-headed households. At the 95th quantile, for example, households headed by mulatto women

had 65 percent of the personal wealth owned by mulatto men. At the 60th quantile, female-headed

households had about half as much personal wealth as male households. OLS estimates show that

the 50 percent gap persists among black women; mulatto women had about 60 percent as much as

mulatto men.

       Thus, the empirical analysis of data included in the 1860 population manuscript census

implies a complex social hierarchy based on gradations in skin color. At the upper end of the wealth

distribution, light-skinned mulattoes of both genders demonstrated a greater ability to accumulate

property than dark complected blacks. Moreover, the complexion gap reinforced a gender gap.


                                                31
Mulatto women, though clearly more able to acquire more property than black women, still lagged

well behind black men at most points in the wealth distribution. In fact, the gender gap was wider

around the mean and the median of the distribution than at the upper tail. In the antebellum rural

South both the complexion gap and the gender gap were evident, and black women householders

resided at the lowest rung on economic ladder.



Concluding Remarks

       Using data reported in the 1860 federal census, empirical analysis reveals an unmistakable

complexion gap in the antebellum rural Upper South. The analysis, nevertheless, provides lower

bound estimates of the gap due to the possible underreporting of mulattoes as blacks. More accurate

data would strengthen the empirical analysis and likely result in an even wider gap. Generations of

historians have documented this gap in urban centers in the Lower South, but doubted its presence

in the rural Upper South. The evidence presented above overturns this long-held interpretation.

Rural mulattoes were more likely to become farm tenants and farm owners than blacks who,

disproportionately, remained on the lowest rung of the agricultural ladder. Rural mulattoes also

accumulated more personal property than blacks at every point in the upper half of the wealth

distribution. Limited evidence on the lower half of the distribution suggests that the poverty was

more colorblind than affluence, but that does not alter the reality that mulattoes were more likely

than blacks to climb out of poverty.22 Historians may have doubted or overlooked this complexion

gap in the rural South because these men and women were not politically active, nor did they form



  22
    Estimates of wealth holding among men at the 40th quantile suggest no statistical difference
between blacks and mulattoes.

                                                 32
the same types of social clubs found in Charleston, Savannah, and New Orleans. Racism ran deep

in rural America, and the best strategy in rural areas may have been to quietly exploit available

opportunities without drawing too much attention to one's self.

        It is also heartening that complexion gap found here is in general agreement with evidence

of a more general mulatto advantage. Margo and Steckel (1992) found that light-skinned ex-slaves

recruited into the U.S. Army during the Civil War were significantly taller than dark-skinned

recruits. They attribute this effect to a combination of heterosis and preferential treatment accorded

light-skinned slaves. Komlos (1992) and Bodenhorn (1999a; 1999c) found a similar pattern among

the Upper South's free African Americans. While the exact connections between the economic and

the "biological" standard of living are not yet fully understood, nor culturally or temporally invariant,

there is a general correspondence between wealth (or income or socioeconomic status) and height

in many historical and modern societies. The findings of this paper accord with the anthropometric

results. Not only were light-skinned mulattoes taller than blacks, they were wealthier.

        Evidence about how blacks and mulattoes fared relative to contemporary whites residing in

the South awaits additional research, but comparisons to whites living in the northern cities suggests

that southern mulattoes fared reasonably well by contemporary standards. Conley and Galenson

(1998, p. 482) estimated that, at the 90th quantile, a skilled 40 year-old, American-born man living

in Boston accumulated $1,562 in personal wealth, about twice that of a rural, southern, mulatto

farmer. That same mulatto farmer, however, had accumulated about $130 more than a skilled 40

year-old, white American-born man residing in Indianapolis. At the 75th quantile, a hypothetical

mulatto farmer owned about the same amount of personalty as a skilled, white, American-born male

living in New York City and Chicago. Clearly, comparisons of southern African Americans and


                                                   33
northern whites are not the most informative sorts of comparisons, but they do imply that the mulatto

advantage in the antebellum South was substantial indeed.

       This article nearly begs more questions than it answers. In the face of much qualitative

evidence, historians have accepted the existence of a complexion gap within the African American

communities of the urban Lower South. It is now time to determine, with some precision, the

quantitative extent of that gap. Only by doing so will we fully comprehend whether the gap found

here reflected cultural, social and economic attitudes throughout the South or whether it was unique

to the rural Upper South. Ultimately, understanding the mulattoes’ actual place in southern society

will depend on determining the life-cycle pattern of real and personal property accumulation among

rural and urban southern whites. Comparisons to northern whites, while informative, do not

illuminate the complex social heirarchy that arose in the antebellum South. Comprehending the

complexities of race in southern society requires much additional inquiry. This article represents the

early steps on a long-term research endeavor.



References

Adams, John W. and Kasakoff, Alice Bee (1991). "Estimates of Census Underenumeration Based
on Genealogies." Social Science History 15, 527-543.

Alston, Lee J. and Kauffman, Kyle D. (1998). "Up, Down, and Off the Agricultural Ladder: New
Evidence and Implications of Agricultural Mobility for Blacks in the Postbellum South."
Agricultural History 72, 263-279.

Atack, Jeremy (1989). "The Agricultural Ladder Revisited: A New Look at an Old Question with
Some Data for 1860." Agricultural History 63, 1-25.

Baltimore American, 9 June 1859.

Blocker, Jack S. (1996). "Bias in Wealth and Income Records: An Ohio Case Study." Historical
Methods 29, 25-36.

                                                 34
Bode, Frederick A. and Ginter, Donald E. (1986) . Farm Tenancy and the Census in Antebellum
Georgia. Athens: University of Georgia Press.

Bodenhorn, Howard (1999a). "The Mulatto Advantage: The Biological Consequences of
Complexion in Rural Antebellum Virginia." Lafayette College, unpublished working paper.

Bodenhorn, Howard (1999b). "The Economic Status of Free Blacks in the Antebellum South:
Technical Paper #1: Rural County Sample Selection." Lafayette College, unpublished working
paper.

Bodenhorn, Howard (1999c). “A Troublesome Caste: Height and Nutrition of Antebellum
Virginia’s Rural Free Blacks.” Journal of Economic History 59, 972-996.

Bogger, Tommy (1997). Free Blacks in Norfolk, Virginia, 1790-1860: The Darker Side of Freedom.
Charlottesville and London: University of Virginia Press.

Bogue, Allan G. (1963). From Prairie to Corn Belt: Farming on the Illinois and Iowa Prairies in the
Nineteenth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Brown, B.M. (1985). "Median Estimates and Sign Tests." In Samuel Kotz and Norman L. Johnson
(Eds.) Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences, Vol. 5. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Pp. 417-420.

Buchinsky, Moshe (1994). "Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure, 1963-1987: Application of
Quantile Regression." Econometrica 62, 405-458.

Conley, Timothy G. and Galenson, David W. (1994). "Quantile Regression Analysis of Censored
Wealth Data." Historical Methods 27, 149-165.

Conley, Timothy G. and Galenson, David W. (1998). "Nativity and Wealth in Mid-Nineteenth-
Century Cities." Journal of Economic History 58, 468-493.

Davis, F. James (1991). Who Is Black?: One Nation's Definition.            University Park.: The
Pennsylvania State University Press.

Degler, Carl (1971). Neither Black nor White: Slavery and Race Relations in Brazil and the United
States. New York: Macmillan Company.

Emerson, John D. and Hoaglin, David C. (1983). "Analysis of Two-Way Tables of Medians." In
David C. Hoaglin, Frederick Mosteller, and John W. Tukey (Eds.) Understanding Robust and
Exploratory Data Analysis. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Pp. 166-210.

Goldin, Claudia and Katz, Lawrence (1999). "The Returns to Skill in the United States across the
Twentieth Century." NBER working paper No. 7126.


                                                35
Gray, Lewis C. (1933) History of Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860, 2 vols.
Washington, D.C.:Carnegie Institution.

Guild, Jane Purcell (1969). Black Laws of Virginia. New York: Negro Universities Press.

Hershberg, Theodore and Williams, Henry (1981). "Mulattoes and Blacks: Intra-group Color
Differences and Social Stratification in Nineteenth-Century Philadelphia." In Theodore Hershberg
(Ed.) Philadelphia: Work, Space, Family and Group Experience in the 19th Century. Oxford and
New York: Oxford University Press. Pp. 392-434.

Horowitz, Donald L. (1973) "Color Differentiation in the American Systems of Slavery." Journal
of Interdisciplinary History 3, 509-541.

Horton, James Oliver (1993). "Shades of Color: The Mulatto in Three Antebellum Northern
Communities." In James O. Horton (Ed.) Free People of Color: Inside the African American
Community. Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press. Pp. 124-144.

Houdek, John T. and Heller, Charles F., Jr. (1986) "Searching for Nineteenth-Century Farm
Tenants: An Evaluation of Methods." Historical Methods 19, 55-61.

Irwin, James R. and O’Brien, Anthony P. (1998). "Where Have all the Sharecroppers Gone?: Black
Occupations in Postbellum Mississippi." Agricultural History 72, 280-297.

Irwin, James R. and O’Brien, Anthony P. (1999). "Economic Progress in the Postbellum South?:
Implications for the Growth in Incomes of African Americans in the Mississippi Delta, 1880-1910."
Central Michigan University, unpublished working paper.

Johnson, Whittington B. (1996). Black Savannah, 1788-1864. Fayetteville: The University of
Arkansas Press.

Johnston, James Hugo (1970). Race Relations in Virginia & Miscegenation in the South, 1776-
1860. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.

Katz, Lawrence (1998). "Commentary: The Distribution of Income in Industrialized Countries."
In Income Inequality: Issues and Policy Options, 34-48. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Symposium.

Koenker, Roger and Bassett, Gilbert, Jr. (1978). "Regression Quantiles." Econometrica 46, 33-50.

Koenker, Roger and Hallock, Kevin F. (2001). “Quantile Regression.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, 143-156.

Komlos, John (1992). "Toward an Anthropometric History of African-Americans: The Case of the
Free Blacks in Antebellum Maryland." In Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff (Eds.) Strategic

                                               36
Factors in Nineteenth Century American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel,
297-329. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. Pp. 297-329.

Komlos, John and Cuff, Timothy (1998). Classics in Anthropometric History. St. Katharinen,
Germany: Scripta Mercaturae Verlag.

Litwack, Leon F. (1961) North of Slavery: The Negro in the Free States, 1790-1860. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Margo, Robert A. and Steckel, Richard H. (1992). "The Nutrition and Health of Slaves and
Antebellum Southern Whites." In Robert W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman (Eds.) Without
Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of American Slavery, Technical Papers, Volume II. New
York and London: W.W. Norton & Company. Pp. 508-521.

Mencke, John G. (1979). Mulattoes and Race Mixture: American Attitudes and Images, 1865-1918.
UMI Research Press.

Parkerson, Donald H. (1991) "Comments on the Underenumeration of the U.S. Census, 1850-1880."
Social Science History 15, 509-515.

Owsley, Frank L. (1949). Plain Folk of the Old South. Baton Rouge: University of Louisiana Press.

Ransom, Roger L. and Sutch, Richard (1997). One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences
of Emancipation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Reid, Joseph D. (1976). "Antebellum Southern Rental Contracts." Explorations in Economic
History 13, 69-83.

Sharpless, John B. and Shortridge, Ray M. (1975). "Biased Underenumeration in Census
Manuscripts: Methodological Implications." Journal of Urban History 1, 409-439.

STATA Corporation (1995). Reference Manual, 3 vols. College Station, TX: Stata Press.

Steckel, Richard H. (1991). "The Quality of Census Data for Historical Inquiry: A Research
Agenda." Social Science History 15, 579-599.

Steckel, Richard H. (1994). “Census Manuscript Schedules Matched with Property Tax Lists: A
Source of Information on Long-Term Trends in Wealth Inequality.” Historical Methods 27, 71-85.

Steckel, Richard H. and Roderick Floud (Eds.) (1997). Health and Welfare during Industrialization.
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

U.S. Census Office. (1862). Preliminary Report on the Eighth Census. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.

                                               37
Virginia (1852). Acts of Assembly.

Virginia (1859/60). Acts of Assembly.

Virginia (1947/48). House Journal.

Virginia (1860). Personal Property Tax Books. Accomack, Campbell, Fauquier, Goochland, and
Stafford Counties. Richmond: Library of Virginia microfilming project.

Williamson, Joel (1984). New People: Miscegenation and Mulattoes in the United States. New
York: New York University Press.

Winters, Donald L. (1978). Farmers without Farms: Agricultural Tenancy in Nineteenth-Century
Iowa. Ames: Iowa State University Press.

Winters, Donald L. (1987). "The Agricultural Ladder in Southern Agriculture: Tennessee, 1850-
1870." Agricultural History 61, 36-52.




                                             38
Table 1 Characteristics of Free African American Sample
Means (Standard Deviations)
                      Black     Black                Mulatto       Mulatto
                      Men       Women                Men           Women

Age               43.03          43.31                40.52          41.34
(yrs)            (12.99)        (13.14)              (13.11)        (13.05)
Property          93.55          36.02               142.34          92.65
($)             (299.69)       (188.24)             (521.75)       (409.77)
Household          5.02           4.20                 5.25           4.20
                  (2.59)         (2.32)               (2.78)         (2.39)
Laborer            0.66           0.37                 0.48           0.22
%                 (0.47)         (0.48)               (0.50)         (0.41)
Farmer             0.16           0.02                 0.24           0.09
                  (0.37)         (0.14)               (0.43)         (0.28)
Watermen           0.02            --                  0.02            --
                  (0.16)                              (0.14)
Skilled                     0.05          --                    0.14             --
                   (0.22)                              (0.35)
Merchant            0.00           --                   0.01              --
                   (0.06)                              (0.10)
Domestic             --           0.06                   --              0.06
                                 (0.23)                                 (0.23)
Seamstress           --           0.01                   --              0.05
                                 (0.11)                                 (0.23)
Washer               --           0.15                   --              0.15
                                 (0.36)                                 (0.36)
Service              --           0.02                   --              0.03
                                 (0.14)                                 (0.18)
Spinster             --           0.00                   --              0.05
                                 (0.07)                                 (0.21)
Maryland           0.74           0.56                  0.29             0.17
                  (0.44)         (0.50)                (0.46)           (0.37)
Virginia           0.18           0.33                  0.16             0.29
                  (0.39)         (0.47)                (0.36)           (0.45)
N.C.               0.06           0.08                  0.49             0.46
                  (0.24)         (0.28)                (0.50)           (0.50)
Tennessee          0.00           0.00                  0.01             0.02
                  (0.00)         (0.04)                (0.12)           (0.12)
Kentucky           0.01           0.02                  0.02             0.03
                  (0.11)         (0.13)                (0.13)           (0.17)
Louisiana          0.00           0.00                  0.03             0.05
                  (0.04)         (0.06)                (0.16)           (0.21)
N              3,859          1,493                 1,259              529

                                               39
Notes: Laborers include day labor, farm labor, ditchers, fencers, railroad hands, waiters, and miners.
Farmers include farmers, planters, plantresses, and tenants. Watermen include sailors, seamen,
oystermen, mariners, boatmen, and fishermen. Skilled includes carpenters, blacksmiths, sawyers,
butchers, brickmasons, stonemasons, coopers, barbers, wagoners, shoemakers, ropemakers, painters,
turners, wheelwrights, cigar makers, millers, turpentine distillers, engineers, and a fiddler.
Merchants include merchants, traders, drummers, restaurant owners, marketmen, and preachers.
Domestics include domestics, housekeepers, servants, and cooks. Seamstresses include
seamstresses, dress makers, and weavers. Washers include washerwomen and laundresses. Services
include cakesellers, nurses, midwives, fortune tellers, boarding house operators, and prostitutes.
Source: 26 county rural southern census sample. See Bodenhorn (1996b) for a description of
sample and sampling method.




                                                 40
Table 2 Characteristics of Free African Americans by Occupation

                       Percent        Age      No.in          Real          Personal        Average
                       Black                   House          Estate        Estate          Farm
                       (%)            (yrs)    (#)            ($)           ($)             Value


1a. Labor            0.85          42.9       4.8         207.63          67.64             --
1b. Farm Labor       0.81          40.8       4.8         185.03          66.35             --

1. All Labor         0.84          42.2       4.8         205.48          67.35             --

2. Tenants           0.52          43.1       6.6         550.67         216.89        1,707.57

3. Farmers
  without
  Farms              0.67          44.6       5.7         756.21         238.13             --

4. Farmers           0.71          48.5       6.6        1,089.11        575.15        1,216.79


Notes: Row 1 averages are averages of Rows 1a and 1b combined. Farmers without farms are those
farmers listed in the population manuscripts as a farmer with reported real estate values, but not
appearing in the agricultural census manuscripts. Average farm value column is value of farm
recorded in agrciultural census. Averages for real and personal property are averages only for those
reporting a value. The statistical issues surrounding missing or censored data are discussed below.
Sources: 1860 federal census population and agriculture manuscripts. For sampling method see
Bodenhorn (1999b).




                                                    41
Table 3 Farm Laborer, Tenancy, and Ownership Rates among
Free African Americans by Cohort in 1860
(per thousand farm workers\operators at age and complexion)
Mulattoes (M) and Blacks (B)

Age            Farm           Tenants          Farmers      Farmers
Cohort         Laborers                        without
                                               Farms
               (M)    (B)     (M)    (B)       (M) (B)      (M)   (B)

20-24          745    876     78     18        137    80    39    27
25-29          587    853     144    20        192    85     77   41
30-34          568    822     148    35        185    76     99   67
35-39          618    784     99     39        137    102   145   75
40-44          545    808     152    37        131    82    172   73
45-49          447    686     105    60        197    143   250   111
50-54          446    730     189    36        257    92    108   142
55-59          383    692     149    46        255    138   213   123
60-64          604    694     75     41        189    104   132   162
65-69          455    735     91     20        136    102   318   143
70-74          364    671     91     12        273    134   273   183
75-79          364    750     91     23        182    68    364   159

Notes: For definitions see Table 2 and text.
Sources: See Table 2.




                                                 42
Table 4: Frequency Distribution of Personal Wealth by County
Free African Americans in 1860

                                   Personal Wealth ($)
County                 5    10     25     50     100     500   1000   1000+   NA

Anne Arundel, Md       1    0      6       100    164    89    7      4       437
Caroline, Md           0    0      2        23     30    92    8      2       283
Dorchester, Md         23   208    236      99     74    150   38     6        50
Frederick, Md          1    11     66       75     53    46    4      0       275
Harford, Md            2    4      125     129    80     72    4      1       89
Kent, Md               0    0      51      123    76     63    11     1       182
Prince Geo, Md         0    0      1       4      8      17    1      2       139
Talbot, Md             0    0      13      48     40     57    1      3       291
Accomack, Va           3    47     167     74     31     31    1      1       169
Campbell, Va           0    15     42      62     18     45    4      4       32
Fauquier, Va           1    6      14      36     30     21    6      1       6
Goochland, Va          0    0      5       12     15     11    0      2       72
Northampton, Va        2    9      22      46     15     13    2      0       59
Northumberland,Va      0    0      0       1      3      11    0      0       21
Southampton, Va        7    34     54      25     11     4     2      2       191
Stafford, Va           0    1      7       14     6      4     1      1       21
Warren, Va             6    8      12      4      5      3     0      0       1
Craven, NC             1    2      48      48     34     32    2      2       145
Edgecomb, NC           0    0      0       3      6      13    1      1       48
Halifax, NC            10   40     110     93     66     82    5      0       122
Robeson, NC            2    8      28      36     29     45    1      8       80
Bath, Ky               0    0      0       0      4      6     0      0       15
Franklin, Ky           0    3      7       6      14     17    3      1       43
Claiborne, Tn          0    0      1       4      11     9     3      0       2
Baton Rouge E, La      0    0      0       4      5      29    6      8       21

Totals                 59   396    1,017 1,069 828       962   111    50      2,794

Source: See Table 1.




                                             43
Table 5 Quantile and OLS Regression Estimates, Selected Quantiles
Dependent Variable=natural logarithm of personal wealth,
Householders age 20-75
$2 censoring point

                                          Quantile
              .95           .85           .75           .60            .50           OLS

                                          Men

Age           0.05*         0.07*         0.06*         0.06*         0.04*         0.06*
             (2.33)        (5.66)        (5.14)        (4.96)        (3.02)        (4.80)
Age2         -0.00*        -0.00*        -0.00*        -0.00*        -0.00*        -0.00*
            (-1.70)       (-4.64)       (-4.24)       (-4.01)       (-2.22)       (-3.77)
House         0.07*         0.67*         0.88*         0.09*         0.09*         0.07*
             (4.88)        (7.24)        (9.64)        (9.55)        (8.17)        (7.85)
Laborer      -0.15         -0.00          0.24*         1.80*         1.84*         0.51*
            (-1.25)       (-0.03)        (3.02)      (20.57)       (19.22)         (6.37)
Farmer        1.45*         1.58*         1.93*         3.74*         4.01*         2.71*
             (9.42)      (16.68)       (20.37)       (36.81)       (36.11)       (29.01)
Waterman 0.75*              0.29*         0.54*         2.25*         2.49*         1.27*
             (2.85)        (1.74)        (3.29)      (12.47)       (12.58)         (7.61)
Skilled             1.03*         1.06*         1.21*         2.83*         3.02*
      1.58*
             (5.61)        (9.12)      (10.33)       (22.65)       (22.20)       (13.84)
Merchant      2.21*         2.31*         1.79*         3.34*         3.38*         2.11*
             (4.73)        (7.11)        (5.70)        (9.57)        (8.76)        (6.41)
Black        -0.19*        -0.15*        -0.09         -0.09         -0.06         -0.05
            (-1.78)       (-2.30)       (-1.31)       (-1.27)       (-0.85)       (-0.84)
Virginia     -0.38*        -0.48*        -0.42*        -0.21*        -0.04         -0.53
            (-3.84)       (-7.63)       (-4.15)       (-2.96)       (-0.46)       (-0.82)
N Carolina -0.26*          -0.41*        -0.32*        -0.28*        -0.23*        -0.11
            (-2.05)       (-5.17)       (-4.15)       (-3.37)       (-2.48)       (-1.47)
Tennessee 1.14*             1.31*         1.20*         1.36*         1.55*         1.99*
             (6.56)        (3.74)        (3.16)        (3.23)        (3.37)          (5.02)
Kentucky      0.51*         0.13          0.14         -0.14         -0.25         -0.11
             (1.78)        (0.69)        (0.70)       (-0.63)       (-1.07)       (-0.54)
Louisiana     1.08*         0.36          0.77*         1.16*         1.31*         1.10*
             (3.30)        (1.37)        (2.99)        (3.96)        (4.03)        (4.00)
Constant      3.78*         2.63*         1.91*        -0.39         -0.45          0.28
             (8.84)      (10.13)         (7.24)       (-1.39)       (-1.49)        (1.08)




                                             44
Table 5 (continued)

                                         Quantile
              .95          .85           .75           .60                         OLS

                                          Women
Age          0.02          0.04*         0.07*         0.03*                       0.05*
            (0.96)        (2.33)        (3.83)        (1.67)                      (2.95)
Age2        -0.00         -0.00*        -0.00*        -0.00                       -0.00*
           (-0.43)       (-1.91)       (-3.35)       (-1.33)                     (-2.31)
House        0.07*         0.08*         0.02          0.00                        0.02
            (3.26)        (5.25)        (1.06)        (0.24)                      (1.18)
Laborer     -0.17          0.03          0.09          1.75*                       0.50*
           (-1.37)        (0.39)        (1.06)      (20.05)                       (6.07)
Farmer       1.82*         1.92*         2.00*         3.73*                       2.49*
            (6.39)      (10.20)       (10.17)       (18.69)                     (13.16)
Domestic     1.00*         0.64*         0.82*         2.20*                       0.74*
            (4.35)        (4.20)        (5.03)      (13.32)                       (4.73)
Seamstress 0.45            0.23          0.65*         2.22*                       0.90*
            (1.34)        (1.07)        (2.84)        (9.10)                      (3.85)
Washer       0.32*         0.44*         0.71*         2.24*                       0.88*
            (1.99)        (4.43)        (6.63)      (20.58)                       (8.50)
Service      1.53*         1.60*         1.85*         3.28*                       2.12*
            (4.37)        (7.32)        (7.69)      (13.66)                       (9.13)
Spinster     0.13          0.33          0.64*         2.50*                       1.29*
            (0.34)        (1.26)        (2.20)        (8.60)                      (4.60)
Black       -0.22*        -0.43*        -0.36*        -0.11                       -0.22*
           (-1.65)       (-5.00)       (-3.85)       (-1.16)                     (-2.50)
Virginia    -0.15         -0.28*        -0.06          0.25*                       0.19*
           (-1.31)       (-3.63)       (-0.68)        (2.93)                      (2.33)
N Carolina -0.14          -0.29*        -0.40*        -0.15                       -0.28*
           (-0.82)       (-2.58)       (-3.36)       (-1.29)                     (-2.50)
Tennessee 0.36*            0.55          0.75          1.22*                       1.15*
            (1.65)        (1.36)        (1.60)        (2.44)                        (2.37)
Kentucky     0.44          0.80*         0.21         -0.15                       -0.01
            (1.20)        (3.65)        (0.85)       (-0.61)                     (-0.06)
Louisiana    3.80*         2.37*         2.24*         3.67*                       1.86*
          (10.16)         (8.81)        (7.69)      (12.12)                       (6.48)
Constant     3.42*         2.84*         1.81*         0.22                        0.51
            (6.06)        (8.15)        (4.88)        (0.58)                      (1.42)

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. STATA cannot estimate 0.5 quantile for women because
regression lines falls below censoring point. Excluded variables are Maryland residence and
unknown occupation. Household size evaluated at the mean. N=5,117 for men; 1,730 censored.

                                            45
N=2,022 for women; 976 censored. *=signficant at 10% or higher.




                                            46
Table 6 Predicted Personal Wealth of 40 Year-Old Black and Mulatto Farmers at Selected Quantiles

                      Mulatto         Black                 Mulatto         Black
Quantile               Men            Men                   Women           Women

0.95                  $856             $708                 $555             $443
0.85                   526              452                  457              297
0.75                   320              293                  259              181
0.60                   218              200                  105               94
0.50                   184              172                 --               --

OLS                     121             115                   78               62
Robust
Regression              142             136                   90               73

Unconditional Means and Quantiles
Mean                 203                145                   164             67
Median                 75               50                     50             25
0.75                 200                150                   100              50
0.90                  650               500                   650             200

Notes: Calculated from regression coefficients reported in Table 5. Farmers defined to include
farmers, planters, plantresses, and tenants. Assumes 40 year-old Maryland resident, and farmer. All
other variables except constant and black set equal to zero. Household size evaluated at mean.
Robust regression weights OLS residuals to correct for outliers. See STATA Reference Manual for
description of robust regression (rreg) procedures.
Sources: See Tables 1 and 5.




                                                47
