                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SOCIAL SECURITY AND DEMOCRACY


                                          Casey B. Mulligan
                                              Ricard Gil
                                         Xavier Sala-i-Martin


                                          Working Paper 8958
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8958


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2002




We appreciate the comments of Alessandro Barbarino, Gary Becker, Rodrigo Cerda, Nick Eberstadt, Eric
Engen, Jong-Wha Lee, Jose Maria Liberti, Peter Lindert, Salvador Valdés, seminar participants at Harvard,
Tufts, and AEI, the research assistance of Allison Schrager and Jakob Bluestone, and the financial support
of the University of Chicago’s Stigler Center for the study of the Economy and the State (Mulligan) and the
Bank of Spain (Gil). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Casey B. Mulligan, Ricard Gil and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Security and Democracy
Casey B. Mulligan, Ricard Gil and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 8958
May 2002
JEL No. H11, H55, D72



                                              ABSTRACT

        Many political economic theories use and emphasize the process of voting in their explanation
of the growth of Social Security, government spending, and other public policies. But is there an
empirical connection between democracy and Social Security program size or design? Using some new
international data sets to produce both country-panel econometric estimates as well as case studies of
South American and southern European countries, we find that Social Security policy varies according
to economic and demographic factors, but that very different political histories can result in the same
Social Security policy. We find little partial effect of democracy on the size of Social Security budgets,
on how those budgets are allocated, or how economic and demographic factors affect Social Security.
If there is any observed difference, democracies spend a little less of their GDP on Social Security, grow
their budgets a bit more slowly, and cap their payroll tax more often, than do economically and
demographically similar nondemocracies. Democracies and nondemocracies are equally likely to have
benefit formulas inducing retirement and, conditional on GDP per capita, equally likely to induce
retirement with a retirement test vs. an earnings test.




Casey B. Mulligan                Ricard Gil                      Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics          Department of Economics         Department of Economics
University of Chicago            University of Chicago           Columbia University
1126 East 59th Street            1126 East 59th Street           420 West 118th Street, 1005
Chicago, IL 60637                Chicago, IL 60637               New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                         and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu                                          xs23@columbia.edu
                                                         Table of Contents


I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

II. Why Democracy Might Matter, or Not . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
      Public Decisions by Voting: Democracies are Different . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
      Efficiency Theories of Government: No Systematic Democracy Effect . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Non-Voting Political-Economy Models: No Systematic Democracy Effect . . . . . . . . 6
      Theories of the Preferences of the Democratic Citizenry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      “Copycat” or “Imitation” Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      Implications for Country-Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

III. Our Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Measures of Social Security Program Spending and Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Indicators of Democracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

IV. Regression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15
      Results from our 1960-90 Cross Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        15
             Evidence on the Amount of Social Security Spending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                         15
             Evidence on Retirement and Earnings Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  21
             Evidence on Payroll Tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    23
      Evidence on the Growth of the Size of Social Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 24

V. Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
      Southern Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
      South America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         29
             Democracy in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, and Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           29
             1980's Public Pension Spending in Four Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                   30
             Induced Retirement and Payroll Taxation in the Four Countries . . . . . . . . . .                                              31
             Large Budgets Chile Prior to 1981 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      32
      European and South American Cases Compared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  35

VI. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

VII. Data Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

VIII. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
I. Introduction
       Assisting the elderly has captured much of the attention, and resources, of the
government in recent decades. Public pension expenditures are a big component of that
assistance and, for example, have exceeded 10% of GDP in several countries.1 Opinions can
differ as to whether governments have assisted the elderly enough, or in the right forms, or how
Social Security should adapt in the future. There is little question, however, that Social Security
is a highly political component of government policy and that political careers have been made
and lost on the basis of an official’s (or a political candidate’s) stance on Social Security
questions.
       The inseparability of Social Security and politics has motivated a number of political-
economic theories of the emergence of growth of public pension spending. Although there are
differences among the various political economic theories, the institution of voting is at the
center of nearly all of them. For example, Browning (1975) models voting cohort-by-cohort, and
argues that the political support for the elderly derives from a majority voting coalition of the
old and the middle aged.2 Tabellini (1992) models a majority voting coalition of the old and poor.
Because so many positive economic models of social security (and other aspects of government
policy) put the institution of voting at center stage, we believe that it may be helpful for
economists to revisit the question, originally posed by sociologists, of whether there is in fact any
obvious empirical connection between public pension policies and the institution of voting. The
economic theories have implications for not only to the amount spent on Social Security, but the



       1
        International Labour Organization (various issues); data for the 1990's. For example,
public pension spending/GDP exceeded 0.1 in Austria, France, and Italy.
       2
           Cooley and Soares (1999) update this argument using modern dynamic game theory.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 2


rules for collecting taxes and disbursing benefits. Our second reason to revisit this question is
that the economic literature has accumulated a number of new and relevant country-panel data
sets.3 These new data include the Penn-World Tables, which allow for better cross-country
comparisons of standards of living. Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999a) have assembled a large
country panel data set of measures and indicators of the design of Social Security systems, which
permit us to explore not only Social Security spending differences between democracies and
nondemocracies, but also differences in the use of payroll taxes, retirement tests, means-tests,
etc. Over time, there have also been detailed country case studies of the design of Social Security
programs (such as those collected by Gruber and Wise (1999)), which allow for further
quantitative comparison of various countries’ Social Security systems.
       In Section II of the paper we argue that positive theories of social security that are based
on voting models predict that the size and the design of social security programs should be
different in democratic and non-democratic countries. We also argue that efficiency theories of
social security do not make such a prediction. Section III describes the political, economic and
demographic data we use. Section IV presents the main results of our regression analysis,
showing how democratic and non-democratic regimes do not differ much when it comes to the
size and the design of social security programs. Section V presents nine case studies. Section VI
concludes.




II. Why Democracy Might Matter, or Not
       Many theories of Social Security have been proposed in the literature. In this section we
argue that many political economic models built on voting are distinct from positive theories
built on economic efficiency, in that the voting-based theories presume that democracy leads to
different program design, increases Social Security budgets, and enhances the link between age
or income distribution and Social Security spending.


II.A Public Decisions by Voting: Democracies are Different


       3
      And time has passed, so the previous data sets have expanded significantly, and
improved in quality.
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 3


       Some political economic studies of Social Security, and redistribution more generally,
have featured the institution of voting in their explanation of the emergence and growth of
Social Security. Many of these studies do not mention whether nondemocratic governments
should be expected to have Social Security, but since they use and emphasize voting in their
explanation of the emergence and growth of Social Security, they implicitly assume that Social
Security would be less likely to emerge and grow without democracy.4 An important reason why
there can be Social Security, and other redistribution, in the voting models, is that votes do not
express intensity of policy preferences, so that large groups can be subsidized at the expense of
smaller ones, even if the redistribution has large aggregate net costs. For example, Social
Security is politically successful in Browning’s (1975), Cooley and Soares’ (1999), and Nataraj’s
(2001) voting models because the old and the middle aged form a majority voting coalition which
cannot be defeated by the young regardless of the intensity of costs they bear. As emphasized
by Tabellini (1992), the skewness of the distribution of taxable income can be an important
determinant of Social Security in a voting model, because it measures the amount that the old
can gain by forming a coalition with the poor.5 Hence, the models not only suggest that
democracies should spend more on Social Security, but that the largest democratic programs
should be those in countries with the most skewed income distribution. Furthermore, since
obtaining a majority is so critical in a democracy, Social Security spending should be especially
sensitive to the size of the elderly population in a democracy.
       Olson, McGuire, and Niskanen have a series of theoretical papers6 comparing the
economies and policies under dictators and democracies. They do not explicitly model the voting


       4
       After all, why should voting be featured in a model if it were not relevant for the
question at hand?
       5
        More precisely, the average taxable income in the economy determines the amount of
revenue that can be raised from income taxes, and the median income determines the amount
of taxes that the median voter would lose by siding with the old in favor of an income
redistribution scheme. The ratio of mean to median income is therefore not only an measure
of income distribution skewness, but also an indicator of the net gain from redistribution to
the coalition of old and poor. See also Meltzer and Richard (1981) or Alesina and Rodrik
(1994) for models of the links between redistribution and income distribution skewness.
       6
           For example, Olson (1993), Olson and McGuire (1996), and Niskanen (1997).
                                                               Social Security and Democracy – 4


process but, when it comes to the democracies, explain how they follow Meltzer and Richard
(1981) and other previous authors who explicitly model majority voting over broad-based income
taxes to finance transfers to a majority of the population. Nondemocracies, in their view, are
different because the transfers go to a relatively small group – namely, the dictator and his
friends – and because the taxes are not so broad-based that the dictator and his friends have to
pay them. Because the democratic public decision-maker (the median voter) is required to pay
a share of the taxes, and the dictator and friends do not, the dictator acts as a leviathan – taxing
up to the point where tax base shrinkage is so severe that no additional revenue can be raised –
and has a larger budget than a democracy would. Because a democracy’s tax base does not have
to be broad based, and dictators may not be able to fully escape their own taxes, we doubt that
the breadth of taxes is necessarily a fundamental difference between democracies and
nondemocracies. Even with the hypothesis that democratic, and not nondemocratic, decision
makers are liable for taxes, Olson, McGuire, and Niskanen’s models may support the prediction
that Social Security budgets would be larger in a democracy, unless nondemocratic Social Security
programs were to benefit only a small group of the dictator’s allies. We can investigate this final
caveat empirically by studying the design of Social Security in particular countries in more detail
and by looking at the likelihood that a democracy vs. nondemocracy means tests Social Security
benefits or uses broad based payroll taxes.
        In a democratic model like Tabellini’s, Social Security serves in part the purpose of
redistributing from rich to poor. Obviously, such a purpose is ill served if the payroll tax is
“capped” so that the payroll tax rate applies only on the first x units of a person’s earnings, where
x is the “cap”, and a zero rate applies above that. For this reason, we might expect democracies
to be less likely to cap their payroll taxes. The Olson, McGuire, and Niskanen studies may also
suggest that dictators would be capping their payroll taxes, at least if the very rich were among
the dictator’s allies.


II.B Efficiency Theories of Government: No Systematic Democracy Effect
        A number of positive theories of public policy ignore politics all together, and suppose
that observed public policies are those enhancing economic efficiency. According to this
approach, the key explanatory variables are economic and demographic ones, since those are
                                                               Social Security and Democracy – 5


some important variables determining efficiency.7 Conversely, political factors – such as the
mechanism by which public decisions are made – are presumed to be much less important
determinants of public policy. One of many examples of this approach is Barro (1979), who
builds a positive theory of the public debt by suggesting that it is efficient for tax distortions to
be smoothed over time and showing what kinds of public debt policy would achieve that
smoothing. Hence, he argues that the timing of government expenditure, and the state of the
economy, are the key determinants of the amount and growth of government debt. Because he
emphasizes the economic variables, Barro downplays the importance of the institution of voting
(or other political institutions) for determining the public debt, unless perhaps those political
factors were otherwise determining the key economic variables: the state of the economy and the
timing of government spending.
       In the field of Social Security, Sala-i-Martin (1996) builds a positive theory based on
economic efficiency. He is quite explicit (eg., p. 288) about his claim that efficiency is the reason
for the program, so that we expect no Social Security difference between democracies and
nondemocracies once we understand what are the economic determinants of efficiency.
Furthermore, since Sala-i-Martin emphasizes the life cycle of human capital and the age-
composition of the labor force in describing economic efficiencies, his theory suggests that richer
and older countries should spend more on Social Security.8 Pogue and Sgontz (1977), Laitner
(1988), and Becker and Murphy (1988) describe elderly care activities and investments in youth
that traditionally occur in a family context, but in more modern economies might be provided
as well or better by the government. In other words, they view Social Security as a reaction


       7
        There are a variety of reasons to expect that economic variables like the level of
GDP, and demographic variables like the age-composition of the population would determine
(or be associated with) which public policy is most efficient. See, for example, Mueller’s
(1989, chapter 17) review of government growth theories. See also below.
        Another literature (eg., Wittman 1995) has argued that democratic institutions are
efficient. This literature does not always spell out in detail what are the variables that
determinant efficiency, or whether nondemocratic political institutions are also efficient, but
their arguments do suggest that the better positive theory of public policy is built on
efficiency, not on political factors.
       8
        See Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999b) for further exposition of efficiency theories
of Social Security.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 6


family activities and, unless family activities themselves depend on the process by which public
decisions are made, do not offer a prediction as to how Social Security might be different in
democracies and nondemocracies. Diamond and Mirrlees (1978) and Merton (1983) describe
Social Security as optimal insurance.
       The main lesson is that the theories that explain social security programs as an optimal
response to economic inefficiencies do not predict size or design differences among programs
depending on whether they are in democratic or non-democratic countries once the measures of
the relevant inefficiencies are held constant.


II.C Non-Voting Political-Economy Models: No Systematic Democracy Effect
       Becker (1983), Becker and Mulligan (1998) and others pay some attention to the political
process in their building a positive theory of public policy, but nevertheless emphasize the role
of efficiency. Becker and Mulligan argue, for example, that political processes may permit more
redistribution when it is economically efficient, that determinants of the amount of efficiency
of that redistribution (such as the instruments available for tax collection) are important
variables for understanding why some government redistribute more than others, and why
government redistribution has grown over time. Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999a) build a
positive theory of Social Security, and also pay some attention to the political process. They
emphasize economic and demographic determinants of political influence (in particular, the labor
force status of the elderly), rather than the mechanism by which public decisions are made or
how economic and demographic variables might interact with those mechanisms. Hence, the
models of Becker, Becker and Mulligan, and Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin say that, after holding
constant the determinants of efficiency and the economic determinants of political influence,
Social Security programs should look similar in democratic and nondemocratic countries.
       The size of the elderly population is one important determinant of the efficiency of
subsidizing the elderly because, among other things, the deadweight costs of Social Security
taxes increase with the size of the budget. By itself, this effect suggests that the share of GDP
going to Social Security should increase with the fraction of the population above certain age,
but less than one-for-one (see also Turner 1984). However, political influence may also increase
with group size (in both democratic and nondemocratic regimes), so that the elderly are more
                                                               Social Security and Democracy – 7


powerful when they are more numerous. In either case, these approaches imply that economic
and demographic variables will affect Social Security spending, and are ambiguous about the
effect of democracy per se.


II.D Theories of the Preferences of the Democratic Citizenry
       Each person may have a preferred way of running the Social Security program, and these
preferences may express a lot more than his personal gains and benefits from the program.9
Furthermore, these preferences may vary over time and across countries in a way that is
determined by, or correlated with, democracy. It has long been argued that the institution of
democracy affects the preferences of its citizens. De Tocqueville (1835) has some of the most
well known of those arguments where he suggests, for example, that more patriotism can be
expected from citizens when “everyone... takes and active part in the government of society”
(Chapter 14). Sen (1999, p. 9) predicts that the discussion and debate associated with democracy
“are central to the process of generating informed and considered choices and ... crucial to the
formation of values and priorities...” When democracies affect the preferences of citizens in
these ways, and the preferences of citizens affect policy, we might expect democracies to have
different Social Security programs. However, without a more detailed model of these effects,
we cannot say whether democracies would have smaller or larger Social Security budgets, be
more or less likely to means-test their program, etc.10
       It may not be the case that democracy causes citizens to have different preferences, but
democracy may nonetheless be correlated with citizen preferences. It has, for example, been
argued that citizens in democracies find violence more distasteful than citizens of




       9
        Some economic models emphasizing preferences as determinants of Social Security
include Diamond (1977), Feldstein (1985), Laitner (1988), Mulligan and Philipson (1999) and
Profeta (2000).
       10
        Brennan and Lomansky (1983) and Becker and Mulligan (1999) have argued that
people should be expected to act less selfishly when voting than they do in private affairs, so
perhaps their arguments could be extended to argue that democracies would spend more on
Social Security?
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 8


nondemocracies, and this distaste affects the military policies of their governments.11 And it has
been found, in fact, that democracies do have different military policies. Perhaps a related
argument would apply to Social Security, with citizens in democracies having systematically
different preferences for Social Security than citizen of other countries. However, we are not
aware of a more detailed model that might tell us whether democracies would have smaller or
larger Social Security budgets, be more or less likely to means-test their program, etc. Nor is it
clear how the size and design of Social Security programs might be correlated with democracy
once we hold constant various proxies for the tastes of citizens, such as their age and their
incomes.


II.E “Copycat” or “Imitation” Models
       It could be argued that non-democratic systems look similar to democratic ones because
they have incentives to imitate them. For example, nondemocratic governments could be
threatened by, and therefore imitate, similarly situated democratic governments. Perhaps
potential revolutionaries are interested in the effect of regime change on public policy, and are
more likely to revolt when they suspect that a democratic regime might offer them policies that
are significantly different. Nondemocratic governors recognize this, and choose policies similar
to those in democracies so that potential revolutionaries among the governed might not expect
significant policy changes to result from a regime shift. For example, if growing inequality
causes democratic governments to expand Social Security, it might also expand Social Security
in nondemocratic countries because the latter countries are trying to look democratic. According
to this view, the observed democratic-nondemocratic policy gap is smaller than the true effect
of democracy (by which we mean the effect of introducing democracy into a country lead by an
unthreatened nondemocratic regime).
       It could be argued, however, that democratic governments are more likely to be imitators
of neighbor governments. In this view, democratic governors are accountable to the citizenry
who are, on average, amateurs when it comes to public policy evaluation. Perhaps an easy way
for a citizen to detect a bad policy is one that differs significantly from those used in similar


       11
        See de Mesquita and Lalman (1992, Chapter 5) and Elman (1997, Introduction) for
surveys of some of these arguments.
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 9


countries. Democratic governors know this, so they try not to deviate too much from their
neighbors.12,13
        We offer two means of gauging the importance of inter-governmental imitation for
interpreting our results. First, we can look at the spatial correlation of our Social Security
spending and design measures. Second, the case studies may reveal some historical analyses of
the motivation of nondemocratic governors, including how and whether they imitated
democratic neighbors.


II.F Implications for Country-Correlations
        In summary, we have argued that many voting models of Social Security are different
from positive theories built on preferences or economic efficiency, in that the voting-based
theories presume that democracy leads to different Social Security program design, increases
Social Security budgets, and enhances the link between age or income distribution and Social
Security spending. The economic efficiency approach presumes that voting, and other political
institutions are relatively minor determinants of the program size and its design. Preference-
based approaches might be consistent with differences between democracies and
nondemocracies, but to date do not predict the nature of these differences. “Copycat” or
“imitation models” suggest that Social Security spending will be spatially correlated even when
we control for economic, demographic, and political variables.
        All of these approaches have implications for the amount spent as well as for how this
money is spent. If, for example, Social Security is intended to alter the operation of the labor
market, then we expect revenues to be collected and disbursed in such a way to affect the
behavior of employers and employees. Or, if it is intended to redistribute from rich to poor, then
taxes and benefits should be administered in a “progressive” way. These administrative



        12
        Case, Hines, and Rosen (1993) propose a model like this for state governments within
the U.S., but do not discuss whether or not democracies are more likely to be “copycats.”
        13
         Neighboring governments may also use similar policies in order to reduce incentives
for migration in and out of the country. Democratic governments might be more sensitive to
this motive than nondemocratic governments are, if nondemocratic governments are more
likely to prohibit migration.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 10


considerations are connected to a study of democracy and social security because administrative
differences between democratic and nondemocratic governments can tell us whether these two
types of governments differ in their motives for having Social Security programs.


III. Our Data
III.A. Measures of Social Security Program Spending and Design
       Our study includes three types of variables:14 those that measure the size and design of
SS programs around the world, those that estimate the degree to which a country is democratic,
and economic and demographic variables. Our main sample consists of 90 countries with
available measures of democracy, the fraction of the population aged 65+, (ppp adjusted) real
GDP per capita, and “sufficient” information on public pension spending.
       We have several variables that estimate the size and design of Social Security programs.
One such measure is annual public spending on old age pensions, as a share of GDP, and as
reported by the International Labor Organization (hereafter, ILO).15 The ILO reports that public
pension spending is distinct from “family allowances,” “unemployment benefits,” “employment
injury benefits,” and “sickness-maternity benefits.”16 We have utilized ILO reports for the years
1960-90, with two exceptions.17 It is also important for our purpose that the ILO reports are

       14
            Summary statistics for the variables are shown in the Appendix.
       15
        In its publication Cost of Social Security, the ILO reports spending by “Social Security
and Assimilated Schemes” and “Family Allowances” in national currency units. It also
reports pension spending as a fraction of spending by “Social Security and Assimilated
Schemes” and “Family Allowances”. To calculate public pension spending/GDP, we take
the product of these two reports, and divide by the GDP reported by the ILO in national
currency units.
       16
          Our research has shown that, for OECD countries where more detailed country-
comparable data is available since 1980, ILO reports are very similar to OECD calculations of
spending on public old age, disability, and survivor pensions, exclusive of pension schemes
for civil servants. We have the impression that the data for nonOECD countries is pretty
accurate, although we have not conducted a systematic analysis of this point.
       17
         The two exceptions are for Italy and Spain, and derive from our case studies. ILO
measures of pension spending/GDP for Italy fluctuates wildly from year to year and, in
preparing the Italian case study, we obtained a public pension spending series from the Bank
of Italy (we thank Alessandro Barbarino for helping us with this) that was very similar in
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 11


comparable for a pretty broad range of countries, because most of the nondemocracies since 1960
are outside the OECD. Henceforth, we refer to these ILO public pension spending data
interchangeably as “public pension spending” and “Social Security spending.”
       There are 128 countries reporting some public pension spending in at least one of the
years 1960-90, plus 22 additional countries for which we know that no Social Security program
existed during at least some of those years.18 Of the 128, most countries have missing data for
some of those years; we work with each country’s averages for the periods 1960-90, 1960-74, and
1975-90, where the averages are calculated using whatever years are available for the country. 104
of the 128 countries report positive public pension spending in at least 5 of the years 1960-90 and
on this criterion are eligible for inclusion in our main 90 country sample.
       Spending is only one indicator of the nature and intensity of public support for the
elderly. But, regardless of whether one looks at elderly support from an economic or political
perspective, it is also relevant how Social Security revenue is collected and distributed. Based on
reports of the U.S. Social Security Administration, Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999a) have
compiled a three year (1958, 1975, and 1995) cross-country panel data set of such indicators of
Social Security design. Those indicators include whether there is a Social Security payroll tax



definition to the ILO series, and with a very similar level and trend, but fluctuating much less
from year to year. In preparing our Spanish case study, we found González-Catalá and
Merino’s (1985) study, which has a Spanish pension spending series that is very similar to
ILO’s, but includes the missing years 1967-74, so we use the González-Catalá and Merino
(1985) series for those years.
       18
         Our Appendix shows which country-years are missing from the ILO pension
spending data. Using the Social Security Administrati0n’s (1995) report of each country’s
Social Security program’s first year, we have found that much of the missing ILO data
derives from the fact that some countries did not have Social Security during each of the
years 1960-90. We therefore fill in the ILO data with zeros for each year since 1960 and
before the first year of Social Security (these years are also shown in the Appendix, are
typically for African and Middle Eastern countries prior to 1975). Doing so has a minuscule
effect on our regression results, because countries with young Social Security systems are
spending practically zero in the years since their program began.
        In general, the Appendix shows how we have nearly all years for European and North
American countries, and for some Asian countries. The 1960's, and to some extent the 1970's,
are missing for most of the other countries, including many for which we believe a Social
Security program existed.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 12


how the payroll tax is shared between employer and employee, whether the payroll tax is capped,
whether the elderly must exit employment to collect public pension benefits, whether benefits
are earnings tested, or means tested, and whether benefits are credited for delayed retirement.
Hence, we can address the question of whether democratic and nondemocratic governments
administer their programs in similar ways, even when they spend similar amounts on them.
       Although our spending and design numbers are of good quality, there are some missing
observations and, even with all of the observations, it is difficult to reduce the variety of elderly
subsidies to one or two numbers. For this reason, case studies are an important part of our
analysis, since those studies do not require numbers that are comparable across a large number
of countries – just the few countries in the case study. Our case study analysis utilizes data from
a variety of country-specific sources, so we do not have to reduce “Social Security” or
“democracy” to one single number.
       There are a few measurement issues which are particular to spending data, and may be
correlated with democracy. First, democracies may have spending, GDP, and demographic data
of higher quality. Better demographic measurement of the latter two variables suggests that we
may observe greater sensitivity of spending to GDP and demography in the democratic
countries, even when the actual sensitivity is the same under both types of regimes. Second, our
spending variable does not include military pensions, and military pensions may be more
prevalent (relative to public pensions for civilans) in nondemocratic countries, so we may
understate the amount of public pension spending in nondemocratic countries.                 Third,
nondemocratic governments may be more prone to create economic data that favors the
government’s image. It is hard to say how this third issue would affect our estimates, since
nondemocracies might exaggerate both GDP and the amount of assistance for the elderly and
thereby not distort the ratio of the two.


III.B. Indicators of Democracy
       We use three different sources of data for our democratic variables. The first source is the
POLITY IV project which calculates for 181 countries going back as far as 1800, among other
things, a democracy index taking integer values 0-10, an autocracy index taking interger values
0-10 (we divide both of these by 10 to put on a 0-1 scale), and a 0,1,2,3 indicator of the extent to
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 13


which government executives are chosen through competitive elections (which we divide by 3).
The democracy index includes as one component the elections indicator, plus rules for political
participation, and the transfer of executive power.         The autocracy index has the same
components as the democracy index, but weights them differently (and negatively). The
POLITY data are available for only 94 of the 104 countries for which we have sufficient Social
Security spending data. The POLITY data are missing during years of occupation, political
interruption, or political transition (eg., occupation by foreign powers, a collapse of central
political authority, or an executive guided process of institutional planning).
       In his international studies of economic growth (eg., Barro 1994, 1996), Robert Barro has
made a linear transformation of Gastil’s (various issues) classification19 into a 0-1 scale. A value
of 1 identifies the maximum level of democracy, a value of 0 identifies the lowest level of
democracy, and values of .17, .33, .5, .67, or .83 identify intermediate cases. We have this measure
for 1972, 1975, 1980, 1985, and 1990. For those years, it is highly correlated with the POLITY
democracy index. Relatively speaking, the POLITY democracy index does little to distinguish
among the least democratic countries; nearly all country-years scored 0-0.33 by (Barro’s
transformation of) Gastil are scored 0 by POLITY. Another difference between POLITY and
GASTIL is that a few Latin countries are scored pretty high by Gastil and very low by POLITY.
       The third source is Bollen(1980) and Bollen and Grandjean (1981), widely known as the
Bollen democracy measure, which was used by a previous study of Social Security and
democracy, Pampel and Williamson (1989). This measure is only available for the years 1960 and
1965 and for different samples of countries. Also, Bollen specifies his criteria to be a mix of the
extent of determinate political factors such as press freedom, freedom of group opposition,
government sanctions, fairness of election, executive selection and legislative selection. The
Bollen measure seems to give a bigger weight to civil rights than does POLITY’s.
       Although the various democracy indices may be of good quality, it is difficult to reduce
democracy to a single number. Hence one reason to extend the empirical analysis to case studies,
as in our section V, is that case studies do not require numbers that are comparable across a large


       19
         Gastil and his colleagues classify countries in a range from 1 to 7, being the countries
with 1 those where political rights are more developed and protected and those with 7 those
where political rights are in the poorest conditions.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 14


number of countries and can thereby rely more on descriptions of political situations from
country-specific sources.


III.C. Economic and Demographic Variables
       Public pensions are paid to old people, so it may be important to know how many people
are old. For this purpose we use the share of population who is 65 years old or older. This
variable comes from the ILO (1996) and is available only at ten year intervals. We construct each
country’s averages for the periods 1960-90, 1960-75 and 1976-90.
       We expect some economic variables to affect the program regardless of the exact political
model of Social Security, although these effects could be different for democracies and
nondemocracies. Furthermore, we expect political institutions to be correlated with economic
variables, so it is important to have good measures of the latter in order to better estimate the
effect of democracy per se on Social Security. Fortunately, there has been significant progress
in recent years in the measurement of some key economic variables. The Penn World Tables
now report a broad cross-country panel of comparable indicators of standards of living, including
real GDP per capita, which we utilize for the years 1960-89. Four of the 94 countries who have
sufficient pension spending data and are included in POLITY do not have either real GDP or
demographic data, so our main sample has 90 countries.
       The shape of the income distribution is important for some of the voting-based theories
of social security. We therefore utilize some of the recent improvements in the construction of
cross-country comparable indicators of income inequality, and income distribution skewness.
In particular we use data elaborated by Deininger and Squire (1996) to obtain multiple income
distribution measures of good quality for a broad cross-section of countries.20 Specifically, we
use their Gini coefficient and the share of income held by the 40% richest share of population
(created by subtracting the third quintile from their data from 1). We also follow Barro (1998)
and use the Gini coefficient for educational attainment as another indicator of inequality.



       20
          See Deininger and Squire for some explanation of how their income distribution
measures are most often derived from comprehensive coverage of the population, and
comparable concepts of income and expenditure. See Atkinson and Brandolini (2001) for a
critical view of the Deininger and Squire data set.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 15


IV. Regression Analysis
       We now analyze empirically the relationship between the democracy index, pension
spending, and pension program design in a couple of broad cross-sections of countries.


IV.A. Results from our 1960-90 Cross Section
IV.A.1. Evidence on the Amount of Social Security Spending
       The correlation between democracy and social spending is displayed in the first column
of our Table 1, where we regress time-averaged public pension spending over GDP on the time-
averaged democracy index in our main sample of 90 countries. Since our democracy index is on
a 0-1 scale and Social Security expenditure measured as a percentage of GDP, the coefficient of
3.71 indicates quite a large difference between a totally democratic country and a totally
nondemocratic country21 – 3.71 percentage points of GDP.
       This result is not new. Jackman (1975) is an early empirical study of social spending
policies and political performance for a sixty-country sample in 1960. In several chapters of his
book, he examines the effect of democracy and political stability on three different rough
measures of social equality: SIPE (Social Insurance Program Experience, which for each country
can be interpreted as the number of years since their SS program was created),22 the Schultz
coefficient and a Social Welfare Index. Since we are looking at the effect of democracy on the
size and design of Social Security programs, Jackman’s SIPE estimates are the relevant ones for
this study. Measuring democracy following the criteria set forth by Dahl (1956), Downs (1957)
and Lenski (1966), he finds a strong positive correlation between SIPE and the democracy



       21
        We have 17 totally nondemocratic (namely index=0 for all years) countries in our
data (Bahrain, C. African Rep., Cameroon, Chad, Ethiopia, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Ivory
Coast, Kuwait, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Oman, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia) and 22 totally
democratic (namely index=1 for all years) countries (including the U.S., Japan, Papua New
Guinea, and several European countries).
       22
        Jackman and Cutright (see below) are interested in welfare and unemployment
programs as well as pensions, and some countries began some program at a different date
than the other programs. Therefore, they calculate each country’s SIPE as the cross-program
average of years since program creation. Our analysis of the SIPE (see “year of first law”
below) is only for the old age pension program.
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 16


index.23 However, we explain in some detail below why he and others do not interpret this
correlation as a democracy effect.
       Pampel and Williamson (1989) study a 32 country panel for the years 1950-80, using social
spending measures and the Bollen democracy index. They show how democratic governments
have larger social budgets, a cross-country correlation which is not surprising given that Jackman
found democratic governments to have more SIPE.
       However, both Jackman (1975) and Pampel and Williamson (1989) point out that, even
if democracy had no direct impact on Social Security policy, significant differences between
democratic and nondemocratic countries are to be expected given that democratic countries are
often economically and demographically unusual.24 Hence, the simple correlation might not
indicate an effect of democracy, but instead proxy for economic and demographic variables that,
for example, would affect citizens’ policy preferences regardless of the political regime. These
authors therefore include log gdp per capita and the fraction of the population over age 6525 in the
regression, and show how the partial effect of democracy is zero or negative, rather than positive
as with the raw correlation.26 We have a very similar finding in our data, as seen in our second
and third columns of Table 1, which deviate from the first column by including the gdp and
elderly population variables in the regression and report smaller (or even negative) democracy
coefficients.
       Peter Lindert (1994) is, to our knowledge, the first economist to explore the relation



       23
         Although Flora and Alber (1982) suggest that nondemocratic regimes may introduce
social programs earlier.
       24
        For example, economic prosperity may permit a country to become democratic, as
suggested by Barro (1998) and many others.
       25
         Jackman uses an economic development indicator rather than log gdp per capita and
elderly’s population share.
       26
         Cutright (1965) also tries to separate the effects of economic development from those
of the “political representativeness” of a nation’s institutions. He indicates that there is a
weak partial relation between SIPE and political representativeness, although it is hard to say
whether his results conform with the other studies, since Cutright uses a cross-tabular
analysis (rather than multiple regression) and his political representiveness index is not
necessarily an index of democracy.
                                                           Social Security and Democracy – 17


between social security spending and democracy with a formal statistical analysis.27 He has a
twenty-one-country panel composed of many of the (now) OECD plus Argentina and Brazil for
the period 1880-1930 – a sample evenly split between democracies and nondemocracies – and finds
the typical democracy to spend the same fraction of GDP on SS as the typical nondemocracy
once GDP per capita, the fraction of the population elderly, and other variables are held
constant.28 Lindert does not explore implications unique to voting-based political-economic
theories of social security, except by including the voter turnout rate and a female suffrage
dummy in a social spending regression for his democratic observations.29 Not long after Lindert,
Sala-i-Martin (1996) created a cross-country data set of Social Security programs for the year
1989, and pointed out (p. 288) that Social Security programs have emerged during nondemocratic
regimes such as the USSR under Lenin, Spain under King Alfonso XIII, and Japan under
Emperor Ito and during democratic regimes such as the 20th century UK, US, and Sweden.
       As explained above, our data suggest that democracies spend more of their GDP on Social
Security merely because they are richer and older. Columns (4)-(6) of Table 1 further explore
this point, by introducing continent dummies into the regression. By comparing columns (1) and
(5), we see how much of the raw democracy-spending correlation is across continents, rather
than within. In fact, column (4) shows how most of the correlation is explained by the


       27
        Although we infer from a paragraph in Easterly and Rebelo (1993, p. 436), that they
looked at a cross-country regression of Social Security spending on GDP, democracy, and
other variables, finding no democracy effect.
       28
        Parts of the Lindert (1994) paper (eg., the abstract) suggest that democracy leads to
more Social spending, and therefore appear to contract the conclusions of other studies.
However, his recent work (2002) explains in more detail how his 1994 findings actually show
that more voter turnout is associated with more public pension spending among democracies,
and that there is not an important spending difference between democracies and
nondemocracies. This can be seen in his 1994 Table 2 where, holding constant the economic
and demographic variables, the pensions column shows that the average nondemocracy
spends 0.33 percentage points of GDP more than the average democracy. We calculate this by
adding his democracy intercept term (-1.18) to his female suffrage coefficient (0.02) times the
mean democratic female suffrage (0.372) plus his turnout coefficient (1.57) times the mean
democratic turnout rate (0.534) to get -0.33.
       29
       Notice that our democracy variable also takes some account of different “intensities”
of democratic regimes, although not according to population voting rates.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 18


difference between Europe (democratic and high spending) and the rest of the world – Europe
explains 4.08 percentage points of the spending share while democracy explains only 1.56.
Column (6) suggests that continent dummies may themselves proxy for GDP per capita and the
elderly share, since a comparison of columns (3) and (6) shows that introducing the continent
dummies does little to the regression coefficients or fit when the regression already includes
GDP per capita and elderly’s share.30 The insignificance of the continent dummies suggest that
there is little spatial correlation in the residuals in our spending model, and hence no strong
evidence that countries tend to follow policies of their neighbors.
       One rough indicator of whether nondemocratic governors are following the policies used
in otherwise similar democratic countries the number of years of experience with Social
Security. Like Jackman (1975), we find a negative correlation between democracy (1960-90) and
the year in which the first Social Security law was passed, but a near zero partial correlation once
we control for age and income. In particular, we find in our 90 country sample that the year of
the first Social Security law is, on average, 35 years earlier for democratic countries (not reported
in the Table; two countries must be dropped because SSA does not report). Regressing year of
first law on the democracy index, log GDP per capita and the elderly population share, we
estimate a democracy coefficient of -8 (s.e.=5).31 Hence, nondemocratic countries do not have
systematically less Social Security experience than do similar democracies. Since there have
been a number of transitions in the 20th century between democracy and nondemocracy, and we
(and Jackman) are using the democracy index later in the century, this result does not necessarily


       30
         The F-stat for the hypothesis of all continent coefficients equal zero is 1.42; the p-
value of the test (6 coefficients and 80 degrees of freedom) is 22%.
       31
         The point estimate is -3 in our 63 country sample. Cutler and Johnson (2001) apply
the econometric duration model to explaining year of first law in a sample of 17 high income
countries, and find “nondemocracies” (defined as Flora et al 1983 do: a country with a
“powerful non-elected ruler”) to adopt Social Security programs slightly earlier than other
countries.
        Other cross-country studies not concerned with the democracy effect (eg., Aaron
1967) have included year of first law as an independent variable in Social Security regressions,
finding old programs to spend more. A raw correlation like this is obvious in our data
(almost one percentage point of GDP for each 10 years of program age), although the partial
effect (holding GDP and elderly share constant) is economically insignificant (one
percentage point for each 50 years of program age, s.e. = 0.5 percentage points).
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 19


show whether or not democracies are quicker to adopt Social Security.32
       Does democratic Social Security spending have a different relation with the age and
income distribution? We address this question for our 90 country sample in Table 1’s columns
(7)-(10). Column (7) interacts the elderly population share (minus 6 percentage points) with
democracy (minus one). We have subtracted constants from each of the variables in the
interaction term, so that the coefficient on the population share by itself can be interpreted as
the democratic population share effect, and the coefficient on democracy by itself can be
interpreted as the democracy effect in a country with six percent of its population over age 65.33
The coefficient on the interaction term is negative and practically zero, and we see in comparison
with column (3) that the effects of age and democracy by themselves are unchanged when we
include the interaction term.
       Columns (8)-(10) explore the relation between Social Security spending and income
inequality, using the Gini coefficient. We have the Gini coefficient for only 65 of the 90
countries, so we use column (8) to demonstrate that results are not too different in the smaller
sample (compare with column (3)). Column (9) introduces the Gini coefficient as a predictor
of Social Security spending’s GDP share, but its estimated coefficient is negative and practically
zero. Perhaps this result is not surprising since several researchers (eg., Benabou 1996, Lindert
1996, and Perotti 1996) have failed to find inequality to be associated with bigger government
across countries.34 Column (10) interacts (Gini-35) with (democracy-1), and the estimated

       32
         There are some difficulties in interpreting the “year of first law” data for this
purpose, and combined them with historical democracy indices. For example, we suspect
that newly independent democracies are likely to “reinvent” Social Security after gaining
independence from a colonizer or dictator, and hence report to SSA a year of first law that is
after the year in which country residents first enjoyed public pension program participation.
A better data set would be like that used by Cutler and Johnson in their duration study.
       33
            6.0 is our 90 country sample average of the percentage of the population over age 65.
       34
         Peltzman (1980) finds inequality to be associated with smaller government across
countries. Tabellini (1992) is the only study we know that finds a positive relation between
government spending (which he measures as Social Security and Welfare spending as a ratio
to the elderly population, GDP, or total government spending, averaged for the years 1978-82)
in inequality (measured as the pre-tax income going to the top 20%, as a ratio of that going to
the bottom 20%). His sample has about 60 countries including some nondemocracies, and his
inequality variable has a statistically significant inequality coefficient in 5 out of 12
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 20


coefficient on the interaction term is practically zero.35 We find similar results if we replace the
income Gini coefficient with the education Gini coefficient as calculated from the Barro and Lee
(1996) data on educational attainment.
       Another indicator of the heterogeneity of a country’s residents is Easterly and Levine’s
(1997) index of “ethnolinguistic fractionalization.” The index is on a 0-1 scale, and measures the
probability that two randomly selected residents speak a different language. Although not
shown in our tables, we have included this variable in our spending regressions, and its estimated
coefficient is always economically and statistically insignificant.36 We see do not find any
evidence of an interaction between ethnolinguistic fractionalization and democracy either.
       We do not believe that voting theories tell us whether GDP should affect spending more
or less in a democracy, but a simple theory of measurement error might. For example, we might
expect better quality GDP data in democracies, so that we would observe pension spending to
be more sensitive to measured GDP among democracies. Although not shown in Table 1, there
is a little evidence in our sample of such an interaction between democracy and log GDP per
capita. If we add the interaction term to column (3), that term’s estimated coefficient is
statistically insignificant and its magnitude is -0.22, which implies GDP coefficients of 0.17 and
0.40 for democracies and nondemocracies, respectively.
       Population age is one of the main predictors of public pension spending. In theory, age
can affect pension spending, and pension spending can affect age. Older populations may spend
more on old age pensions because, by definition, only the elderly are eligible for old age transfers.
The size of the elderly population may also determine political support for social security.




specifications (see his Tables 3 and 4). His analysis does not include GDP per capita, except
as it determines his dummy variable for “industrialized countries.”
       35
         Since we use the constants 35 and 1 in the interaction term, the coefficient on
democracy by itself can be interpreted as the effect of democracy in a country with Gini-35
(fairly typical, although slightly above average, for Europe) and the coefficient on Gini by
itself can be interpreted as the effect of Gini in a democracy.
       36
         In their study of 17 countries time until adopting Social Security, Cutler and Johnson
(2001) find countries with more ethnolinguistic fractionalization to adopt Social Security
somewhat later. They do not interact democracy with fractionalization.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 21


Pensions can in theory affect the age of the population by discouraging fertility37 or mortality,38
although these “reverse causal” effects are not contemporaneous, since in these theories current
demographics are affected by the anticipation of future pensions. Perhaps our finding (to be
shown in detail later) that decade-to-decade growth in pension spending is closely related to the
growth of the elderly population over those same decades suggests that these reverse causal
effects are a minor part of the age-spending correlation shown in Table 1.39
       We have “life expectancy” data for all but two of the countries in our 79 country sample
(Bahrain and Iceland are missing life expectancy information), and life expectancy is correlated
0.79 with the elderly population share. If we add life expectancy to the pension spending
regression, its coefficient is small (0.054, s.e.=0.028), which may suggest that the elderly
population share effect may be same regardless of whether the age distribution can be explained
by fertility, mortality, or migration.
       Standard errors on the democracy coefficient are a bit smaller when POLITY IV’s
democracy score is used, as in Table 1, rather than any of the other democracy indices. Our point
estimates are not sensitive to the use of democracy index. To see this, consider specification (6)
from Table 1. If we replace the POLITY IV democracy score with (one minus) its autocracy
score, the coefficient on the score is -0.79 (s.e.=0.52) rather -0.89, the GDP coefficient is 0.31
rather than 0.40, and the other coefficients are quite similar. Using POLITY IV’s election yields
a democracy coefficient of -0.80 (s.e.=0.56). Using Gastil’s or Bollen’s index gives (in slightly
smaller samples with the available data) coefficients of -1.19 (s.e.=0.65) and -0.06 (s.e.=0.63),
respectively.


IV.A.2. Evidence on Retirement and Earnings Tests


       37
         eg., the theory of Becker and Barro (1988, pp. 17-18) although Social Security’s effect
on fertility is temporary in their model. Ehrlich and Lui (1998) and Ehrlich and Kim (2001)
have models with permanent fertility effects of Social Security.
       38
            eg., the theory of Philipson and Becker (1998).
       39
         A reverse causal mechanism which may be contemporaneous is that high social
security tax rates encourage young people to emmigrate, which raises elderly’s population
share.
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 22


       Table 2 presents models for explaining the use of Social Security benefit formulas that
induce retirement in one way or another. The three dependent variables used in the Table are
whether the country’s Social Security program had a retirement test, an earnings test, or one of
the two (each a 0-1 variable averaged over the three years 1958, 1975, 1995 for each country). The
sample is necessarily smaller than our 90 country sample, because Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin’s
sample does not completely overlap ours.40
       Column (1) is a regression of the fraction of time (for the years 1958, and 1975, 1995 only)
a country had “induced retirement” (ie, had a retirement or an earnings test as part of its Social
Security benefit formula) on the same variables used in column (3) of Table 1. We see little
partial relation between democracy or the elderly population share and induced retirement.
Columns (2) and (3) show that these relations are robust to introducing continent dummies, and
that South American countries have less induced retirement than others. Column (4) excludes
GDP and the share of elderly from the regression; the coefficient on democracy is still not
significant.
       The rest of the columns of Table 2 separate the retirement test from the earnings test.
Columns (5) and (6) use the retirement test as the dependent variable. The coefficient on
democracy in column (5) is negative and significant which suggests that democracies are less
likely to induce retirement with a retirement test. Column (6) includes income and the share
of elderly and the coefficient on democracy becomes insignificant, which suggests, again, that
democracy is correlated with design variables only because it proxies for income per capita as
richer countries tend to be more democratic.
       Columns (7) and (8) have the earnings test as the dependent variable. The coefficient on
democracy is positive which suggests that democracies are more likely to induce it with an
earnings test. However, it is again the effect of income and age, and not democracy, that effects
the method by which retirement is induced, because the democracy coefficients are practically
zero once we control for GDP and the elderly population share (see column (8)).




       40
         The spending models shown in Table 1 look similar if we confine our attention to
the 65 country sample used in Table 2.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 23


IV.A.4. Evidence on Payroll Tax
       Table 3 present empirical evidence on the design of the payroll tax in a cross-section of
countries.41 The two dependent variables used in the Table are whether the country’s Social
Security payroll tax was capped (a 0-1 variable for each year) and the employee tax rate as a
fraction of the sum of the employee and employer tax rates (each dependent variable is averaged
over the three years 1958, 1975, 1995 for each country). The sample is the same as in Table 2,
except that Australia is omitted because it does not have payroll taxes during any of the years
we study. Columns (1)-(6) model the capping of the payroll tax. Columns (1)-(3) have a
democracy index as the only independent variable, and shows how democracies are more likely
to have their payroll tax capped although the coefficient is least significant when the POLITY
IV democracy index is used. To put it another way, our 64 country sample is evenly divided
according to whether the time-average POLITY democracy index is greater or less than 0.4, but
only 4 of the 15 countries not capping their payroll tax have index greater than 0.4.
       Columns (4)-(6) add GDP per capita, the elderly population share, continent dummies,
and a British colony dummy to the regressions, and we see a larger coefficient on the democracy
index. Because a country’s highest earners enjoy the direct benefit of capped payroll taxes, and
we see more democracies with caps, our findings seem at odds with Tabellini’s model, where the
voting process creates Social Security from a coalition of the old and the poor.
       Does the capping of the Social Security payroll tax explain why we see democracies spend
less than otherwise similar nondemocracies? Consider two cross-country public pension
spending regressions using the sample of 64 countries from Table 3 that suggest this is not a big
part of the story. The first has the same independent variables as Table 1's column (3) –
democracy, GDP, and the elderly population share – and produces a similar democracy
coefficient estimate of -0.77 (s.e.=0.55). The second regression adds the capped payroll tax as an
independent variable. The GDP and elderly share coefficients estimates are quite similar in the
two regressions, while the democracy coefficient estimate only falls in magnitude from 0.77 to
0.69 (s.e.=0.54), and the payroll tax cap coefficient is -0.54 (s.e.=0.39). Hence, use of the payroll
tax cap may explain part, but not all, of democracies’ spending less on Social Security.

       41
        We do not model the use of a payroll tax, since Australia and New Zealand are the
only countries without a payroll tax sometime during our sample.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 24


       Columns (7)-(10) look at the (nominal) split of the payroll tax between employers and
employees. The U.S. has always split its payroll tax equally between employer and employee,
so our employee share variable is 0.5 for the U.S. 0.5 is common internationally, but there still
is a lot of international variation in the employee share. Without minimum wages, the usual
economic analysis predicts that it does not matter who nominally pays the tax, but the split may
matter for political purposes, so we might expect democracies to be different in this regard. The
positive democracy coefficients in columns (7)-(10) suggest that democracies put a little bit more
of the tax on the employee.
       We can investigate the effect of the visibility of Social Security taxes on the size of the
budget by considering three cross-country public pension spending regressions using the sample
of 64 countries from Table 3. The first has the same independent variables as Table 1's column
(3) – democracy, GDP, and the elderly population share. The second adds the split variable to
the set of regressors. The split coefficient of 2.61 (s.e.=1.32) is economically significant, and the
democracy coefficient is more negative than in the first regression.42 The third regression adds
to the second a regressor interacting split and democracy, and its coefficient is found to be
economically and statistically insignificant (coef=0.98, s.e.=2.96). These three regressions suggest
that tax visibility may have a small effect on the size of the program, but that the effect is not
different in democracies vs. nondemocracies.


IV.B. Evidence on the Growth of the Size of Social Security
       In order to examine the growth of the SS program, we also partition our sample in two
time periods: 1960-74 and 1975-90.      We choose this division because it is an equal split
chronologically, and point out how it corresponds with the chronological discussion of our
European Case Studies (see below). Fourteen of the 90 countries in Table 1's sample do not
report social security spending or real GDP for more than one or two of the years 1960-74, so we




       42
         This result is probably not very robust, because in previous work (Mulligan and
Sala-i-Martin 1999a) using somewhat different samples and spending measures, we found a
significantly negative coefficient on the split variable.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 25


exclude them from the spending growth analysis.43 Rather than looking at the 1960-90 democracy
index average, our spending growth models measure democracy according to the average
POLITY index for the years 1960-74.44
       Table 4's column (1) shows how Social Security spending grew more (by 1.6 GDP
percentage points) in democracies than nondemocracies (as classified in 1960-74). But this may
derive from the relation between GDP per capita and spending growth, because the partial effect
of democracy (holding log GDP per capita constant) on Social Security spending is zero or
negative, as shown in column (2). Column (3) shows how Social Security spending growth is
related more closely with GDP per capita’s log than with its growth rate.
       Older countries and aging countries had more Social Security spending growth, as shown
in columns (4) and (5). European countries also had more spending growth, and the inclusion
of continent dummies in the spending model makes the democracy coefficient more negative.
Columns (8) and (9) add the 1960-74 to 1975-90 change in the democracy index to the models
shown in columns (1) and (7). We see in Column (8) that, without an additional controls, it
appears that democratic countries, especially those that were democratic at the end of the period,
had the most spending growth. However, column (9) shows how this derives from the different
demographics45 of democratic countries: countries that begin democratic may have a bit less
spending growth.
       The main lesson from this section is that, once we hold constant per capita income and
elderly population share, there appear to be no differences in the size, growth or design of SS
programs between democratic and nondemocratic regimes. Although not shown in Table 4,


       43
         Excluding those fourteen countries (Argentina, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran, Ivory Coast, Mali, Peru, and Rwanda eliminated because lack of
spending data, and Bahrain, Kuwait, and Bulgaria eliminated because of lack of real GDP
data) from Table 1's sample has almost no effect on point estimates, except to increase the
democracy coefficient by 0.1 (eg., the democracy coefficient becomes 3.8 in column (1), and
-0.79 in column (6)).
       44
         As discussed above, there are not many countries in our sample with significant
changes in the democracy index, so our comparison of spending changes with democracy
changes is limited to the case studies.
       45
            Column (9)’s results would be similar if the continent dummies were excluded.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 26


various democracy-interaction terms can be added to the models there, and the point estimates
on the interactions terms are economically and statistically insignificant. Hence, democracies
and nondemocracites also seem to be similar in terms of the reaction of their pension spending
growth to the economic and demographic variables.




V. Case Studies
       It is helpful to see whether the regression results for the 90-country sample are confirmed
with case studies. One advantage of the case studies is that they can rely more on country-
specific data sources that may not be available for a broad cross-section. Another advantage is
that the case studies may help us gauge the importance of various causal mechanisms. For
example, it may be that Social Security policy affects aging, or GDP, or the form of the political
institutions so that coefficients from a regression equation like those displayed in the third
column of Table 1 should not be interpreted as the effects of democracy, GDP, and aging on
public pension spending. But the time series relationships seen for a case study like Spain’s
might be more readily interpreted that way, for example, if we think that Franco’s death would
be the end of dictatorship regardless of when it occurred, and that the year of his death was not
affected by Spain’s pension spending, GDP, or the average age of its population. Unfortunately,
case studies are not a full solution to this problem because, for example, the amount of public
pension spending during a dictator’s regime may affect the likelihood of democracy’s emerging
after his death and hence our choice of his country as a case study.
       Our overall strategy for selecting countries for closer study is to first look for examples
of a dramatic change in political regime (either from democracy to dictatorship or vice versa) and
then observe whether this change is followed by dramatic alterations in the size or the design of
the Social Security program relative to changes occurring elsewhere in the world. More
specifically, we begin with two time averages for each country of the POLITY democracy index
– 1960-74 and 1975-90 – and take those countries for which the two averages indicate significant
secular changes. Portugal and Spain stand out the most in this regard, with democracy index 0
prior to 1975 and 1 in most of the years after. Greece also stands out with democracy index 0.7
1960-66, 0 1967-73, and about 0.9 after 1975. Bangladesh, Chile, and Uruguay are the three
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 27


countries with largest democracy index reductions over the time period.
       We then tried to find economically and demographically similar countries for
comparison. This lead us immediately to Italy for comparison to Greece, Portugal and Spain.
There are eight South American countries in our data other than Chile and Uruguay, but none
of them could be characterized as particularly democratic during the period 1960-90. Argentina
is relatively democratic, and the most similar to Uruguay in terms of GDP and age, so we include
Argentina for comparison with Uruguay. Based on GDP and age, we include Brazil and Peru
for comparison with Chile and each other. We leave the study of Bangladesh, and an appropriate
comparison country, for future research.


V.A. Southern Europe
       Consider three European countries which have changed to and from democratic regimes
during the past couple of decades – Greece, Portugal, and Spain – and compare them with
another southern European country which has been continuously democratic since WWII. The
top part of Table 5 shows how the countries share not only geography in common, but they also
have similar postwar age demographics (percentage of population over age 65 increased 6-7
percentage points 1950-90), similar economic growth (GDP per capita grew 1.6-1.8 percentage
points per year 1950-90), and similar income inequality (Gini coefficients of about 40 in 1974).
       Are the different political histories associated with different SS histories? From the mid
1960's through the 1980's (the period during which we have pretty reliable and comparable
spending data), Greece, Portugal, and Spain increased public pensions’ percentage of GDP by
6.5, 4.9, and 6.2 percentage points, respectively, while Italy’s increased 6.2 percentage points.
Nearly all of the Greek pension share growth was during its democratic period (since 1975, and
before 1967), but Spain had pretty similar spending share growth rates during its nondemocratic
and democratic periods (before and after 1975), respectively, as did Portugal. Figure 1 supports
this conclusion, using perhaps more reliable country-specific spending data for Italy and Spain.46


       46
         We believe that some of the Italian data reported by the ILO may not be comparable
over time. However, the Bank of Italy reports that “regular” public pension spending’s share
of GDP grew by 5.6 percentage points 1966-90 and, as shown in Figure 1, this growth was
pretty steady over time. This is in line with the conclusions our Table 5 draws from the ILO
data.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 28


       Italy had the most spending in 1966, although it was not far ahead of Greece.47 Italy’s
spending share grew pretty steadily over time, while the Greek share hardly grew 1966-79, and
then grew quite rapidly since. By the late 1980's, the two countries were quite similar. Spain and
Portugal both began the period with similar low levels of spending and grew at similar rates. In
terms of the age of the population, all four countries age at very similar rates. Greece, Portugal
and Spain have very similar fractions of their population over age 65, and are each about one
percentage point behind Italy on that metric throughout the period 1960-90.
       Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin’s SS design indicators show how all four of these countries
now (as of 1995) have retirement tested SS benefits, with no delayed retirement credits. Greek
and Italian benefits have relatively important means tests, while Spanish and Portuguese do not.
Greece, Portugal, and Spain retirement-tested benefits both in their democratic and
nondemocratic periods, while Italy moved from earnings tests to its current retirement test. The
means testing of benefits has been fairly constant over time in these countries, except Italy
where means-testing has become more important over time. All four countries have relied, and
do rely, heavily on payroll taxes for SS program revenue. Greece and Spain capped their payroll
tax (i.e., did not levy payroll tax on earnings a person has above some cap amount), and did so
throughout the period. Interestingly, all four countries have shared, and do share, a financing
difference with most other countries in the world – they all have much higher payroll taxes
(nominally) levied on employers than those on employees.
       In summary, Social Security policy in Spain and Portugal during their nondemocratic
period, as measured by our design and spending indicators, was similar to those of democratic
Italy. Nondemocratic Greece had a social security program of similar design to the others, but
its share of GDP grew less rapidly. Spanish and Portuguese Social Security spending continued
to grow at Italian rates during their democratic period. Democratic Greek spending grew more
rapidly, in effect making up for its slower pre-1975 spending growth relative to the other three
countries. In other words, of the political regimes represented in the Figure, the unusual one is
nondemocratic Greece 1967-74 because it did not increase Social Security’s share of GDP.


       47
         Italy’s spending is further ahead of Portugal and Spain than we might guess from
their age and GDP differences and the pension spending regression coefficient found with
our 90 country sample.
                                                                Social Security and Democracy – 29


Hence, the Greek case supports, while the Spanish and Portuguese cases contradict, the
hypothesis that the introduction of the institution of voting should lead to higher SS spending
growth. All three cases are inconsistent with the hypothesis that introducing democracy would
significantly affect the design of tax and benefit formulas.




V.B. South America
V.B.1. Democracy in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, and Uruguay
          Uruguay probably has the most experience with democracy since 1960 (POLITY scored
it 0.8, 0.9, or 1 in more than half of the years), and is the only one of the five countries getting
a perfect score at some point (1989 and 1990). Chile is probably the least democratic (POLITY
scored it 0 in terms of elections and overall democracy in half of the years) although, for the
purposes of understanding public policy, it may be useful to think of Chile as somewhat more
democratic than scored by POLITY because Pinochet planned a transition to democracy several
years before the first 1980's election. Chile and Peru probably have the largest changes from
democracy to nondemocracy and back, since these two countries are the only ones scored 0 in
terms of elections and overall democracy for several consecutive years in the middle of the
period.
          For the 1980's alone – 1980's is the period when we have the most social spending data for
these countries – the democracy rankings are different. Peru is the most democratic in the 1980's,
but had ended a twelve year period of nondemocracy in 1979. By comparison with Peru, perhaps
Brazil is less democratic because its 21-year military rule lasted until 1985. Of the five countries,
Uruguay is one of the least democratic in the 1980's, since its nondemocratic regime was in power
for the first half of the decade, and dated back to the early 1970's. According to the dates of
transition, Argentina (1985) looks only slightly more democratic than Uruguay (1983), but we
point out that (according to the POLITY codes) Uruguayan executive elections were not fully
competitive until 1989. Furthermore, Argentina had the more recent democratic experience prior
to 1980: 3-4 years of democracy in the 1970's.48


          48
               The democratic years during the 1970's were unstable politically.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 30


       Chile is a complicated case for our analysis because it began the 1980's with a dictator who
planned a several year transition to democracy. Thus, it can be persuasively argued that during
the transitional years, policies were enacted by a “democratic” regime. Moreover, there were a
number of other significant economic reforms coincident with the change in politics and Social
Security, and our Social Security spending data is particularly unreliable.


V.B.2 1980's Public Pension Spending in Four Countries
       Much of the South American Social Security spending data reported by the ILO is for
the 1980's, so most of our South American analysis pertains to that period. We compare
Uruguay with Argentina because they are pretty similar in terms of the age of their populations
(as compared to Brazil and Peru, both Argentina and Uruguay have about twice the fraction of
their population over age 65) and in terms of GDP per capita (just above $4000 per year).
Uruguay spent more on public pensions, but based on population age alone we would have
expected a difference.49 So the levels of social spending in these two countries are consistent
with no democracy effect.
       Public pension spending does grow less in Argentina than in Uruguay: pension spending
grows in Uruguay, but in Argentina pension spending is pretty constant. Even if political
situations were the same, we expect Argentinian pension spending to grow less because it ages
less during the decade. Hence, the pension spending growth rates are also consistent with no
democracy effect.
       Peru is quite similar to Brazil in terms of the age of its population (and in terms of the
rate of aging during the 1980's), although it is poorer than Brazil and the other countries we
study. If Peru’s greater 1980's democracy created more social spending, it is not obvious in our
data because it is not large enough to counteract the effect of income.50 If anything, comparing



       49
        Another part of this difference may be attributed to a data error. ILO reports
Uruguayan public pension spending of 13.6% of GDP in 1987, as compared with 7.2 and 8.6 %
of GDP in 1986 and 1988, respectively. The 1980-89 average Uruguayan public pension
spending percentage without the year 1987 is 6.7.
       50
        Our regression analysis below (and those of previous studies) show how the level of
income is an important determinant of the size of the social security program.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 31


all four countries suggests that Brazil’s pension spending is the outlier because it spends so much
more than Peru and is so similar to Argentina despite being half as old. Since Brazil is arguably
less democratic in the 1980's than Peru or Argentina, its data may suggest a negative effect of
democracy on pension spending.
       ILO provides a relatively long history of Social Security spending for Uruguay and Brazil,
which we display in Figure 2 (note that Uruguay data are missing 1967-74, and are suspicious for
1987). The Figure also has vertical lines to show when the two countries changed democracy-
nondemocracy status (“D”=democratic). Although the missing data makes it hard to be sure,
it does not appear that there was significant SS spending growth during the democratic period
prior to 1974, or that the level of spending was unusual during those years. We see some SS
spending growth during the nondemocratic years 1974-84 – about at the rate the elderly
population share was growing. This growth continued (or perhaps increased slightly) during the
recent democratic years. Hence, Uruguay’s times series do not show us that democratic
governments have significantly more SS spending.
       Brazil’s public pension spending is quite similar in the first and second half of the 1980's,
even though the political regimes were quite different. Brazil’s spending seem to grow at a
normal rate during its nondemocratic period (prior to 1985), once we consider that its elderly
population share grow from .037 to .043 between 1970 and 1990.


IV.B.3. Induced Retirement and Payroll Taxation in the Four Countries
       At some time since 1960, all four countries made retirement a necessary condition for
receiving the public pension, and did not (from an actuarial point of view) sufficiently credit
pensioners for delayed retirement.51 Brazil, Peru, and Argentina eliminated this requirement in
1966, 1991, and 1993, respectively, and did not replace it with an earnings test. Uruguay still (as
of 1999) requires retirement of pensioners. Notice that two of the countries removing the
retirement test (Brazil and Peru) did so during nondemocratic regimes, and one during a
democratic regime. It is therefore hard to argue from these four cases that democracies have a
different likelihood of using retirement or earnings tests.

       51
       All of the reports in this section about Social Security benefit rules are from
Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin’s database, or from SSA (various issues) directly.
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 32


       Brazil reduced the share of the payroll tax levied on employees (by increasing the
employer tax rate without increasing the employee rate proportionally) between 1975 and 1995
which, since Brazil became democratic in between those years, by itself suggests that
democracies tend to (nominally) tax employers more than employees. However, Brazil was
democratic prior to 1963 and (not shown in the Table) had the same employee share (0.5) as in
1975. Furthermore, Peru and Uruguay also changed democratic status between 1975 and 1995, but
did not significantly change their employee shares.52
       Brazil and Argentina capped their payroll taxes in all three years 1958, 1975, and 1995. Peru
removed its cap some time between 1975 and 1995. The SSA reports do not show that Uruguay
had a cap at any time since 1958. Peru’s recent removal of the cap might suggest that democracies
are less likely to have caps, but this tendency does not show it self in the changes over time in
the other three countries. We show below that a larger sample of countries shows a pretty strong
tendency for democracies to have a cap.


V.B.4. Large Budgets Chile Prior to 1981
       Chile (not included in Table 6 because we do not have good spending data) shows us how
nondemocracies have been known to create, or at least maintain, extremely large Social Security
budgets. According to the IMF (ILO), Social Security and Welfare spending under General
Pinochet exceeded 10 percent (6 percent) of GDP by 1981. As fractions of GDP, 6-10% is as large
or larger than the Social Security budgets of European countries, despite the fact that only 6%
of Chile’s population was over age 65 (compare to 10-15% aged 65+ in most European countries).
It is hard to tell from these data alone whether social spending grew to these levels under
Pinochet, or under prior governments.        But we do have some evidence that Pinochet’s
government, even though not immediately held accountable by an electoral process, was
unprepared to reduce pension and other social spending during the first several years of its
regime even when it meant increasing already high payroll tax rates. For example, SSA reports



       52
         Uruguay reduced its employee rate from 15 to 13%, while reducing its employer rate
from 15% to 14.5%. We are not sure how this could occur while expenditure was rising
significantly, but the SSA (1995) does note that Uruguay’s Social Security deficits are
financed with general revenue.
                                                               Social Security and Democracy – 33


that almost 40 percentage points were added to the employer portion of payroll tax rates between
1973 and 1975, and that this increase lasted at least until 1977.53 Hence, the first part of Pinochet’s
regime shows clearly that an electoral process is unnecessary for the maintenance of large social
security budgets.54
       Foxley et al (1979, p. 129) report that 1969 Chilean social spending was 10-11 percent of
GNP (6 of the 10-11 were spent on public pensions). ILO (1961, p. 205) reports that payroll tax
revenue and social spending were already pretty high as long ago as 1951 – 10.2 and 8.2 percent of
national income, respectively. It is hard to tell how these data might be compared with IMF or
later ILO data, but they show a lot of social spending prior to Pinochet, especially when we
recognize that only 4.3 and 5.1 percent of the Chilean population were over age 65 in 1950 and
1970. The SSA reports pretty high payroll tax rates in, for example, 1958, 1969, 1971, and 1973:
about 20% for pensions and another 20% or more for other social programs. These pension
payroll tax rates were similar to those in Argentina and Brazil at the time (Uruguay had higher
rates, and Peru lower, by about 10 percentage points), and the Chilean rates for other programs
were significantly higher. Arellano’s (1985) series on payroll tax rates (employer and employee,
all programs combined) for wage earners is 8% in 1952 and already 45% by 1960.
       If Chilean pension spending growth occurred before Pinochet, was it under a democratic
or nondemocratic regime? This is a hard question to answer, for two reasons. First, our data do



       53
         Perhaps one explanation for the tax rate increases 1973-75 is the government’s desire
to maintain social spending while the tax base was shrinking (for example, real GDP per
capita fell by 22% during the period).
        The reader should note that changes in the employer tax rate does not accurately
measure changes in the tax wedge created by the payroll tax, especially in a place like Chile
where employer rates were so high. For this purpose, it is better to look at (employer rate +
employee rate)/(1+employer rate) which, according to SSA, increases from about 35% in 1973
to 50% in 1975 (exact percentages depend on whether the contributor is a wage earner or a
salaried worker). We thank Salvador Valdés for bringing this point to our attention, and
refer readers to Barro and Sahasakul (1986) for further explanation of the formula.
       54
         Another interesting observation about Pinochet’s public pension programs is that,
according to the SSA, he did not change the design of public pensions prior to 1981. In 1958
and 1975 Chile had the same public pension policy regarding earnings and retirement tests
(according to SSA, there were none except for salaried employees), and the payroll tax was
not capped.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 34


not clearly indicate when the growth occurred. Arellano shows payroll tax rates quadrupling
between 1952 and 1955 (from 8% to 33% – note that there was a major Social Security reform in
1952) and then growing to 50% by 1972, although ILO (1961, p. 205) does not report a dramatic
payroll tax revenue increase any time between 1951 and 1957. Second, while the Chilean
governments prior to Pinochet were relatively more democratic, which of them (if any) should
be considered democratic? Consider the period 1952-54, when a major Social Security reform was
passed and payroll tax rates quadrupled (according to Arellano). During this time, Chile’s
president was Ibanez, who was by all accounts a dictator in the 1920's. The POLITY project’s
democracy score is a mere 0.3 for Chile during these years, in part because Chile’s chief
executives were not always elected fairly and competitively (ie, elections were “stacked”),
executives had a lot of power, and some political parties were outlawed. During these years,
POLITY ranks Chile as less democratic, and having less competitive elections, than (among our
South American case study countries) Brazil, Peru, and Uruguay.
       An early ILO report (1961) suggests that social spending (i.e., the sum of pension, health,
family, and other social program spending) was already generous in Chile by 1951. A Chilean
Social Security system was created in 1925, although this did not resemble the system as of 1952
because the 1925 system was designed to be fully funded (Foxley et al, p. 124). We are not sure
of exactly which year the Chilean system was transformed to pay-as-you-go, but we point out
that POLITY gives Chile a democracy score of 0.1 for the years 1925-34, in part because dictator
Ibanez’s regime (1927-31) came about from rigged elections, military support, and from the
repression of political activity.55 POLITY slightly increases Chile’s democracy index to 0.3 in
1935, and notes that its elections were somewhat more competitive. Nevertheless, POLITY
clearly characterizes Chile as nondemocratic from 1925 until 1954. Of course, these years also
include the Great Depression, so our data do not permit us to determine whether Chile’s growing
social spending 1925-51 should be attributed to nondemocracy or to the Great Depression.56


       55
        http://www.countryreports.org/
       56
         The 1924 “Ruido de Sables” is an interesting episode suggesting that nondemocracy
was a factor. During that episode, there was a conflict between the Parliament and the
military – the former wanted to increase congressional salaries and the latter thought social
programs needed more attention!
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 35


       There may have been substantial increases in pension spending between 1955 and 1972.
During this period, Chile may not have been very democratic by world standards, but democratic
by Chilean and South American standards. For example, POLITY scores Chile 0.5 (1955-63) and
0.6 (1964-72) – the highest scores in Chile’s history prior to 1989.57 Among our case studies,
Argentina, Brazil, and Peru had lower scores than Chile for the 1960's. Hence, whether we
associate any Chilean pension spending growth 1955-72 with democracy depends on some of the
details of how we quantify “democracy.”
       In summary, Chile’s history has a lot to tell us about the connection between pension
spending and democracy. Our Chilean data is of limited quality, and sometimes appears
contradictory. Nevertheless, all of our data are consistent with two conclusions that might be
drawn by focusing on the key years 1925, 1952, and 1973, and the few years immediately following
each of them. First of all, the Chilean governments in these years were not democratic by any
standard. Sometimes there were not elections, at other times there were elections but they were
stacked and led to the appointment of an executive who was very powerful and often suppressed
his political competition. Second, of all of the increase over time in pension spending and rates
of payroll taxation, much of it occurred in these key years and the few years immediately
following. Hence, the Chilean experience suggests that free and fair elections, or even elections
of any kind, are not necessary to create, expand, and maintain a large Social Security system.


V.C. European and South American Cases Compared
       We chose countries for comparison so that political differences were large, but economic
and demographic situations were similar. Might democracy affect Social Security by affecting
the response of Social Security spending to economic and demographic shifts? Economics and
demographics were (and are) quite different in Europe and South America, so we can offer an
answer this question by combining the democratic-nondemocratic spending growth gaps for the



(http://icarito.tercera.cl/enc_virtual/historia/parlamento/parla7.html)
       57
         Chile’s POLITY democracy score is less than 0.5 in all of the years 1818-1954, except
1888-90 (0.6) and 1891-23 (0.5) but even in these years POLITY notes that there were not fair
and competitive elections. Also note that Bollen’s (1980) democracy index is higher for Chile
than for the U.S. in 1960 and 1965.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 36


European and South American cases. To see the details of the argument, notice first how our
European countries aged much more 1960-90 than the South American cases. Elderly population
shares almost doubled in Europe (eg., Portugal’s grew by a factor of 1.7), from initially high levels
(8% in Greece, Portugal and Spain; 9% in Italy). Argentina’s elderly population share increased
from 5.5% to 8.9% (a factor of 1.6, mainly prior to 1980), but otherwise only Uruguay added more
than one percentage point to its elderly population share (8.1% to 11.6%). The European cases
also had more per capita real GDP growth in the 1960's, 1970's, and 1980's.
       Second, recall how, with the exception of Greece, the democratic-nondemocratic
spending growth gap was basically zero in Southern Europe. It seems that democratic Italy’s SS
spending was reacting to rapid population aging by increasing at a rate similar to those in
nondemocratic Spain and Portugal. In South America during the 1980's, Argentina, Brazil and
Peru seem to react to slow population aging in the same way – namely, by holding pension
spending’s share of GDP roughly constant. Uruguay aged somewhat during the 1980's, and its
spending growth seems to have reacted in the way we would have expected based on the
experience of other countries (and without regard for political institutions) – with slow growth
of pension’s share of GDP. While it’s hard to say which of the South American cases is the most
“democratic”, we can say that rates of spending growth are quite similar despite their very
different political experiences. Hence, the democratic-nondemocratic spending growth gap
seems to be close to zero in South America too. If both Europe and South America have the
same democratic-nondemocratic spending growth gap, but different rates of economic and
demographic change, then democracy is not interacting with the economic and demographic
variables.
       Of course, we have the two outlying case studies, Greece and Chile. From the Greek
case, it appears the spending growth is more rapid under democracy, while we get the opposite
impression from the Chilean case. If we then compare the Greek and Chilean cases, and
recognize that the elderly population was growing more in Greece, we might infer that
nondemocracies have more spending growth (as in Chile), but that democracies respond more
to population aging. However, this result does not receive support from our other case studies,
or from the regression analysis in the larger country cross-sections.
                                                           Social Security and Democracy – 37


VI. Conclusions
       We have three main empirical findings regarding the relation between Social Security
and democracy. First, holding constant the fraction of the population over age 65 and GDP per
capita, we find no systematic evidence that democratic governments spend a larger share of GDP
on Social Security, or differently adjust their spending to economic and demographic trends.
Cross-country econometric estimates suggest that the effect of democracy may be to lower Social
Security spending’s share of GDP by 0.9 percentage points. Case studies of seven countries
show how countries with very different political histories, but similar economic and
demographic histories, can have similar Social Security programs. One country, Chile, shows
that Social Security budgets can be quite large without democracy. Greece is the only case, out
of nine total, where we see some evidence consistent with a positive effect of democracy on
Social Security spending, because Greek Social Security grew significantly in the early 1980's –
only a few years after the Greek nondemocratic regime ended.
       Second, the relation between pension spending and economic and demographic variables
seems to be the same in democracies and nondemocracies. In particular, richer and older
countries spend more of their GDP on public pensions, while inequality is uncorrelated with
public pension spending. Third, both case studies and cross-country regressions show no effect
of democracy on Social Security program design, except perhaps for a somewhat greater
tendency for democracies to cap their payroll tax.
       Previous empirical studies of other public policies also find that democratic and
nondemocratic governments look pretty similar from a public finance perspective. For example,
controlling for GDP per capita, Easterly and Rebelo (1993, p. 436) found no relationship between
democracy and a number of government tax and expenditure items.58 Indeed, the only
government budget item in their study that was systematically different between democracies
and nondemocracies was the amount of aid revenue received by the government from foreign


       58
         We infer from their p. 436 and Table 1 that the budget items they studied in
connection to democracy include tax revenue, nontax revenue, current revenue, social
security contributions, government consumption, government consumption excluding
defense and education, public services expenditure, social security expenditure, and transfers
expenditure. Most of their budget data is from Barro and Wolf (1989) and the International
Monetary Fund (various issues).
                                                           Social Security and Democracy – 38


governments!59 According to Lott (1999), totalitarianism does not predict the amount of public
health spending, or the number of children vaccinated by public health programs, although it
does predict (over some range) more public education spending.60 Political scientists have long
studied the determinants of military policies, and there still is some debate as to whether
democracy affects them. Elman (1997) surveys some of the literature, whose findings lean
toward some connection between democracy and peaceful foreign policy, at least vis-a-vis other
democratic countries. Sen (eg., his 1999 article) has argued that democratic governments are
better at preventing famine during a food shortage. There is some evidence that government
spending follows an electoral cycle (eg., Alesina, Cohen, and Roubini 1992 on total government
spending, or Godoy and Valdes 1993 on pension spending in Chile), and by definition
nondemocracies have no electoral cycle.61 More research is needed to measure the various effects
of democracy on the public economy, but our view is that the democracy effects are quite small
in comparison with the effects of demography and the private economy.62 Dougan and Snyder

       59
         For a detailed study of the determinants of foreign aid, see Alesina and Dollar (2000).
All four authors conjecture that the difference does not derive from a difference in the public
decision-making processes of democratic and nondemocratic governments, but rather that
donor countries prefer the recipient to be democratic.
       Budget balance implies that recipient countries – which happen to be
disproportionally democractic – would tax less, spend more, or both. Perhaps this effect is
small because Easterly and Rebelo report no significant tax or spending difference between
democracies and nondemocracies.
       60
         Lott does not attribute the public education spending difference directly to the
institution of voting, but rather to the greater demand by totalitarian regimes to control
information.
       61
        Nondemocratic governments do not turn over on a regular cycle, but might
government spending be different near times of (irregularly spaced) transitions? We are not
aware of any studies of this question, so perhaps it is premature to conclude that
nondemocracies have no analogue to electoral cycles.
       62
        Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (2000), hereafter PRT, look at a sample of democratic
countries, and find quite a significant correlation between “constitutional features” and
government spending’s share of GDP. Their results are (partially) reconciled with our
findings and the findings of other studies of Social Security and democracy by Mulligan and
Gil (2002), who show how PRT’s constitutional feature measures are correlated with
nonpension Social Spending, but much less so with public pension spendin and other forms
of government spending. But we are not aware of an explanation of why nonpension
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 39


(1993) find both authoritarian and democratic regimes to restrict trade, but authoritarian regimes
tend to use tariffs while democratic countries tend to use quotas.
       Since the institution of voting, and political institutions more generally, are so different
in democratic countries, our findings suggest that political institutions are quite minor
determinants of the size and design of Social Security programs. Much more important are
economic and demographic variables, such as the aging of the population and economic growth.
Social Security may still be a highly political issue, because economic and demographic variables
may determine the political influence of various groups. For example, an aging population may
have more political support for Social Security spending, but we believe that this influence
would derive from the size and economic activity of the elderly population itself, and that it does
not particularly matter for the size and design of Social Security what are the details of the
political institutions in which the various groups interact or even if voting by the citizenry is
part of the political process.
       A number of positive theories of the public sector in general, and Social Security in
particular, are built on models of voting. Are the implications of those models consistent with
our findings? We think not, at least for the game theoretic voting models in which the public
policy chosen by the voting mechanism is highly sensitive to the rules of the mechanism,
because in fact Social Security seems to be so insensitive to quite large changes in political
institutions. Perhaps voting models are just a metaphor for a variety of public decision
mechanisms, including those that are used by dictatorships. But if this is the reason for building
a model of voting, then it seems improper to take seriously any implications that are sensitive
to the form of the voting mechanism. One important example is the “one-man, one-vote”
property of voting models, which makes it difficult for a citizen to express his intensity of
preference for policies considered by the public sector. Because intensity of preference does not
matter in such models, we get results like de Tocqueville’s (1835), Meltzer and Richard’s (1981)
and Tabellini’s (1992) that income inequality should be associated with larger transfer or Social
Security budgets, and that income or earnings taxes have the important purpose of raising
revenue from the very rich. An important challenge for political economics is to explain why


spending might be correlated with constitutional features but (according to Easterly and
Levine) not with democracy.
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 40


the elderly have enjoyed political success in nondemocracies as well as democracies.




VII. Data Appendix
       The table below shows, for our main 90-country sample, which country-years are missing
from the ILO pension spending data. Using the Social Security Administrati0n’s (1995) report
of each country’s Social Security program’s first year, we have found that much of the missing
ILO data derives from the fact that some countries did not have Social Security during each of
the years 1960-90. We therefore fill in the ILO data with zeros for each year since 1960 and
before the first year of Social Security (typically for African and Middle Eastern countries prior
to 1975). Dark boxes are country-years with no Social Security program, and white boxes are
country-years with Social Security but no ILO data.
       All of the countries in the Table have at least 5 years of positive ILO data. But if we
combine the ILO data with the zeros, there are ten more countries with 5 years of data (including
the zero spending years as data points) and with GDP and demographic data. These countries
are (with year of first SS law in paren): Chad (1984), Gambia (1981), Ghana (1965), Haiti (1965),
South Korea (1973), Liberia (1972), Oman (1975), Papua New Guinea (1980), Thailand (1990), and
Zimbabwe (1993). If we average the zero spending years with the positive spending years report
by ILO (if any), we get essentially zero spending for all of them: Haiti has the highest estimate,
spending 0.02% of GDP. Zero is probably a pretty accurate estimate for most of these countries,
except for South Korea, Thailand, and Oman which, if ILO had reported any spending for them,
might be significant given their age and level of development. In any case, our regression
estimates are similar if we exclude all 10 countries, include all 10, or just include those 7 where
we suspect zero to be an accurate spending estimate: democracy coefficient point estimates are
-0.89 (see column 3 of Table 1), -0.67, and -0.72, respectively.
countrys          60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
C. African Rep.
Cameroon
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
Dom. Rep.
Fiji
Jamaica
T&Tobago
Bahrain
Bangladesh
India
Indonesia
Iran
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Pakistan
Phillippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syrian A. Rep.
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua
Panama
Canada
Mexico
U.S.A.
Australia
New Zealand
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
U.K.
Yugoslavia
Color codes: Dark = no pension program existed. Gray = data available. White = no data available.
Italy and Spain denote country-specific sources, and not only the ILO data which are missing in 1986 (Italy) and 1967-74 (Spain).
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 41


                          Summary Statistics: Continuous Variables
                                years        Countries   avg      std    median    min    max
                                                                  dev
 public pension                 60-90         90         2.19     2.70   0.75      0.00   8.79
 spending/GDP, %
 years of pension obs.         60-90          90         22       7      23        6      31
 democracy index                60-90         90         0.43     0.41   0.59      0      1
 real GDP, 1985 $ per capita   60-89          90         4290     3762   3017      288    13873
 elderly per capita, %         60, 70,        90         6.0      3.9    4.0       1.6    14.9
                               80, 90
 year of first SS law            na           88         1945     22     1948      1889   1978
 Gini coefficient              60-90           65        40       9      39        23     61
 ethnolinguistic fract.          60           69         0.26     0.24   0.14      0      0.81
 retirement or earnings test   58, 75, 95      65        0.78     0.35    1        0      1
 retirement test                58, 75, 95     65        0.62     0.43   0.83      0      1
 earnings test                 58, 75, 95      65        0.17     0.31   0         0      1
 payroll tax is capped         58, 75, 95     64         0.64     0.41   0.67      0      1
 employee sh of payroll tax    58, 75, 95     64         0.41     0.12   0.4       0.02   0.90
                 Summary Statistics: Dummy variables (percent of sample = 1)
             1958 (N=40): retirement test=58, earnings test=25, payroll tax cap=73
             1975 (N=60): retirement test=63, earnings test=18, payroll tax cap=66
              1995 (N=61): retirement test=61, earnings test=16, payroll tax cap=55


We also point out that, in the 90 country cross-section sample, the democracy index is correlated
0.69 and 0.67 with log real GDP per capita and elderly per capita, respectively.
                          Table 1: Democracy and Social Security Expenditure in a Cross-Section of Countries


independent variables             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)     (9)     (10)
democracy index                  3.71         0.86        -0.86         1.59         1.03        -0.88        -0.87        -0.80    -0.83    -0.95
                                (0.58)       (0.68)       (0.42)       (0.47)       (0.56)       (0.44)       (0.43)       (0.52)   (0.51)   (0.54)
avg gdp per capita, log                       1.67         0.35                                   0.40         0.34         0.44     0.61     0.59
                                             (0.27)       (0.19)                                 (0.23)       (0.19)       (0.32)   (0.34)   (0.35)
% of pop. aged 65+                                         0.62                                   0.59         0.60         0.59     0.52     0.54
                                                          (0.05)                                 (0.08)       (0.06)       (0.07)   (0.08)   (0.09)
(%65-6)*(democ-1)                                                                                             -0.07
                                                                                                              (0.10)
gini                                                                                                                                -0.03    -0.00
                                                                                                                                    (0.02)   (0.05)
(gini-35)*(democ-1)                                                                                                                           0.03
                                                                                                                                             (0.05)
Europe dummy                                                            4.08         3.30         1.45
                                                                       (0.43)       (0.96)       (0.73)
other continent dum’s             no           no           no           no           yes          yes          no           no      no       no
adj-R-sq                             .31        .51          .83          .66          .67            .84        .83          .81     .82      .81
s.e.                              2.25         1.89         1.11         1.59         1.56         1.09         1.12         1.21    1.21     1.21
# of countries                  90           90           90           90           90           90           90           65       65       65
Notes: (1) dependent variable is Social Security expenditure, as a percentage of GDP, averaged over the available years 1960-90.
(2) OLS standard errors in parentheses
(3) All regression include a constant term. Coefficients estimates for constants and some dummies are not reported in the Table.
(4) All regressions with continent dummies have North America as the omitted category.
                                                                      Social Security and Democracy – 43


                             Table 2: Democracy and Induced Retirement in a Cross-Section of 65 Countries


           dependent variable:                       retirement or earnings test                        retirement test                 earnings test
independent variables                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)             (8)
democracy index                           -0.01            0.07           0.02           0.02          -0.40           0.07         0.42            0.14
                                          (0.16)          (0.15)         (0.16)         (0.12)         (0.14)         (0.17)       (0.10)          (0.12)
avg gdp per capita, log                   -0.10           -0.08          -0.10                                        -0.15                         0.08
                                          (0.08)          (0.08)         (0.10)                                       (0.08)                       (0.06)
% of pop. aged 65+                         0.01            0.01           0.02                                        -0.04                         0.04
                                          (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.03)                                       (0.03)                       (0.02)
recent British colony                                     -0.20          -0.22          -0.21          -0.10          -0.13        -0.12           -0.09
                                                          (0.11)         (0.13)         (0.11)         (0.13)         (0.13)       (0.10)          (0.09)
Europe dummy                                              -0.19          -0.20          -0.18          -0.02           0.26        -0.18           -0.45
                                                          (0.16)         (0.24)         (0.11)         (0.13)         (0.18)       (0.09)          (0.13)
S. America dummy                                          -0.46          -0.49          -0.47          -0.39          -0.39        -0.10           -0.09
                                                          (0.13)         (0.25)         (0.13)         (0.15)         (0.14)       (0.11)          (0.10)
other continent dum’s                     no              no           yes             no             no              no           no              no
adj-R-sq                                       .00             .15         .11              .16            .19             .29          .18             .30
s.e.                                        0.36           0.33           0.33           0.32           0.39           0.36         0.28            0.26
Notes: (1) Dependent variables are averaged over the years 1958, 1975, and 1995.
(2) OLS standard errors in parentheses
(3) All regression include a constant term. Coefficients estimates for constants and some dummies are not reported in the Table.
(4) All regressions with continent dummies have North America as the omitted category.
(5) Recent British colonies variable = 1 for all countries under British rule for more than 50 years since 1850.
                                                                Social Security and Democracy – 44


                             Table 3: Democracy and Payroll Taxation in a Cross-Section of 64 Countries


       dependent variable:                            payroll tax capped                                   employee share of payroll tax
independent variables             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)
democracy index source         POLIT      PELEC        GAST       POLIT       PELEC       GAST       POLIT       POLIT      PELEC        GAST
democracy index                  0.16        0.27       0.30        0.25        0.51       0.65        0.13        0.14       0.13         0.10
                                (0.12)      (0.15)     (0.15)      (0.21)      (0.26)     (0.28)      (0.04)      (0.06)     (0.08)       (0.08)
avg gdp per capita, log                                             0.12        0.06       0.07                    0.02       0.01         0.02
                                                                   (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.12)                  (0.03)     (0.04)       (0.04)
% of pop. aged 65+                                                 -0.01       -0.02      -0.03                    0.00       0.01         0.01
                                                                   (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)                  (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)
recent British colony                                               0.03        0.00       0.01                    0.07       0.08         0.09
                                                                   (0.17)      (0.16)     (0.16)                  (0.04)     (0.05)       (0.05)
Europe dummy                                                       -0.11       -0.29      -0.21       -0.08       -0.05      -0.06        -0.05
                                                                   (0.23)      (0.29)     (0.29)      (0.04)      (0.08)     (0.09)       (0.09)
other continent dum’s             no         no          no         yes         yes         yes         no         yes         yes         yes
adj-R-sq                          .01         .03         .04       -.08       -0.03         .00        .13         .10         .04             .02
s.e.                             0.40        0.40       0.40        0.42        0.41       0.41        0.12        0.12        0.12        0.12
Notes: (1) OLS standard errors in parentheses
(2) All regression include a constant term. Coefficients estimates for constants and some dummies are not reported in the Table.
(3) All regressions with continent dummies have North America as the omitted category.
(4) Sample is the same as Table 2, except that Australia is excluded.
(5) POLIT = POLITY IV democracy index. PELEC = POLITY IV executive election index. GASTIL = Barro/Gastil index. All indices are on 0-1 scale.
(6) Recent British colonies variable = 1 for all countries under British rule for more than 50 years since 1850.
                               Table 4: Democracy and Social Security Expenditure Growth in 76 countries,
                                                           1960-74 to 1975-90
independent variables                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)
1960-74 democracy                    1.59         -0.52         -0.49         -0.55         -0.74         -0.66         -0.83          1.89           -0.95
                                    (0.41)        (0.46)        (0.46)        (0.42)        (0.37)        (0.37)        (0.39)        (0.40)          (0.45)
democracy change                                                                                                                       2.53           -0.36
                                                                                                                                      (0.74)          (0.64)
avg gdp per capita,                                1.35          1.29          0.64          0.30          0.36          0.54                          0.54
1960-74, log                                      (0.21)        (0.21)        (0.25)        (0.23)        (0.23)        (0.28)                        (0.29)
avg gdp per capita, gr                                           0.01
                                                                (0.01)
% of pop. aged 65+,                                                            0.25          0.17          0.09          0.11                          0.11
1960-74                                                                       (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.07)        (0.07)                        (0.08)
% of pop. aged 65+, chg                                                                      0.54          0.48          0.45                          0.47
                                                                                            (0.11)        (0.12)        (0.12)                        (0.13)
Europe dummy                                                                                               0.67          1.50                          1.52
                                                                                                          (0.45)        (0.66)                        (0.67)
other continent dum’s                no            no            no            no            no             no           yes                          yes
adj-R-sq                               .16           .46           .46           .56           .66           .67           .66           .26             .66
s.e.                                  1.49          1.20          1.19          1.08         0.95          0.94          0.94           1.40           0.95
Notes: (1) dependent variable is the percentage point change of 100*Social Security expenditure/GDP, from the period 1960-74 to the period 1975-90, using the
available years (see Appendix).
(2) for other variables: “chg” (“gr”) = change (log change) from the period 1960-74 to the period 1975-90.
(3) OLS standard errors in parentheses
(4) All regression include a constant term. Coefficients estimates for constants and some dummies are not reported in the Table.
(5) All regressions with continent dummies have North America as the omitted category.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 46


                         Table 5: Social Security, Economics, and Politics
                        in Southern European Countries, mid 1960's - 1990
                                       Greece         Portugal       Spain         Italy
Politics
nondemocratic years                    1967-74        -1974          -1975*        none
democratic years                       -1966, 1975-   1975-          1976-         all
Economics and Age-Demographics (1950-90)
GDP per cap growth (%/year)            1.7            1.8            1.8           1.6
pop share aged 65+ (percentage         6.6            6.1            6.9           6.2
point change)
1974 Gini coefficient                  41.3           40.6           37.1          41.0
Public Pension Programs
spending/GDP (percentage               6.5            4.9            6.2           6.2
point change)†
timing of spending growth              mainly         even           even          even
                                       1979-
uses payroll tax                                               throughout
payroll tax is capped                  yes            no             yes           no
employee payroll tax rate, as          0.3            between 0.2    0.3 reduced   0.3
share of employer+employee                            and o.4        to 0.2
retirement test                        throughout     throughout     throughout    earnings
                                                                                   test, with
                                                                                   retirement
                                                                                   test later
delayed retirement credit                                         none
means test                             throughout     little         little        mainly
                                                      throughout     throughout    recent
Notes: *Dictator Francisco Franco-Bahamonde died in 1975, democratic Constitution
adopted in 1978
†
  Spending data from the ILO.
                                                                Social Security and Democracy – 47


                        Table 6: Social Security, Economics, and Politics
                           in Four South American Countries, 1980's
                                           Brazil         Peru           Uruguay         Argentina
Politics
nondemocratic years                        -1985          -1979          -1985**         -1982
democratic years                           1986-          1980-          1985-           1983-
Economics and Age-Demographics (1980-89)
Average GDP per cap (1000s)                4.0            2.7            4.3             4.1
pop share aged 65+ (avg percentage)        4.2            3.8            11              8.5
1981 Gini coefficient*                     55             49             49              42
Public Pension Programs
spending/GDP (avg percentage)              2.8            0.5            7.4             4.3
spending growth                            no trend       no trend       some            no trend
                                                                         growth
payroll tax                                                       throughout
payroll tax is capped                      yes            no             no              yes
employee payroll tax rate, as share        0.5 reduced    0.3            0.5             0.4
of employer+employee                       to 0.3
retirement test                            none           throughout     throughout      throughout
delayed retirement credit†                 n/a            none           none            small
Notes: * Gini coefficients are not from the same data set. Year was picked so that
coefficients for all four countries were available.
†
  “small” credit refers to a credit that is too small to be actuarially fair for a typical retiree.
**
   Prior to the 1980's Uruguay was democratic 1952-70.
                                                                Social Security and Democracy – 48




              Figure 1 Public Pension Spending in Southern Europe, 1960-93
(Source: Greece – ILO, Italy – Bank of Italy, Portugal – ILO, Spain – ILO & González-Catalá&Merino 1985)
                                                Social Security and Democracy – 49




Figure 2 Public Pension Spending in Uruguay and Brazil, 1961-89 (Source: ILO)
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 50


VIII. References


Aaron, Henry. “Social Security: International Comparisons.” in Otto Ecksein, ed. Studies in
       the Economics of Income Maintenance. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1967: 13-48.
Alesina, Alberto, Gerald D. Cohen, and Nouriel Roubini. “Macroeconomic Policy and Elections
       in OECD Democracies.” Economics and Politics. 4(1), March 1992: 1-30.
Alesina, Alberto and David Dollar. “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?” Journal of
       Economic Growth. 5(1), March 2000: 33-63.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics. 109(2), May 1994: 465-90.
Arellano, Jose Pablo. Politicas Sociales y Desarrolllo, Chile 1924-1984. Santiago: CIEPLAN, 1985.
Atkinson A. B. and A. Brandolini. “Promise and Pitfalls in the use of ‘Secondary’ Data-Sets:
       Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study.” Journal of Economic Literature.
       39(3), September 2001: 771-800.
Barro, Robert J. “On the Determination of the Public Debt.” Journal of Political Economy. 87(5),
       October 1979: 940-71.
Barro, Robert J. “Democracy and Growth.” NBER Working paper no. 4909, October 1994.
Barro, Robert J. Determinants of Economic Growth: a Cross Country Empirical Study. MIT Press,
       1998.
Barro, Robert J. and H. Wolf. “Data Appendix for Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of
       Countries.” mimeo, Harvard University, 1989.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong Wha Lee. “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling
       Quality.” American Economic Review. 86(2), May 1996: 218-23.
Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 98(3), August 1983: 371-400.
Becker, Gary S. and Robert J. Barro. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 103(1), February 1988: 1-25.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. “Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government.”
       NBER Working paper #6789, November 1998.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. “Voting and Rationality.” Working paper, University
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 51


       of Chicago, January 1999.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. “The Family and the State.” Journal of Law and
       Economics. 31(1), April 1988: 1-18.
Benabou, Roland. “Inequality and Growth.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996. Cambridge,
       MA: M.I.T. Press, 1996.
Bollen, Kenneth A. “Issues in the Comparative Measurement of Political Democracy.” American
       Sociological Review. 45, 1980: 370-90.
Bollen, Kenneth A. and Burke Grandjean. “The Dimensions of Democracy: Further Issues in
       the Measurement and Effects of Political Democracy.” American Sociological Review. 46,
       1981: 651-9.
Bollen, Kenneth A. 1990. “ Political Democracy: Conceptual and Measurement Traps.” Studies
       in Comparative International Development. Spring, 1990: 7-24.
Brennan, Geoffrey and Loren Lomansky. “Institutional Aspects of Merit Good Analysis.”
       Finanzarchiv. 41(2), 1983: 183-206.
Browning, Edgar K. “Why the Social Insurance Budget Is Too Large in a Democracy.” Economic
       Inquiry. 13(3), Sept. 1975: 373-88.
Case, Anne C., James R. Hines, Jr. and Harvey S. Rosen. “Budget Spillover and Fiscal Policy
       Interdependence: Evidence from the States.” Journal of Public Economics. 52, October
       1993: 285-307
Cooley, Thomas F. and Jorge Soares. “A Positive Theory of Social Security Based on
       Reputation.” Journal of Political Economy. 107(1), February 1999: 135-60.
Cutler, David M. and Richard Johnson. “The Birth of the Social Insurance State: Explaining
       Old Age and Medical Insurance Across Countries.” manuscript, Harvard University,
       September 2001.
Cutright, Phillips. “Political Structure, Economic Development and National Social Security
       Programs.” American Journal of Sociology. 70(5), March 1965: 539-55.
Dahl, Robert A. A Preface to Democratic Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire. “A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality.” World
       Bank Economic Review. 10(3), September 1996: 565-91.
Diamond, Peter. “A Framework for Social Security Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics. 8(3),
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 52


       December 1977: 275-98.
Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees. “A Model of Social Insurance with Variable
       Retirement.” Journal of Public Economics. 10(3), December 1978: 295-336.
Downs, Anthony. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper and Row, Publishers,
       Inc., 1957.
Dougan, William R. and James M. Snyder. “Are Rents Fully Dissipated?” Public Choice. 77(4),
       December 1993: 793-813.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. “Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112(4), November 1997: 1203-50.
Easterly, William and Sergio Rebelo. “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: An Empirical
       Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 32(3), December 1993: 417-58.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Francis T. Lui. “Social Security, the Family, and Economic Growth.”
       Economic Inquiry. 36(3), July 1998: 390-409.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Jinyoung Kim. “Social Security, Demographic Trends, and Economic
       Growth.” manuscript, SUNY Buffalo, September 2001.
Elman, Mariam Fendius. Paths to Peace: Is Democracy the Answer? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       1997.
Feldstein, Martin. “The Optimal Level of Social Security Benefits.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. 10(2), May 1985: 303-20.
Flora, Peter, and Jens Alber, et. al. State, Economy and Society in Western Europe 1815-1975: A Data
       Handbook in Two Volumes. Chicago: St. James Press, 1983.
Flora, Peter, and Jens Alber. “Modernization, Democratization, and the Development of
       Welfare States in Western Europe.” in Peter Flora and Arnold J. Heidenheimer, eds.
       The Development of Welfare States in Europe and America. New Brunswick: Transaction
       Books, 1982.
Foxley, Alejandro et al. Redistributive Effects of Government Programmes: The Chilean Case.
       Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1979.
Gastil, Raymond D. Freedom in the World. New York : Freedom House, various issues.
Godoy, Oscar Arcaya and Salvador Valdes Prieto.             “Democracia y Previson en Chile:
       Experiencia con dos Sistemas.” Cuadernos de Economia. 93, August 1994.
                                                              Social Security and Democracy – 53


González-Catalá, Vicente T. y Ana Vicente Merino. “Análisis económico-financiero del
       sistema español de Seguridad Social. 1964-1985.” Colección Informes, Serie Seguridad
       Social. Ministerio de Trabajo y Seguridad Social, MTSS, 1985.
Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise, eds. Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1999.
International Labour Organization. The Cost of Social Security 1949-57. Geneva, 1961.
International Labour Organization. The Cost of Social Security. various issues.
International Labour Organization. Economically Active Population 1950-2010. 4th edition. 1996.
International Monetary Fund. Government Finance Statistics. various issues.
Jackman, Robert W. Politics and Social Equality: a Comparative Analysis. New York: John Wiley,
       1975.
Laitner, John. “Bequests, Gifts, and Social Security.” Review of Economic Studies. 55(2), April 1988:
       275-99.
Lenski, Gerhard E.      Power and Privilege: A Theory of Social Stratification.         New York:
       McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1966.
Lindert, Peter. “The Rise of Social Spending, 1880-1930.” Explorations in Economic History. 31(1),
       January 1994: 1-37.
Lindert, Peter. “What Limits Social Spending?” Explorations in Economic History. 33(1), January
       1996: 1-34.
Lindert, Peter. Social Spending and Economic Growth. manuscript, University of California at
       Davis, January 2002.
Lott, John R., Jr. “Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism.” Journal of Political
       Economy. 107(6), December 1999: S127-57.
Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard. “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government.”
       Journal of Political Economy. 89(5), October 1981: 914-27.
Merton, Robert C. “On the Role of Social Security as a Means for Efficient Risk-Sharing in an
       Economy where Human Capital is not Tradeable.” in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David
       Wise, eds. Financial Aspects of the US Pension System. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, 1983.
de Mesquita, Bruce Bueno and David Lalman. War and Reason. New Haven: Yale University
                                                            Social Security and Democracy – 54


       Press, 1992.
Mueller, Dennis C. Public Choice II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Tomas J. Philipson. “Merit Motives and Government Intervention.”
       Public Finance in Reverse.” NBER working paper no. 7698, May 2000.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Ricard Gil. “How Does the Political Process Matter for Public
       Spending? Reconciling Empirical Results From Democracy and Constitutional Features
       Literatures.” manuscript, University of Chicago, February 2002.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier X. Sala-i-Martin. “Gerontocracy, Retirement, and Social
       Security.” NBER working paper no. 7117, May 1999a.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier X. Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice II.”
       NBER working paper no. 7119, May 1999b.
Nataraj, Sita. “Age Bias in Fiscal Policy: Why Does the Political Process Favor the Elderly?”
       manuscript, Stanford University, December 2001.
Niskanen, William A. “Autocratic, Democratic, and Optimal Government.” Economic Inquiry.
       35(3), July 1997: 464-79.
Olson, Mancur. “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development.” American Political Science
       Review. 87(3), September 1993: 567-76.
Olson, Mancur and Martin McGuire. “The Economics of Autocracy and Majority Rule: The
       Invisible Hand and the Use of Force.” Journal of Economic Literature. 34(1), March 1996:
       72-97.
Pampel, Fred C. and John B. Williamson. Age, Class, Politics and the Welfare State. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Peltzman, Sam. “The Growth of Government.” Journal of Law and Economics. 23(2), Oct. 1980:
       209-87.
Perotti, Roberto. “Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy: What the Data Say.” Journal
       of Economic Growth. 1(2), June 1996: 149-87.
Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland, and Guido Tabellini. “Comparative Politics and Public
       Finance.” Journal of Political Economy. 108(6), December 2000: 1121-1161.
Philipson, Tomas J. and Gary S. Becker. “Old-Age Longevity and Mortality-Contingent
       Claims.” Journal of Political Economy. 106(3), June 1998: 551-73.
                                                             Social Security and Democracy – 55


Pogue, Thomas F. and L.G. Sgontz. “Social Security and Investment in Human Capital.”
       National Tax Journal. 30(2), June 1977: 157-69.
Polity IV Project. Political Regime Characteristics and Transition, 1800-2000. Electronic data file
       (version p4v2000). College Park, MD: CIDCM, University of Maryland, 2000.
Profeta, Paola. “The Political Economy of Retirement and Social Security.” PhD Dissertation,
       Universitat Pompeu Fabra, October 2000.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier “A Positive Theory of Social Security.” Journal of Economic Growth. (1)2,
       June 1996: 277-304.
Sen, Amartya. “Democracy as a Universal Value.” Journal of Democracy. 10(3), 1999: 3-17.
Tabellini, G. “A Positive Theory of Social Security.” mimeo IGIER, Milano, Italy, February,
       1992.
de Tocqueville, Alexis. “Government of the Democracy in America.” Democracy in America.
       Book     1,   Chapter      13,   reprinted    by    the    University      of   Virginia,
       http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/DETOC/, 1835.
Turner, John A. “Population Age Structure and the Size of Social Security.” Southern Economic
       Journal. 50(4), April 1984: 1131-46.
University of London School of Advanced Study, Institute of Commonwealth Studies. “Former
       British         Colonies           and       Commonwealth                 Members.”
       http://www.sas.ac.uk/commonwealthstudies/library/libcolonies.html
