                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE MODERN HISTORY OF EXCHANGE RATE ARRANGEMENTS:
                            A REINTERPRETATION


                                          Carmen M. Reinhart
                                           Kenneth S. Rogoff


                                          Working Paper 8963
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8963


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




The authors wish to thank Vincent Reinhart and Miguel Savastano and participants at Harvard’s Canada-US
Economic and Monetary Integration Conference for useful comments and suggestions and Kenichiro
Kashiwase, Daouda Sembene, and Ioannis Tokatlidis for excellent research assistance. The views presented
in this paper are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund. This
work was largely undertaken while the authors were professors at the University of Maryland and Harvard
University, respectively. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research or the International Monetary Fund.


© 2002 by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation
Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 8963
June 2002
JEL No. F30, F31, F41



                                              ABSTRACT

        We develop a novel system of re-classifying historical exchange rate regimes. One difference
between our study and previous classification efforts is that we employ an extensive data base on
market-determined parallel exchange rates. Our “natural” classification algorithm leads to a stark
reassessment of the post-war history of exchange rate arrangements. When the official categorization is
a form of peg, roughly half the time our classification reveals the true underlying monetary regime to be
something radically different, often a variant of a float. Conversely, when official classification is
floating, our scheme routinely suggests that the reality was a form of de facto peg. Our new classification
scheme points to a complete rethinking of economic performance under alternative exchange rate
regimes. Indeed, the breakup of Bretton Woods had a far less dramatic impact on most exchange rate
regimes than is popularly believed. Also, contrary to an influential empirical literature, our evidence
suggests that exchange rate arraignments may be quite important for growth, trade and inflation. Our
newly compiled monthly data set on market-determined exchange rates goes back to 1946 for 153
countries.




Carmen M. Reinhart                                                Kenneth S. Rogoff
Research Department                                               Research Department
Room 10-700H                                                      International Monetary Fund
International Monetary Fund                                       700 19th Street, NW
700 19th Street, NW                                               Washington, DC 20431
Washington, DC 20431                                              and NBER
and NBER                                                          krogoff@imf.org
creinhart@imf.org
                                                    -1-




                                               I. Introduction

           Contemporary thinking on the costs and benefits of exchange rate flexibility is

heavily influenced by the large number of studies on the empirical differences in growth,

trade, inflation, business cycles, and commodity price behavior across different exchange rate

arrangements. These include the influential work of Baxter and Stockman (1989) and Flood

and Rose (1995), both of whom failed to detect any significant difference across fixed and

floating rates, except for the volatility of real exchange rates that Mussa (1986) had already

noted. Nearly all such studies have relied on the official or “standard” classification

published in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange

Restrictions which, until recently, asked member states to self-declare their arrangement as

belonging to one of four categories (fixed, limited flexibility, managed floating, and

independently floating). Yet, a closer reading of the experience suggests that these official

classifications often fail to describe actual country practice, implying that the gap between de

facto and de jure can be vast. A few previous studies have attempted to either extend the

four-way official classification into a more informative meaningful taxonomy (see Gosh et.

al., 1997), or have relied on purely statistical methods to regroup country practices (see,

Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger, 2002).1 The Fund, recognizing the limitations of its former

strategy, significantly revised and upgraded the standard official approach toward classifying

exchange rate arrangements in 1997, though it did not re-evaluate its historical classification

after the fact. Notably, all previous approaches to exchange rate regime classification,



1
    See also Masson (2000) and Glick (2001).
                                                    -2-




whether or not they accept the country’s declared regime, have been based almost solely on

official exchange rate series.

           One problem with the pre-1997 official classification that has received substantial

attention in the recent literature is the frequency of episodes where the regime is classified as

floating (independently or managed) when, in effect, the country had a de facto peg or

crawling peg.2 However, a less well known but equally serious problem, shared even by the

small number of earlier efforts to reclassify regimes, is that the officially-reported exchange

rate itself is often profoundly misleading. Over the course of post-World War II history,

virtually every country has relied, at one time or another, on capital controls and/or multiple

exchange rate systems.3 By failing to look at market-determined exchange rates, one often

gets a false picture of the underlying monetary policy and the ability of the economy to adjust

imbalances. When there are dual or parallel markets, a regime that is officially labeled a peg

might easily turn out to be a de facto float or a crawling band. As an illustration suppose, for

example, that the parallel market rate undergoes sustained and significant depreciation but

the official rate remains fixed. (Over the broad sweep of post-war history, we find this a

common occurrence.) Then the underlying monetary policy is inflationary, but the effects on

the official nominal exchange rate are effectively masked–at least in the short run--by an

ever-increasing tariff. By far the most common outcome in these circumstances is that the




2
    See Calvo and Reinhart (2002), Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002), and Wickham (2002).
3
 Edwards (1989) stresses the inadequacy of official exchange rate data for the many Latin American economies
with multiple exchange rates.
                                                   -3-




official rate is ultimately devalued, thus validating what had already transpired in the free

market.

        Thus when there are dual markets, it is not sufficient to just discard the official

exchange rate classification. One very often also has to discard the official rate, which can

be meaningless and far removed from the rate at which transactions take place. Another

difference from other studies that have tackled the regime classification issue is that our

approach relies on extensive historical chronologies that allow us to identify when dual or

multiple rates are in place or when parallel markets are active. In the vast majority of these

cases, our data set contains monthly data on dual/parallel market exchange rates from 1946

through 1998, and we use these data to assess whether, from a monetary perspective, the true

de facto regime corresponds to the stated de jure regime. Very often—roughly half the time

for official pegs over the post-1970 period—we find that dual/parallel rates have been used

as a form of back-door floating.4 Lastly, we rely on a large battery of descriptive statistics to

classify exchange rate arrangements into as many as 15 categories. We argue that both pieces

of information—historical chronologies and data on market-determined exchange rates--are

essential to any meaningful classification algorithm.

        We note also that the IMF’s monthly data on exchange rates—which only includes

the official rate—currently begin in 1957, whereas ours begin in 1946. Our analysis is

extremely comprehensive, covering 153 countries. Since exchange rate regimes are often




4
 The IMF data for official exchange rates begins on January 1957 for most countries. We also compiled data
on official exchange rates from 1946 through 1957; see appendix.
                                                          -4-




mixed within a given year, our methodology captures regimes changes by month; all

previous approaches have used only annual classifications.5

           The highlights of our findings can be summarized as follows:

           First, dual or multiple rates, and/or parallel markets were far more commonplace that

is commonly thought.6 In 1950, 45 percent of the countries in our sample had dual rates, not

to mention many more that had thriving illegal parallel markets! Among the industrialized

economies, dual or multiple rates were the norm in the 1940s and the 1950s and, in some

cases, lasted until much later. Those countries that clung to dual or multiple exchange rates

were important actors on the world stage and included the United Kingdom in the 1970s,

Italy in the 1980s, and Belgium and Luxembourg until 1990. 7 Among developing countries

such practices remained relatively commonplace through the 1980s. Going back as recently

as 1980, 32 percent of countries had dual rates. In the 1990s, the number still stood at

approximately 20 percent, including some of the largest emerging markets.

           Second, when one uses market-determined rates in place of official rates, the history

of exchange rate policy suddenly begins to look very different. In particular, it becomes

obvious that de facto floating was not uncommon during the so-called Bretton Woods era of

“pegged” exchange rates. Indeed, for many countries, it is difficult to detect any change in

exchange rate behavior between the two periods (provided one focuses on market-determined


5
    See Côté (1994) for a survey of this literature.
6
  When we refer multiple exchange rates in this context, we are focusing on the cases where one or more of the
rates was market-determined. This is very different from the cases where the multiple official rates are all fixed
and simply act as a differential tax on a variety of transactions.
7
    Of course, over the more recent period the differences in rates was relatively trivial.
                                               -5-




rates). The main impact of the dissolution of Bretton Woods was on G-3 currencies, the US

dollar, the Yen, and the mark. Remarkably, in our “natural” classification scheme, we find

that for about 45 percent of the time official pegs are better characterized as managed or

freely floating arrangements, or limited flexibility. Indeed, we find that very often, an

official “peg” masks an underlying 12-month inflation rate greater than 40 percent. Thus,

nearly half of the official “pegs” turn out to have exhibited far more exchange rate flexibility

than was reported to the IMF. Conversely, many “floats” of the post-1980s turn out to be (de

facto) pegs, crawling pegs, or very narrow bands (often narrower than Bretton Woods

period). Of countries that are listed in the standard classification as managed floating, 53

percent turned out to have de facto pegs, crawls or narrow bands to some anchor currency.

       Third, next to pegs (which account for 33 percent of the observations during 1970-

2001, according to our new classification scheme) the most popular exchange rate regime

over modern history has been the crawling peg or narrow crawling band, which account for

over 26 percent of the observations. During 1990 to 2001, this is the most common type of

arrangement in emerging Asia and Western Hemisphere (excluding Canada and the United

States), making up for about 36 and 42 percent of the observations, respectively.

       Fourth, in our taxonomy, the extreme macroeconomic distresses associated with

inflation over 40% per annum—we term the underlying exchange rate regimes “freely

falling”—are not uncommon. In our sample, about 12½ percent of the observations are in

the freely falling category—which is to say that “freely falling” is about three times as

common as “freely floating”, which accounts for only 4½ percent of the total observations.

(In the official classification, freely floating accounts for over 30 percent of observations in

the past decade, more than three times our estimate.) Our new freely falling classification
                                                          -6-




makes up for 22 and 37 percent of the observations in Africa and Western Hemisphere

(excluding Canada and the United States) during 1970-2001.8 In the 1990s, freely falling

accounted for 41 percent of the observations for the transition economies. Given the

distortions introduced when inflation rises to 40 percent and beyond, any fixed versus

flexible exchange rate regime comparisons that do not break out the freely falling episodes

are meaningless, as shall confirm.

           In light of the evidence we collect, we conjecture that the surprising and provocative

results in Baxter and Stockman (1989) and Flood and Rose (1995)—that there are no

significant differences in business cycles across exchange arrangements— may owe to the

fact that the official historical groupings of exchange rates are misleading.9 Similar

statements could be made about the literature that has concluded that exchange rate volatility

has little impact on trade, as all studies relied exclusively on the official exchange rate. At

one time or another, in every region of the world, parallel/dual markets have been

commonplace.

         The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we briefly describe the evolution

of the official standard annual classification scheme, that has served as the basis for so many

studies. Unlike our classification, which is by month, the official classification imposes the

same regime on the entire year. In Section III, we sketch our methodology for re-classifying

exchange rate arrangements with details provided in an Appendix. Our approach recognizes
8
 We also include in the freely falling category the first six months following an exchange rate crisis (see
Appendix II for definitions), but only for those cases where the crisis marked a transition from a peg or quasi-
peg to a managed or independent float.
9
  Indeed, in light of our results, it is difficult to discern the “puzzle” that recent research is still trying to explain
as in Dedola and Leduc (2001).
                                                      -7-




that an exchange rate regime is difficult to ascertain from one month’s or even one-year’s

worth of data. Section IV compares our results to the “official history” and provides

examples of how our reclassification of exchange rate arrangements may reshape the some of

the existing evidence on the links between exchange rates and various facets of economic

activity. The final section discusses the scope for future research, while an Appendix

provides the detailed country exchange rate chronologies that underpin our analysis. Our

conclusions issue a call for rethinking how the profession should look at the impact of

exchange rate regimes, both at a theoretical and at an empirical level.


                                         II. The Standard Classification

         Classification schemes, for anything, have always been controversial. Dating back to

Aristotle, there arose two kinds of classificatory schemes for animals and plants, the so-

called “artificial” and “natural” systems. Artificial systems placed organic species into well-

marked groups, using a few, sometimes even a single, characteristic for the purposes of

classification. Natural systems, on the other hand, aimed to bring the diverse organic species

into natural families, in which there was a continuity of creatures.10 The standard official

classification prior to 1997, as described in various issues of the IMF’s Annual Report on

Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange Rate Restrictions, would seem to fall squarely

into the “artificial” system category. As shown in Table 1, initially there were only two

buckets, par (fixed) and “other”. Later, the classification expanded to three, then four,

buckets. The four-bucket classification that prevailed through most of the 1980s and 1990s

10
  The French Naturalists of the 18th century were the strongest advocates of the “natural” classification scheme,
as explained in Mason (1962).
                                                       -8-




consisted of peg, limited flexibility, more flexible arrangements, and independently

floating.11 Aside from the small number of buckets, the pre-1997 official categorization was

also “artificial” —in the sense of Aristotle—in that it relied exclusively on a single piece of

information; namely it took at face value whatever each government declared its exchange

rate regime to be in any given year. The post-1997 system, though dramatically improved, is

still based mainly on the official rate.




11
 In practice, limited flexibility has, almost exclusively, been used to classify European countries (prior to the
monetary union) with exchange rate arrangements vis-à-vis one another (i.e., the Snake, the Exchange Rate
Mechanism, etc.).
                                                     -9-




  Table 1. Evolution of the Fund’s “Exchange Arrangements and Restrictions” the Categories
                  for the Annual Classification of Exchange Rate Regimes


 Volumes 1950-1973
 1. Par value or central rate exists--Par value of central rate applied
 2. Effective rate other than par value or central rate applicable to all or most transactions:
           fixed rate or fluctuating rate

 Volume 1974, (no mention of par values)
 1. Exchange rate maintained within relatively narrow margins in terms of:
         US Dollar, Sterling, French Franc, group of currencies, and average of exchange rates of main
         trading partners.
 2. Exchange rate not maintained within relatively narrow margins

 Volumes 1975-1978
 1. Exchange rate maintained within relatively narrow margins in terms of:
         US Dollar, Sterling, French Franc, South African Rand or Spanish Peseta, group of currencies
         (under mutual intervention arrangements), and composite of currencies.
 2. Exchange rate not maintained within narrow margins

 Volumes 1979-1982
 1. Exchange rate maintained within relatively narrow margins in terms of
         US Dollar, Sterling, French Franc, Australian Dollar, Portuguese Escudo, South African Rand
         or Spanish peseta, a group of currencies (under mutual intervention arrangements), a composite
         of currencies, and a set of indicators.
 2. Exchange rate not maintained within relatively narrow margins

 Volumes 1983-1996
 Exchange rate determined on the basis of :
 1. a peg to: the US Dollar, Sterling, the French Franc, other currencies, and composite of currencies
 2. limited flexibility with respect to: a single currency, cooperative arrangement
 3. More flexible arrangements: adjusted according to a set of indicators, other managed floating, and
 4. independently floating.

 Volumes 1997-1998
 1. Pegged to: single currency, composite of currencies
 2. Flexibility limited
 3. Managed floating
 4. Independent floating

 Volumes 1999-2001
 1. Exchange arrangement with no separate legal tender
 2. Currency board arrangement
 3. Conventional pegged arrangement
 4. Pegged exchange rate within horizontal bands
 5. Crawling peg
 6. Crawling band
 7. Managed floating with no pre-announced path for the exchange rate
 8. Independently floating
Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Restrictions, 1950-1978 and Annual
Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, 1970-2001.
                                                       - 10 -




         The critical importance of taking into account dual/parallel rates can be seen in Chart

1, which gives the distribution of regimes, with and without stripping out cases of

dual/parallel markets. The light bars are the official classification; the dark bars separate out

dual markets.12 Note, for example, that according to the official classification, pegs reigned

supreme in the early 1970s, accounting for over 90 percent of all exchange rate

arrangements. But, in fact, over half of these “pegs” masked dual/parallel markets that, as

we shall, quite often exhibited quite different behavior.


                          III. The “Natural” Classification Code: A Guide

         In contrast to the “artificial” official classification of exchange rate arrangements, we

would describe our classification scheme as a “natural” system. Our algorithm relies on a

broad variety of descriptive statistics and chronologies, and we group episodes into a much

finer grid of regimes, rather than just three or four buckets. The most important new piece of

information we bring to bear, of course, is our extensive data series on market-determined

dual or parallel rates. The data, its sources, and country coverage are described in Appendix

I, while the chronologies that map the history of exchange rate arrangements for each country

are reported in Appendix III. To verify and classify regimes, we also rely on a variety of

descriptive statistics based on exchange rate and inflation data from 1946 onwards; these

statistics and how they are used are described in detail in Appendix II.




12
  In Chart I, the dark bars treat dual rates separately, the unified rate regimes are classified according to our
“natural algorithm,” discussed below.
                                              - 11 -




1. The algorithm

       Figure 1 is a schematic summarizing our natural classification algorithm. First, we

use the chronologies (see Appendix III) to sort out for separate treatment countries with

either official dual or multiple rates or active parallel (black) markets. Second, if there is no

dual or black market, we check to see if there is an official pre-announced arrangement, such

a peg or band, etc. If there is, we examine summary statistics to verify the announced

regime, going forward from the date of the announcement. If the regime is verified (i.e.,

exchange rate behavior accords with the pre-announced policy), it is then classified

accordingly as a peg, crawling peg, etc. If the announcement fails verification (which is the

most common outcome), we then seek a de facto statistical classification using the algorithm

described below, and discussed in greater detail in Appendix II.

       Third, if there is no pre-announced path for the exchange rate, or the announced

regime fails to be verified by the data and the twelve-month rate of inflation is below 40

percent, we classify the regime on the basis of actual exchange rate behavior.
                                                    - 12 -


      Figure 1. A Natural Exchange Rate Classification System
                                          From Chronologies:
                     Are There Dual or Multiple Rates, or a Parallel Market?

                    Unified rate                                                    Dual/Multiple or
                                                                                     Parallel rates




              From Chronologies:                                                         Statistically
                                                                                       classify regime
               Is there an official
                                                                                  using market determined
                announcement ?
                                                                                       exchange rates



                YES                NO



    Statistically
   verify regime                          Statistically
    (Pass/Fail)                         classify regime




                                                             If (Inflation>40%)       If (Inflation<40%)
   Verification                                                                    Classified as De Facto:
                             FAIL
    Procedure
                                                                                              Peg
                                                             Freely falling

     PASS: Announcement Confirmed                                                             Band

(Recognized as one of the following regimes)              If (Monthly Inflation
                                                                > 50%)
                                                                                        Crawling peg
  No legal tender            Crawling peg

                                                                                       Crawling band
  Currency board            Crawling band                      Hyperfloat

                                                                                        Moving band
        Peg                  Moving band

                                                                                       Managed float
        Band                Managed float


                            Freely floating                                            Freely floating
                                             - 13 -




       Our statistical measures include rolling two-year and five-year moving average

measures of volatility (see Appendix II). The longer five-year window has priority, in order

that the monthly exchange rate behavior is appropriately viewed as part of a larger regime.

(We also examined the graphical evidence as a check on the classification. In practice, the

main effect is to allow one to more reliably separate pegs from crawling pegs or bands, and

to mark more finely the latter between moving pegs or crawling bands.)

       Fourth, as discussed below, an important departure from all previous classification

schemes is that we create a new separate category for countries whose twelve-month rate of

inflation is above 40 percent. These episodes are classified as freely falling.13 If the country

is in a hyperinflation (according to the classic Cagan definition of 50 percent or more

monthly inflation), we categorize the exchange rate as a hyperfloat, a sub-species of freely

falling. In Chart 2, exchange rates are plotted for two countries that were classified officially

as floating over much of that period—Canada and Argentina. 14 Argentina experienced a bout

of hyperinflation and as Chart 2 illustrates, freely floating regimes look rather different from

freely falling regimes—witness the orders of magnitude difference in the range of the Y-

scales between Canada (top of page) and Argentina (bottom). This difference is highlighted

in the middle panel, which plots the Canadian dollar-US dollar rate against Argentina’s Y-

scale; from this perspective it looks like a fixed rate! The exchange rate profile of other


13
  In the highly exceptional cases where, despite inflation over 40%, the market rate
nevertheless follows a confirmed, pre-announced band or crawl, the pre-announced regime
takes precedence.
14
   For Argentina, this of course, refers to the period before the Convertibility Plan was
introduced in April 1991.
                                                         - 14 -




countries which experienced chronic high inflation bouts—even if these did not reach the

hyperinflation stage--look more similar to Argentina in Chart 2, than to Canada. In our view,

regimes associated with the myriad of problems that result from very high inflation should

not be lumped under the same exchange rate arrangement as low inflation floating regimes,

certainly not if one wants to contrast the macroeconomic implications of alternative exchange

rate regimes.

           In step five, we take up those residual regimes that have not already been classified

by steps one through four. These regimes become candidates for “managed” or “freely”

floating.15 To distinguish between the two, we perform some simple tests (described in detail

in Appendix II) that look at the likelihood the exchange rate will move within a narrow

range, as well as the mean absolute value of exchange rate changes.

           When there are dual or parallel markets, we apply steps one through five to our data

on parallel exchange rates and reclassify accordingly, though in our finer grid, dual rates as a

whole also constitute a separate “species.”

2. Using the chronologies

           The 153 individual country chronologies in Appendix II are the central point of

departure from all previous efforts. In the first instance, the data are constructed by culling

information from annual issues of various secondary sources, including Pick’s Currency

Yearbook, Pick’s World Currency Report, Pick’s Black Market Yearbook, International

Financial Statistics, the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and

Exchange Restrictions, and the United Nations Yearbook. Generally speaking, constructing

15
     Our classification of “freely floating” is the analogue of “independently floating” in the official classification.
                                             - 15 -




our data set required us to sort and interpret information for every year from every

publication above. In addition, however, we draw on national sources to investigate apparent

data errors or inconsistencies. More generally, we rely on the broader economics literature to

include pertinent information not to be found in our secondary sources, such as the dates of

Tablita episodes in Latin America.

       The chronologies allow us to date dual or multiple exchange rate episodes, as well as

to differentiate between pre-announced pegs, crawling pegs, and bands from their de facto

counterparts. We think it is important to distinguish between, say, de facto pegs and

announced (confirmed) pegs, because their properties are potentially different. 16 At the

very least, we want to provide future researchers with the data needed to ask the question.

The chronologies also flag the dates for important turning points, such as when the exchange

rate was allowed to float or a currency was repegged from one anchor currency to another.

       Table 2 gives an example of one of our 153 chronologies shown in Appendix III, for

the case of Chile. The first column gives critical dates. Note that where possible, we extend

our chronologies back before 1946 (even though we can only classify from 1946 onwards);

in the case of Chile we go back to 1932. The second column gives the arrangement,

according to our natural classification algorithm, which may or (much more often) not

correspond to the official classification. As one can see, although Chile unified rates on

September 1999, it previously had some form of dual or multiple rates throughout most of its



16
   Policymakers may not be indifferent between the two. In theory, at least, announcements
of pegs, bands, and so on can act as a coordinating device which, by virtue of being more
transparent, could invite speculative attacks.
                                               - 16 -




history.17 In these circumstances, our classification algorithm relies on the market-

determined, rather than the official rate. In some instances, the discrepancy proved to be

small. For example, from September 1998-December 1998, the official regime was a pre-

announced crawling band to the dollar; our statistical algorithm confirms this band even for

the dual rate. Chile has also experienced several periods where the twelve-month monthly

inflation exceeded 40 percent. Our algorithm automatically categorizes these as freely falling

exchange rate regimes—unless there is a pre-announced peg crawling peg or narrow band

that is verified, as was the case when the Tablita program was introduced on February 1978.

For the freely falling cases, the second column also notes whether there was a dual market

and how our algorithm would categorize the regime absent knowledge of the inflation rate.

The third column in our chronology gives further sundry information on the regime—

information we believe to be particularly important, e.g., the width of the announced and de

facto bands. For Chile, which followed a crawling band policy over many sub-periods, it is

particularly interesting to note the changes over time in the width of the bands. Information

on the performance of the parallel market premia is also presented in the third column, as is

information on currency reform. As an example of the former, we note that since 1992 the

parallel premium slipped into single digits. An example of the latter is given for Chile when

the peso replaced the escudo in 1975.




17
     Of course, since 1992 the difference between the official and parallel rate has been trivial.
                                                                  - 17 -


        Table 2. A Sample Chronology in the Natural Classification Scheme: Chile, 1932-2001
Date                                          Classification                         Comments
                                              Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 16, 1925- April 20, 1932            Peg                                    Gold standard. Foreign exchange controls are
                                                                                     introduced in on July 30,1931.
April 20, 1932–1937                           Dual Market                            Pound Sterling is reference currency. Suspension of
                                                                                     gold standard.
1937-February, 1946                           Managed floating/Multiple rates        US Dollar is the reference currency
March 1946-May 1947                           Freely falling/Managed                 US Dollar is the reference currency
                                              floating/Multiple rates
June 1947-October 1952                        Managed floating/Multiple rates
November 1952–April 16, 1956                  Freely falling/Managed                 US Dollar is the reference currency
                                              floating/Multiple rates
April 16, 1956-August 1957                    Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                              Market
September 1957–June 1958                      Managed floating/Dual Market
July 1958-January 1, 1960                     Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                              Market
January 1, 1960–January 15, 1962              Peg to US Dollar                       The Escudo replaces the peso.
January 15, 1962–April 1964                   Freely falling/Managed
                                              floating/Multiple rates
January 15, 1962–June 1971                    Managed floating/Multiple rates
July 1971-June 29, 1976                       Freely falling/Multiple exchange       On September 29, 1975 the Peso replaced the
                                              rates                                  Escudo. October 1973 classifies as a hyperfloat.
June 29, 1976–January 1978                    Freely falling/Crawling peg to US
                                              Dollar
February 1978–June 1978                       Pre announced crawling peg to US       The Tablita Plan
                                              Dollar/Freely falling
July 1978–June 30, 1979                       Pre announced crawling peg to US       The Tablita Plan
                                              Dollar
June 30, 1979–June 15, 1982                   Peg to US Dollar                       The second phase of the Tablita Plan
June 15, 1982–December, 1982                  Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                              Market
December 1982–December 8, 1984                Managed floating/Dual Market           Parallel market premium reaches 102% in early
                                                                                     1983. On March 1983 the intentions to follow a PPP
                                                                                     rule was announced.
December 8, 1984–January 1988                 Managed floating/Dual Market           PPP rule. The official rate is kept within a +/- 2%
                                                                                     crawling band to US Dollar the June 1985. Yet,
                                                                                     while the official rate remains within the band,
                                                                                     parallel market premia remain in the 20–40% range
                                                                                     and scores as managed floating.
January 1988–January 1, 1989                  De facto crawling band around US       PPP rule. Band width is +/-5%. Official pre–
                                              Dollar/Dual Market                     announced crawling band to US Dollar. Band width
                                                                                     is +/– 3%. While the official rate remains within the
                                                                                     band narrower band, parallel market premia remain
                                                                                     in double digits.
June 1, 1989–January 22, 1992                 Pre announced crawling band around     PPP rule. Band width is +/- 5%.
                                              US Dollar/Dual Market
January 22, 1992– January 20, 1997            De facto crawling band around US       PPP rule. Band is +/-5%. Official pre–announced
                                              Dollar/Dual Market                     crawling band to US Dollar. Band width is +/- 10%.
                                                                                     Parallel premium declines to below 15 percent and
                                                                                     into single digits.
January 20, 1997–June 25, 1998                De facto crawling band to US           Official pre–announced crawling band to US Dollar.
                                              Dollar/Dual Market                     Band width is +/- 12.5%, de facto band is +/-5% for
                                                                                     the official rate and +/-2% for the parallel rate.
June 25, 1998–September 16, 1998              Pre–announced crawling band to US      Band width is, +/- 2.75%.
                                              Dollar/Dual Market
September 16, 1998–December 22, 1998          Pre announced crawling band to US      Band width is +/- 3.5%.
                                              Dollar/Dual Market
December 22, 1998–September 2, 1999           Pre announced crawling band to US      Band width is +/- 8%.
                                              Dollar/Dual Market
September 2, 1999–December 2001               Managed floating                       Rates are unified.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                             - 18 -




       The top panel of Chart 3 plots the path of exchange rate for Chile. It is evident that

through much of the period shown the arrangement was one of a crawling peg or a crawling

band with the rate of crawl varying through time and notably slowing as inflation began to

stabilize following the Tablita plan of the early 1980s. As we will discuss in the next Section

crawling pegs or bands are not at all unusual and, indeed, quite commonplace. The two

bottom panels of Chart 3, which show the path of the exchange rate for India and Greece

provide other examples of the many crawling pegs or bands in our sample.

3. About the data

       As noted, we use monthly data on official and market-determined exchange rates for

the period 1946-1998. In some instances, the data for the market-determined rate is

available for a shorter period and Appendix I provides the particulars on a country-by-

country basis. The market-determined exchange rate data comes from various issues Pick’s

Currency Yearbook, Pick’s Black Market Yearbooks, and Pick’s World Currency Report and

the official rate comes from the same sources and as well as the IMF. The quotes are end of

month exchange rates and are not subject to revisions. For the countries that had one ore

more monetary reforms, involving changes in the units in which the exchange rate is

expressed, the data has been converted as necessary to ensure continuity.

       While the quality of data on market-determined rates is likely to vary across countries

and time, we believe these data to be reliable and generally far better indicators of the

underlying monetary policy than are official rates. For instance, if monetary policy is more

lax than is consistent with maintaining the official exchange rate unchanged one would

expect the market-determined rate to start depreciating ahead of the official realignment.

When the official realignment occurs—it is simply a validation of what had previously
                                                   - 19 -




transpired in the free market. Indeed, this is the pattern shown in the three panels of Chart 4

for the cases of Bolivia, Indonesia, and Iran. This pattern also emerges in the developed

European economies and Japan in the years following World War II; it is quite typical.

        To illustrate more formally that the market-based exchange rate is a better indicator

of the monetary policy stance than the official rate and that changes in the former

systematically predict changes in the latter, we regressed for each of the developing countries

in our sample a currency crash dummy on the parallel market premia lagged one to six

months.18 If the market rate consistently anticipates devaluations of the official rate, its

coefficient should be positive and significant. If, in turn, the official exchange rate does not

validate the market rate then, the coefficient on the lagged market exchange rate will be

negative. As shown in Table 3, in the overwhelming number of cases (97 percent), the

coefficient on the market-determined exchange rate is positive and consistent with the view

that the monetary policy stance is better reflected in market rates. In about 81 percent of the

cases, the sign on the coefficient was positive and statistically significant. Indeed, for

Western Hemisphere as a region the coefficient on the parallel premia was significant I all

the cases.




18
   Two definitions of currency crashes are used. A severe currency crash refers to a 25% or higher monthly
depreciation which is at least 10% higher than the previous month’s depreciation. The “milder” version
represents a 12.5% monthly depreciation which is at least 10% above the preceding month’s depreciation; see
details in Appendix II. To put in perspective the monthly depreciations annualized are 1, 355% and 310%,
respectively.
                                                   - 20 -




       Table 3. Is the Parallel Market a Good Predictor of Crashes in the Official Rate?
                                   Summary of the Results
                                                                    “Milder” crash           “Severe” crash
Percent of countries for which the coefficient is positive           97.1                    97.1
Percent for which the coefficient is positive and significant 1      81.4                    80.0
Percent for which the coefficient is negative                         2.9                     2.9
Percent for which the coefficient is negative and significant 1       1.4                     1.4
Notes: Two definitions of currency crashes are used. A “severe” currency crash refers to a 25% or higher
monthly depreciation which is at least 10% higher than the previous month’s depreciation. The “milder” version
represents a 12.5% monthly depreciation which is at least 10% above the preceding month’s depreciation. To
put in perspective the monthly depreciations annualized are 1, 355% and 310%, respectively.
1
  At the ten percent confidence level or higher.



     IV. The “Artificial” and “Natural” Taxonomies of Exchange Rate Arrangements

        We are now prepared to offer some broad descriptive statistics about our “natural”

classification scheme and how it compares to the standard “artificial” one.

1. Alternative taxonomies: comparing the basic categories

        Altogether, our taxonomy of exchange rate arrangements includes the 14

classifications sketched in Table 4 (15 if hyperfloats are treated as a separate category).

Because we sometimes want to compare our classification regime with the official one, we

can also collapse our 14 types of arrangements into 5 broader categories. The least flexible

arrangements are assigned lower values in our scale as shown in the second column of Table

4.

        In the finer grid, we distinguish between pre-announced policies and the less

transparent de facto regimes. Since the former involve an explicit announcement while the

latter leaves it to financial market analysts to figure out what the implicit exchange rate

policy is, in the finer classification we treat pre-announcement as less flexible than de facto

and accordingly assign it a lower number in our scale. For those not interested in testing

whether announcements serve as a coordinating device (say to make a speculative attack
                                                      - 21 -




more likely) and are exclusively interested in sorting out the degree of observed exchange

rate flexibility, the bottom panel of Table 4 presents a coarser ranking according to the

degree of flexibility from one to five. However, in both the coarse and fine grid, it is

imperative to treat freely falling as a separate category. These sorting strategies categorize

cover the period January 1946-December 2001 for those with unified rates, and January

1946-December 1998 for those countries with dual markets.


        Table 4. The Fine and Coarser Grids of the Natural Classification Scheme

Natural Classification Bucket                     Number assigned to      Number assigned to
                                                  category in fine grid   category in coarse grid
No separate legal tender                          1                       1
Pre announced peg or currency board               2                       1
arrangement
Pre announced horizontal band that is narrower    3                       1
than or equal to +/- 2%
De facto peg                                      4                       1
Pre announced crawling peg                        5                       2
Pre announced crawling band that is narrower      6                       2
than or equal to +/- 2%
De facto crawling peg                             7                       2
De facto crawling band that is narrower than or   8                       2
equal to +/- 2%
Pre announced crawling band that is wide than     9                       2
or equal to +/- 2%
De facto crawling band that is narrower than or   10                      3
equal to +/- 5%
Moving band that is narrower than or equal to     11                      3
+/- 2%
(i.e., allows for both appreciation and
depreciation over time)
Managed floating                                  12                      3
Freely floating                                   13                      4
Freely falling                                    14                      5
Source: The authors.
                                              - 22 -




2. Fact and fiction: Natural and Artificial?

       We are now prepared to contrast the official view of the history of exchange rate

regimes with the view that emerges from employing our alternative methodology. To

facilitate comparisons, we will focus mainly on the coarse grid version of the natural system.

       For example, in 1950, the IMF’s then two tier classification (peg and “other”) had 65

percent of countries listed as pegs, as Chart 5 illustrates. As one can also see from Chart 5,

according to our natural classification system, less than forty percent of all regimes at this

time were pegs (since countries had dual/parallel rates which did not qualify as pegs.) In

fact, this coarse comparison understates the differences between the two classification

systems since some of our “pegs” were not considered pegs under the official classification;

in turn, our algorithm rejects almost half of the official pegs as true pegs. It is worth noting

that our reclassification of the early post-war years impacts not only on developing countries,

but on industrialized countries as well; nearly all the European countries had active parallel

markets after World War II.

       A second (less important) reason why our scheme shows less pegs is that the IMF’s

pre-1997 allowed countries to declare their regimes as pegged to an undisclosed basket of

currencies. This practice was especially popular during the 1980s, and it was under the

umbrella of pegging to an undisclosed basket of currencies that a great deal of managed

floating, freely floating and freely falling actually took place.

       For the period 1974-1990, the official classification has roughly 60 percent of all

regimes as pegs; our classification has only half as many. Again, as we shall see shortly, this

comparison understates the differences since some of our pegs are not official pegs. For the

years 1974-1990, and 1991-2001, one can see two major trends. First, “freely falling”
                                                  - 23 -




continues to be a significant category, accounting for 12 percent of all regimes from 1974-

1990, and 13 percent of all regimes from 1991-2001. For the transition economies in the

1990s, over 40 percent of the observations are in the freely falling category. Table 5 looks at

what kinds of official exchange rate regimes are most closely associated with our freely

falling category. We find that peg, managed floating and independently floating contribute

in almost equal measure to our freely falling category. Only limited flexibility–a relatively

small group of mostly European countries in the official classification–is not associated with

freely falling. The last item in the table shows that 62 percent of all freely falling exchange

rate systems took place under the guise of dual rates.


                         Table 5. Behind Freely Falling: Exchange Rate
                 Official Arrangements in Place during Freely Falling Episodes
                                          1970-2001
                                    (Percent of Total Cases)

                        Peg          Limited        Managed         Independently     (Dual or parallel
                                    Flexibility     Floating           Floating            rates)



                       28.2             0.0            35.7              36.1               (61.8)

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
and International Financial Statistics, Pick and Sédillot (1971), International Currency Analysis, World
Currency Report, various issues.

        Second, the natural classification scheme reveals a bunching to the middle in terms of

exchange rate flexibility, when compared to the official monetary history of the world.

Limited flexibility – which under the natural classification is dominated by de facto crawling

pegs – becomes notably more important. From being a very small class under the official

scheme, the natural classification algorithm elevates limited flexibility to the second most

important grouping over the past decade, just behind pegs. Another startling difference is the
                                               - 24 -




reduced importance of freely floating. According to the official classification, more than 30

percent of countries were independently floating during 1991-2001. According to the natural

classification, less than 10 percent were freely floating. This is partly a manifestation of

what Calvo and Reinhart (2002) term “fear of floating”, but equally because we assign high

inflation floats to our new freely falling category. Indeed, more countries had freely falling

exchange rates than had freely floating exchange rates!

       The contrast between the old and new classification systems becomes even more

striking when one sees just now small the overlap is between the two classifications country

by country, month by month. As we can see from Table 6, if the official designation of the

regime is a peg (1970-2001), there is a 44 percent chance our algorithm will categorize it into

a more flexible arrangement. If the official regime is a float, there is a 31 percent chance we

will categorize it as a peg or limited flexibility. If the official regime is a managed float,

there is 53 percent chance our algorithm will categorize it as a peg or limited flexibility.

Whether the official regime is a float or peg, it is virtually a coin toss whether the natural

algorithm will yield the same result. The bottom of the table gives the pairwise correlation

between the two classifications, with the official classification running from 1 (peg) to 4

(independently floating), and the natural classification running from 1 (peg) to 5 (freely

falling). The simple correlation coefficient is only .42. As one can confirm from the

chronologies, the greatest overlap occurs in the classification of the G3 currencies and of the

limited flexibility European arrangements. Elsewhere, and especially in developing

countries, the two classifications differ significantly, as we shall see.
                                                      - 25 -




        Table 6. Floating Pegs and Pegged Floats: Revisiting the Past, 1970-2001


 Conditional probability                                                                    In percent

 Probability that the regime is dual, managed or independently floating according to
 natural classification conditional on being classified as a peg in the official standard     40.2
 classification
 Probability that the regime is limited flexibility, managed or independently floating        44.5
 or freely falling cording to natural classification conditional on being classified as a
 peg in the official standard classification
 Probability that the regime is peg or limited flexibility according to natural
 classification conditional on being classified as managed floating by the official           53.2
 standard classification
 Probability that the regime is peg or limited flexibility according to natural
 classification conditional on being classified as independently floating by the official     31.5
 standard classification

 Pairwise correlation between the Standard and Natural classification                         42.0

Source: The authors’ calculations.

3. The pegs that float

        Chart 6 plots the parallel market premium since January 1946, in percent, for Africa,

Asia, Europe and Western Hemisphere. As is evident from the Chart, for all the regions

except Europe, it would be difficult to make the case that the breakdown of Bretton Woods

was a singular event, let alone a sea change. The levels of pre- and post-1973 volatilities in

the market determined exchange rate—as revealed by the parallel market premia are

remarkably similar for the developing world. Note that for all regions, we exclude the freely

falling episodes which would significantly increase the volatility but also distort the scale.

        As regards Europe, the story told by Chart 6 is even more surprising. From 1946

until the arrival of the 1960s, Europe was de facto floating under the guise of pegged official

exchange rates. Each time official rates were realigned, the story had already unfolded in the

parallel market. While the volatility of the gap between the official rate and the market

exchange rate is not quite in the order of magnitude observed in the developing world, the
                                               - 26 -




volatility of the parallel rate is quite similar to the volatility of today’s managed or freely

floating exchange rates. The disappearance of the premia at such a late stage—the 1960s--

suggests that the duration of the “true” Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange rates was

much shorter lived than most textbooks suggest. As show earlier for Chile and India in the

top two panels of Chart 2, there are many interesting country examples that illustrate visually

just how little changed before and after the breakup of Bretton Woods. Clearly, more

careful statistical testing is required to make categorical statements about when a structural

break took place; but it is obvious from the charts that whatever break might have taken place

must be relatively minor quantitatively compared to usual image of the move from fixed to

flexible rates.

4. The floats that peg

        Chart 7 provides a more general flavor of how exchange rate flexibility has evolved

over time and across regions. The chart plots five-year moving averages of the probability

that the monthly percent change in the exchange rate remains within a two percent band for

Africa, Asia, Europe and Western Hemisphere (excluding only the United States). Hence,

under a pegged arrangement, assuming no adjustments to the parity are made, these

probabilities should equal 100 percent. As before, we exclude the freely falling episodes.

For comparison purposes, the figures plot the unweighted regional averages against the

unweighted averages for the “committed floaters”. (The committed floaters group include

the following exchange rates against the dollar: Yen, DM (Euro), Australian dollar, and the

Pound Sterling.)
                                              - 27 -




       It is evident for all regions (this applies the least to Africa) that the monthly percent

variation in the exchange rate has typically been kept to a minimum—there is a great deal of

smoothing of exchange rate fluctuations in all regions when compared to the usual monthly

variations of the committed floaters. The smoothing is most evident in Asia where the index

hovers around 90 percent for most of the period, versus 60-70 percent for the floaters.

       Hence, over time, the nature of the classification problem has evolved from labeling

something as a peg when it is not, to labeling something as floating when the degree of

exchange rate flexibility has in fact been very limited.

5. Reflections on the choice of nominal anchor

       The data set underlying our analysis offers a number of potential insights about how

the choice of exchange rate regime impacts on macroeconomic performance. A very basic

one is inflation. Many developing countries today are faced with the question of whether to

use the exchange rate as an explicit or implicit nominal anchor. It is widely recognized that

fixing to a strong major currency can pose problems if the developing country lags in

productivity growth, or if it experiences recessions at different times from the anchor. How

big is this problem quantitatively? It is very instructive to look at the CFA franc zone

countries in Africa, a group of more than a dozen nations that have pegged more or less

continuously to the French franc since 1946 (with the notable exception of a one time 50

percent devaluation in 1994). Although these countries have (by and large) enjoyed a

relatively high degree of exchange rate stability, they also constitute the region of the world

that has had experienced by far the most frequent bouts of deflation. During 1970 to 2001, as

shown in the top panel of Chart 8, these countries, on average had deflations (as measured by

a decline in the twelve-month percent change in the consumer price index) about 28 percent
                                               - 28 -




of the time! This can be interpreted as “a cost” of having the exchange rate as the nominal

anchor and requiring that all adjustment in the real exchange rate to be borne by the price

level. It merits analysis to explore to what extent these prolonged bouts of deflation have

contractionary consequences for output.

        Of course, the flip side having such a “tight” nominal anchor is not having a nominal

anchor at all. As shown in the bottom panel of Chart 8, freely falling is endemic—

particularly in Western Hemisphere (i.e., Latin America) and in the transition economies,

which include the republics that made up the former Soviet Union. Freely falling, as we

discuss in the next subsection, is not only problematic from the point of view of having no

price stability and the resultant high degree of uncertainty about nominal magnitudes. It is

also a main stumbling block to economic growth.

6. Does the exchange rate regime matter?

        The question of whether the exchange rate arrangement matters for various facets of

economic activity is, indeed, a far-reaching and significant question that has been tackled

over the years in the literature on international trade and finance, and is beyond the scope and

aims of this paper. However, a few simple exercises are illustrative of the potential

usefulness of our Natural classification. First consider Table 7 below, the top row of which

is the same as the first four entries in Table 8 which follows. Recall that if the official regime

classification is a peg, the probability that the regime is actually “freely falling” is 28

percent. The probability that an exchange rate regime with an official classification of

independently floating is one the natural algorithm would label as freely falling is 36 percent.

Simply taking out treating dual arrangements separately drastically alters the picture. Pegs
                                                  - 29 -




with unified rates accounted for only 3 percent of freely falling, though independently

floating still accounts for 25 percent.


                      Table 7. Probability of Freely Falling Across Regimes:
                                            1970-2001

                                       Percent of Total Cases
     Period          Peg          Limited        Managed      Independently       Dual or Multiple
                                 Flexibility     Floating        Floating         Exchange Rates

    Standard         28.3            0.0            35.6            36.1                 0.0
   Dual rates
     treated         3.2             2.2            20.9            25.3                24.5
   separately

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
and International Financial Statistics, Pick and Sédillot (1971), International Currency Analysis, World
Currency Report, various issues.

        In a similar vein, we compare the average annual inflation rate and the average annual

per capita GDP growth rate across exchange rate regimes under (a) the standard classification

and (b) a modified standard classification that simply separates dual markets into a different

bucket. The results are shown in Table 8 for the entire sample. As Table 8 highlights, there

are significant differences in the inflation averages across the two classification schemes.

The standard classification shows very high average inflation rates in three of the four

“standard” categories; only limited flexibility exhibits moderate inflation. The difference is

particularly stark when the independently floating cases are assessed, with the standard

official classification showing average annual inflation rate of 174 percent versus 46 percent

for the classification that separates out dual rates. Similarly, annual real per capita GDP

growth is twice as large for the freely floating cases under our classification. These

discrepancies are in a large part owing to our extra category of dual rates, which houses a
                                                 - 30 -




disproportionately large number of the high inflation cases—notice the average inflation rate

for dual rates is 167 percent.


                              Table 8. Do Classifications Matter?
                       Growth and Inflation across Regimes: 1970 to 2001

                                     Average Annual Inflation
 Classification     Peg        Limited        Managed       Freely Floating   Dual or Multiple
    scheme                    Flexibility     Floating                        Exchange Rates

   Standard        38.8           5.3             74.8           173.9              n.a.
 Dual rates as a
   separate        20.7          10.1             29.7           45.5              167.4
   category
                             Average Annual Per Capita GDP Growth

    Standard          1.4          2.2             1.9            0.5               n.a.
 Dual rates as a
    separate          1.7          2.6             1.5            1.1               0.8
    category
Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook.

        However, simply modifying the standard classification is far less revealing than the

Natural classification. The contrast is stark both in terms of the level of per capital GDP,

growth, and inflation averages; see Charts 9-12. The implications for trade volume are also

interesting. Not surprisingly, freely falling regimes (including the subcategory “hyperfloat”)

exhibit an average annual inflation rate 443 percent versus an inflation average in the 6 to15

percent range for the other categories (Chart 7). As shown in Chart 10, freely falling has the

lowest per capita income (US $3,476) of any category, while freely floating has the highest

(US $13,602)—a difference that is clouded in the original standard classification when freely

falling cases are included in the freely (independently) floating category for lack of a better

alternative. In the official IMF historical classification, limited flexibility, which was almost

entirely comprised of European countries, showed the largest per capita income.
                                              - 31 -




       Stark differences in average per capita real GDP growth also emerge. In particular,

growth is negative for freely falling, -2.5%, versus positive growth rates in the 1.6-2.4 range

for the other categories (Chart 11). Once freely falling is treated as a separate category, the

differences between our other classifications pale relative to the differences between freely

falling and not freely falling. In the standard classification, freely floating shows a meager

average growth rate of 0.5 percent for the independently floating cases. In the natural

classification, which purges the freely floating category from its freely floating counterparts,

the average growth rate quadruples for the floaters to 2.3 percent. Clearly, this exercise

highlights the importance of treating as a separate classification the freely falling episodes.

       On trade volume (i.e., exports plus imports as a share of GDP), Chart 12 reveals that

for the Natural classification, the differences between fix and flex are noticeably greater than

for the official classification. Trade volume is the highest for pegs and for limited flexibility,

and it is lowest for freely floating; the gap between these is about 36 percent. Obviously, we

cannot assess causation here, but the striking differences merit further exploration.


                                   VI. Concluding Remarks

       We have argued that the official classification has serious flaws. Systems with

extensive dual or parallel markets, which accounted for about half of all exchange rate

arrangements in our sample in the 1950s and 1960s and early 1970s, are not treated as a

separate category. Most often, these regimes have been labeled pegs by all other

classifications, notably including the official classification. Given that a very significant

share of these “pegs” masked high inflation and large parallel/dual market premiums, it is

clear the standard categorization can be highly misleading. According to our new “natural”
                                             - 32 -




classification scheme, across all countries and all months, 45 percent of all post-1970

observations officially labeled as a “peg” should, in fact, have been classified as limited

flexibility, managed or freely floating—or worse, “freely falling”. In the 1980s and 1990s, a

new type of misclassification problem emerged and the odds of being officially labeled a

“managed float” when there was a de facto peg or crawling peg was about 53 percent. We

thus find that the official history of exchange rates can be profoundly misleading, as a

striking number of pegs are much better described as floats, and vice-versa.

       These misclassification problems deeply cloud our view of history along some very

basic dimensions. Using the official classification for the period 1970-2001, one would

conclude that a freely floating exchange rate is not a very attractive option—it produces an

average annual inflation rate of 174 and a paltry average per capita growth rate of 0.5

percent. This is the worst performance of any arrangement. Our classification presents a

very different picture: free floats deliver an average inflation which is less than 10 percent

(the lowest of any exchange rate arrangement), and an average per capita growth rate of 2.3

percent. We believe that the new view of exchange rate history offered here may well lead to

a significant reassessment of how different regimes perform.

       In light of the dramatic revision of exchange rate classifications presented here,

Milton Friedman’s (1953) oft-ridiculed depiction of floating exchange rates no longer looks

so foolish. Friedman, of course, argued that flexible exchange rates were preferable to fixed

rates because they prevented small inflation differentials from cumulating and eventually

forcing a big devaluation. Most commentators have suggested that Friedman was completely

wrong in his prediction of how flexible rates would work, and that post-1973 flexible rates

would prove far more volatile than he had ever imagined. It is true that exchange rates across
                                             - 33 -




the dollar, yen and DM (now euro) did become notably more volatile after the breakup of

Bretton Woods in 1971, at least in comparison with the 1960s. But for most other countries,

the main trend is that after 1973, more countries effectively adopted crawling pegs vis-à-vis

their anchor, with very little volatility – much as Friedman had envisioned. If one wants to

criticize Friedman (1953), it is perhaps better to focus on his depiction of fixed exchange

rates, which he portrayed as making occasional big moves instead of frequent small

adjustments. In practice, much de facto floating was done through the back door of parallel

markets. As a result, the effective adjustment of exchange rates under “pegging” was in many

respects far smoother than Friedman described. Indeed, for many developing countries, the

market-determined exchange rate looks remarkably similar during and after the Bretton

Woods system--they were de facto crawling pegs both before and after the break up. The

remarkable and durable popularity of crawling pegs is indeed a new fact that needs to be

better understood and rationalized. So, not only is it important to rethink the empirical

literature on exchange rate regimes, our new stylized facts make it important to rethink

theoretical comparisons of exchange rates as well.
                                          - 34 -




                                       References

Baxter, Marianne, and Alan Stockman, (1989). “Business Cycle and Exchange Rate Regime:
       Some International Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 23, 377-400.

Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, (2002). “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, forthcoming.

Côté, Agathe, (1994). “Exchange Rate Volatility and Trade: A Survey,” Bank of Canada
       Working Paper 94-5.

Dedola, Luca, and Sylvain Leduc, (2001). “Why is the Business Cycle Behavior of
      Fundamentals Alike Across Exchange Rate Regimes? Oesterreichische Nationalbank
      Working Paper 53.

Easterly, William, (2001). The Elusive Quest for Growth (MIT Press: Cambridge, MA).

Flood, Robert P., and Andrew K. Rose, (1995). “Fixing Exchange Rates: A Virtual Quest for
       Fundamentals,” Journal of Monetary Economics.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose, (1996). Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets:
       An Empirical Treatment, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 41, No.3/4,
       November, 351-368.

Glick, Reuven, (2000). “Fixed or Floating: Is It Still Possible to Manage in the Middle?”
       Pacific Basin Working Paper No. PB00-02, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Gosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, Jonathan Ostry, and Holger Wolfe, (1997). “Does the
       Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?, NBER Working Paper No. 5874, January.

International Monetary Fund, various issues, (1949-1978). Annual Report on Exchange
        Restrictions (International Monetary Fund: Washington DC)

International Monetary Fund, various issues, (1979-2001). Annual Report on Exchange
        Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions

International Currency Analysis, World Currency Yearbook (International Currency
        Analysis: New York).

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzeneger, (2002). “Classifying Exchange Rate
      Regimes: Deeds vs. Words,” mimeograph, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

Mason, Stephen F., (1962). A History of the Sciences, (Collier Books: New York).
                                           - 35 -




Masson, Paul R., (2000). “Exchange Rate Regime Transitions,” Journal of Development
      Economics Vol. 64, 571-586.

Pick, Franz, various issues, (1955-1982). Pick’s Currency Yearbook (Pick Publishing
        Corporation, New York).

Pick, Franz, various issues, (1945-1955). World Currency Reports (Pick Publishing
        Corporation, New York).

Pick, Franz, and René Sédillot (1971). All the Monies of the World: A Chronicle of Currency
        Values, (Pick Publishing Corporation, New York).

Wickham, Peter, (2002). “Do Flexible Exchange Rates of Developing Countries Behave Like
      the Floating Exchange Rates of Industrialized Countries?” IMF Working Paper.
                                       - 36 -


                             Appendix I. The Data
                           Table AI.1. Country Coverage


     Country         Official exchange rate          Parallel market exchange rate
      Albania          1954:12-2001:12                      1954:12-1998:12
      Algeria           1946:1-2001:12                       1955:1-1998:12
     Argentina          1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
     Armenia            1992:4-2001:12                            n.a.
     Australia          1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
      Austria           1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
    Azerbaijan         1992:12-2001:12                            n.a.
      Belarus           1992:1-2001:12                       1991:8-1998:12
     Belgium            1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
       Benin            1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Bolivia           1946:1-2001:12                       1948:1-1998:12
Bosnia-Herzegovina      1997:1-2001:12                            n.a.
     Botswana           1946:1-2001:12                       1989:1-1998:12
       Brazil           1946:1-2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
     Bulgaria           1946:7-2001:12                       1946:7-1998:12
   Burkina Faso         1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Burundi           1946:1-2001:12                       1983:1-1998:12
    Cameroon            1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Canada            1946:1-2001:12                       1947:1-1998:12
  Central African       1946:1-2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
     Republic
       Chad             1946:1-2001:12                      1970:7-1998:12
       Chile            1946:1-2001:12                      1948:1-1998:12
       China            1951:1-2001:12                      1949:9-1998:12
     Colombia           1946:1-2001:12                      1952:1-1998:12
Congo, Democratic       1946:1-2001:12                      1962:1-1996:12
    Republic of
Congo, Republic of     1946:1-2001:12                      1970:7-1998:12
    Costa Rica          1946:1-2001:12                      1948:1-1998:12
   Cote D’Ivoire        1946:1-2001:12                     1970:7-1998:12
      Croatia          1992:12-2001:12                     1991:12-1998:12
      Cyprus           1955:1-2001:12                      1970:7-1998:12
  Czech Republic        1946:1-2001:12                      1946:1-1998:12
     Denmark            1946:1-2001:12                      1946:1-1998:12
Dominican Republic      1946:1-2001:12                      1960:3-1998:12
     Ecuador            1946:1-2001:12                      1947:1-1998:12
       Egypt           1946:1-2001:12                      1946:1-1998:12
    El Salvador         1946:1-2001:12                      1961:1-1998:12
 Equatorial Guinea      1946:1-2001:12                      1970:7-1998:12
      Estonia           1992:62001:12                      1991:8-1998:12
      Finland          1946:1-2001:12                      1946:1-1998:12
      France            1946:1-2001:12                      1946:1-1998:12
       Gabon           1946:1-2001:12                      1970:7-1998:12
      Gambia           1946:1- 2001:12                     1985:1-1998:12
      Georgia          1995:10-2001:12                           n.a.
     Germany            1946:1-2001:12                     1946:1-1998:12
       Ghana           1946:1- 2001:12                     1962:3-1998:12
      Greece            1946:1-2001:12                      1946:1-1998:12
                                         - 37 -

                       Table AI.1. Country Coverage (continued)


      Country          Official exchange rate            Parallel market exchange rate
     Guatemala            1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
        Guinea            1949:1-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
   Guinea-Bissau          1946:1-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
       Guyana             1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
         Haiti            1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
      Honduras            1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
     Hong Kong            1946:1-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
       Hungary            1946:8-2001:12                         1946:8-1998:12
       Iceland            1946:1-2001:12                         1949:1-1998:12
         India            1946:1-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
      Indonesia           1946:1-2001:12                         1947:1-1998:12
          Iran            1946:1-2001:12                         1947:1-1998:12
          Iraq            1946:1-2001:12                         1947:2-1998:12
        Ireland           1946:1-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
         Israel           1948:5-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
          Italy           1946:3-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
       Jamaica            1946:1-2001:12                         1974:1-1998:12
         Japan            1946:3-2001:12                         1946:3-1998:12
        Jordan            1950:7-2001:12                         1955:1-1998:12
     Kazakhstan          1993:11-2001:12                              n.a.
        Kenya            1946:12- 2001:12                       1966:12-1998:12
       Kuwait             1949:9-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
  Kyrgyz Republic         1993:5-2001:12                              n.a.
         Laos             1946:1-2001:12                         1959:1-1998:12
        Latvia            1992:2-2001:12                         1991:8-1998:12
       Lebanon            1946:1- 2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
       Lesotho            1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
        Liberia           1946:1-2001:12                         1989:1-1998:12
Libyan Arab Republic      1952:1-2001:12                         1955:1-1998:12
      Lithuania           1992:1-2001:12                         1991:9-1998:12
    Luxembourg            1946:1-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
     Macedonia           1993:12-2001:12                         1997:6-1998:12
    Madagascar            1946:1- 2001:12                        1985:1-1998:12
       Malawi             1946:1 2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
      Malaysia            1946:1-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
         Mali             1946:1-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
         Malta            1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
     Mauritania           1946:1- 2001:12                        1974:1-1998:12
      Mauritius           1946:1-2001:12                         1985:1-1998:12
       Mexico             1946:1-2001:12                         1947:1-1998:12
      Moldova            1991:12-2001:12                              n.a.
      Mongolia            1970:3-2001:12                         1970:3-1998:12
      Morocco            1956:10-2001:12                         1959:1-1998:12
      Myanmar             1946:1-2001:12                         1955:1-1998:12
         Nepal           1955:12-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
    Netherlands           1946:1-2001:12                         1946:1-1998:12
    New Zealand           1946:1-2001:12                         1948:1-1998:12
     Nicaragua            1946:1-2001:12                         1947:1-1998:12
         Niger            1946:1-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
       Nigeria            1946:1-2001:12                         1970:7-1998:12
                                               - 38 -

                              Table AI.1. Country Coverage (concluded)


       Country               Official exchange rate           Parallel market exchange rate
        Norway                  1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
        Pakistan                1946:1-2001:12                        1948:4-1998:12
        Panama                  1946:1-2001:12                             n.a.
       Paraguay                 1946:1-2001:12                        1951:3-1998:12
          Peru                  1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
      Philippines               1946:1-2001:12                        1949:8-1998:12
         Poland                 1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
        Portugal                1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
       Romania                  1957:1-2001:12                        1946:7-1998:12
  Russian Federation            1992:6-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
     Saudi Arabia              1952:10-2001:12                       1959:12-1998:12
        Senegal                 1946:1-2001:12                        1970:7-1998:12
       Singapore                1946:4-2001:12                        1973:5-1998:12
   Slovak Republic              1993:1-2001:12                        1993:1-1998:12
        Slovenia               1991:12-2001:12                             n.a.
     South Africa               1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
     South Korea                1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
         Spain                  1946:1- 2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
       Sri Lanka                1946:1-2001:12                        1956:1-1998:12
       Suriname                 1949:9-2001:12                        1970:7-1998:12
       Swaziland                1946:1-2001:12                        1985:1-1998:12
        Sweden                  1946:1-2001:12                        1946:6-1998:12
      Switzerland               1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
 Syrian Arab Republic           1947:7-2001:12                        1970:7-1998:12
       Tajikistan               1992:1-2001:12                             n.a.
       Tanzania                1946:12- 2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
        Thailand                1946:5-2001:12                        1948:1-1998:12
          Togo                  1946:1-2001:12                        1970:7-1998:12
        Tunisia                 1956:3-2001:12                        1960:1-1998:12
         Turkey                 1946:1- 2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
     Turkmenistan              1993:11-2001:12                             n.a.
        Uganda                 1946:12- 2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
        Ukraine                1992:12-2001:12                        1991:8-1998:12
   United Kingdom               1946:1-2001:12                        1946:1-1998:12
     United States              1946:1-2001:12                             n.a.
        Uruguay                1946:12- 2001:12                       1946:1-1998:12
      Venezuela                 1946:1-2001:12                       1960:11-1998:12
        Zambia                 1946:12- 2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12
      Zimbabwe                 1946:12- 2001:12                       1970:7-1998:12



                                       Table AI.2. Data Sources
Variable                                 Source
Official exchange rate, 1946-1956        Pick’s Currency Yearbook and Pick’s World Currency
                                         Report, various issues.
Official exchange rate, 1957-2001        IMF, International Financial Statistics
Parallel Market exchange rate 1946-1980 Pick’s Currency Yearbook, Pick’s Black Market Yearbooks,
                                         and Pick’s World Currency Report, various issues.
Parallel Market exchange rate 1980-1998 World Currency Yearbook, various issues.
Consumer price index, 1957-2001          IMF, International Financial Statistics
                                                          - 39 -

                               Appendix II. The Details of the “Natural” Classification

         This appendix describes in greater detail our classification algorithm, which is outlined in Section III if the
text and summarized in Figure 1 of the text. Table 4 of the text gives the different categories in our “fine” and
“coarse” grids; this appendix concentrates on the fine grid.

1. Exchange rate flexibility indices and probability analysis

         Our judgment about the appropriate exchange rate classification is shaped importantly by the time-series of
several measures of exchange rate variability, based on monthly observations and averages over twenty-four month
and five-year rolling windows. The first of these is the absolute percent change in the monthly nominal exchange
rate. We prefer mean absolute deviations to variance to minimize the impact of outliers. These arise when, for
example, there are long periods in which the exchange rate is fixed but subject to periodic large devaluations. The
presence of a few outliers would imply that the variance or standard deviation would overstate the extent of
exchange rate flexibility in the period around the devaluation. 19

         To assess whether exchange rates are kept within a band, we calculate the probabilities that the exchange
rate remains within a one, two, and five percent-wide band over any given period. As with the mean absolute
deviation, these probabilities are calculated over two-year and five-year rolling windows. Unless otherwise noted in
Appendix II, we use the 5-year rolling windows as our primary source in the analysis. These probabilities
supplement the analysis in an important manner. While pre-announced explicit exchange rate bands are not rare—
implicit unannounced bands are positively commonplace.

2. De jure and de facto pegs and bands: definition issues

          Where the chronologies show the authorities explicitly announcing a peg, we shortcut the de facto dating
scheme described below and zero in on the date announced as the start of the peg. We then see if we can confirm
the peg by examining the mean absolute monthly change over the period following the announcement. Obviously,
the chronologies we develop, which give the day, month and year when a peg becomes operative are essential to our
algorithm. There are two cases where we need to go beyond simply verifying the announced peg. The first of these
is the case where our chronologies indicate that the pegged rate is only an official rate and that there is an active
dual market (official or illegal). As we describe in the text, essentially, we apply the same battery of tests to the
parallel market rate as we do to the official rate in a unified market. Secondly, there are the cases where policy is
announced as pegging to a basket of currencies, often without disclosing of the weights or the currencies included in
the basket. In these cases, we attempt look to see if the “basket” peg is really a de facto peg to a single dominant
currency (or to the SDR). If no dominant currency cannot be identified, we do not label the episode as a peg.20
Potentially, of course, we may be missing some de facto basket pegs, though in practice, this is almost certainly not
a major issue.

          We have described our procedure for confirming de jure pegs; we now proceed to elaborate how we use
our measures of exchange rate volatility to detect de facto pegs. If authorities have not announced that their currency
is pegged, we test for a “de facto” peg in two manners: First, we examine the monthly absolute percent changes. If
the absolute monthly percent change in the exchange rate is equal to zero for four consecutive months or more, that
episode is classified (for however long its lasts) as a de facto peg if there are no dual or multiple exchange rates in
place. This allows us to identify relatively short-lived de facto pegs as well as those with a longer duration. For
instance, this exercise allowed us to identify the Philippines de facto peg to the US Dollar during 1995-1997 in the
run-up to the Asian crisis as well as the numerous European de facto pegs to the DM well ahead of the Euro.
Second, we compute the probability that the monthly exchange rate change remains within a one percent band over a
rolling 5-year period

19
   This is a problem with the Levy-Sturzeneger (2002) reclassification strategy. For instance, in 1994 all CFA
Franc Zone countries are listed as managed floating. In effect, this is the result of a one-time 100% devaluation in
January of 1994.
20
     Pegs to the SDR are readily verifiable so they are treated in the same manner as pegs to any other currency.
                                                            - 40 -


         P( ε < 1% ).

 where ε is the monthly absolute percentage change in the exchange rate. If this probability is 80 percent or
higher, then the regime is classified as a de facto peg or crawling peg over the entire 5-year period. If the exchange
rate has no drift, it is classified as a fixed parity; if a positive drift is present, it is labeled a crawling peg; and, if the
exchange rate also goes through periods of both appreciation and depreciation it is a moving peg. Our choice of an
80 percent threshold is not accidental, but rather we chose this value because it appears to do a very good job at
detecting regimes one would want to label as pegs, without drawing in a significant number of “false positives.”

          Chart A.1 plots this rolling five-year probability for the US Dollar-Yen (the dashed line), for the Bolivian
Peso-US Dollar (the dark solid line) and for the French Franc-DM rate (the pale solid line). The two vertical lines
indicate the beginning and the end of the period during which Bolivia had an annual inflation rate above 40
percent—these inflationary episodes will be dubbed freely falling.

          As is evident from Chart A.1, the probability that monthly exchange rate change falls within a +/- 1% band
is far lower for the Yen-US Dollar rate than for the Bolivian peso-US Dollar rate. The period during which these
rolling probabilities were declining for the Bolivian peso-US Dollar rate corresponds to the time of Bolivia’s
hyperinflation of the mid 1980s and its immediate aftermath. The rolling probability also captures the French
Franc’s strengthening ties to the DM over the course of the sample.

          Our approach regarding pre-announced and de facto bands follows a parallel two-step process. If a band is
explicitly announced and the chronologies show a unified exchange market, we label the episode as a band unless it
had already been identified as a de facto peg by the criteria described earlier. But we also verify whether the
announced and de facto bands coincide. There are several cases where the announced (de jure) band is much wider
than the de facto band.21 Thus, as before, we calculate the probability that the monthly exchange rate change
remains within a +/-2 % band over a rolling 5-year period. If this probability is 80 percent or higher, then the
regime is classified as a de facto narrow band, narrow crawling or moving band over the period through which it
remains continuously above the 80 percent threshold.

         Figure A.2 plots the probability that the monthly percent change in the exchange rate will be within a +/-
2% band for the same three bilateral exchange rates as before. The contrast between the behavior of the Dollar-Yen
rate with the other two bilateral rates is now even more stark—as in both the case of the Bolivian Peso-Dollar rate
and the French Franc-DM 100 percent of the observations fall within a +/-2% band through most of the 1990s. For
the Dollar-Yen only between 45 and 60 percent of the observations fall in this narrow band.




21
  Mexico’s exchange rate policy prior to the December 1994 crisis is one of numerous examples, despite the fact
that the band was widening over time, as the floor of the band was fixed and the ceiling was crawling, the peso
remained virtually pegged to the US dollar for extended periods of time.
                                                                                                                                                                                    - 41 -


                                           FIGURE 2. ABSOLUTE MONTHLY PERCENT CHANGE IN THE EXCHANGE
                                                                       RATE
                                                     PERCENT OF OBSERVATIONS WITHIN A 2% BAND
                                                             (5-YEAR MOVING AVERAGE)
          110


          100


           90


           80


           70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BOLIVIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FRANCEDM
           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    US/YEN

           50


           40


           30


           20
                1975M1
                         1975M1
                                  1976M7
                                           1977M4
                                                    1978M1
                                                             1978M1
                                                                      1979M7
                                                                               1980M4

                                                                                        1981M1
                                                                                                 1981M1
                                                                                                          1982M7

                                                                                                                   1983M4
                                                                                                                            1984M1
                                                                                                                                     1984M1
                                                                                                                                              1985M7
                                                                                                                                                       1986M4
                                                                                                                                                                1987M1

                                                                                                                                                                         1987M1
                                                                                                                                                                                  1988M7

                                                                                                                                                                                           1989M4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1990M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1990M1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1991M7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1992M4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1993M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1993M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994M7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1995M4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996M1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1996M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1997M7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1998M4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1999M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1999M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000M7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001M4
         In the case where the pre-announced bands are wide we also verify +/-5% bands. The specifics for each
case are discussed in Appendix III. For instance in the case of Chile we found that the de facto band during 1992-
1998 was narrower (+/-5%) than that which was announced (+/-10% and +/-12.5%). In the case of Libya, which
had an announced a 77% wide band along a fixed central parity pegged to the SDR over the March 1986-December
2001, we were able to detect a +/-5% crawling band to the US Dollar. 22

3. The essential distinction between freely falling and freely floating

     As we emphasize in the text, there are situations, almost invariably due to high inflation, in which large
downward shifts in the exchange rate occur on a routine basis for extended periods of time. Given the many well-
known problems that high inflation can cause, we believe that it is inappropriate and misleading to lump these cases
in with other floating rate regimes – even though that is essentially what all previous classifications algorithms have
done.23 A more apt characterization would be to label episodes as freely falling.24 To identify the freely falling
episodes we rely on two criteria: First, periods where the 12-month rate of inflation equals or exceeds 40 percent are
classified as freely falling unless they have been identified as some form of pre-announced peg or pre-announced
narrow band by the above criteria.25 The 40 percent inflation threshold is not entirely arbitrary, as it has been



22
  Though we incorporate these wider band regimes, narrow +/-2% crawling bands are the most common. Again,
our chronologies are absolutely essential to detecting these subtleties.
23
  As we shall see, many of our freely falling regimes are labeled as peg in the official and other classifications,
because these earlier efforts did not employ data on parallel or dual markets.
24
   Our classification scheme is the first to make the fundamental distinction between floats and hyperfloats (freely
falling). In previous classifications, freely falling cases are usually included in the managed or freely floating
categories in the IMF’s classification and also in the Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2000) scheme.
25
  It is critical that the peg criteria supersede the inflation criteria in the classification strategy, since historically a
majority of inflation stabilization efforts have used the exchange rate as the nominal anchor and in many of these
episodes inflation rates at the outset of the peg were well above our 40 percent threshold.
                                                         - 42 -

identified as an important benchmark in the literature on the determinants of growth.26 In effect, as we discuss later,
the average annual inflation rate for the countries that are grouped under this category is 453 percent. Borderline
freely falling, which we do not classify as a separate regime, refers to inflation rates in the 20-39 percent range. We
note these episodes on the commentary in Appendix II. As a special sub-category of freely falling, we include those
episodes that meet Cagan’s (1956) classic definition of hyperinflation (50% or more inflation per month). We label
this subcategory as hyperfloats.

     A second situation where we label an exchange rate as freely falling are the six months immediately following a
currency crisis—but only for those cases where the crisis marks a sudden transition from a fixed or quasi fixed
regime to a managed or independently floating regime.27 Such episodes are typically characterized by exchange rate
overshooting. This is another situation where a large change in the exchange rate is not obviously connected to a
deliberate intent to float the currency, rather the decline is the result of a large speculative attack. To date these
crisis episodes we follow a variant of the approach suggested by Frankel and Rose (1996). Namely, any month
where the depreciation exceeds or equals twelve and one-half percent and also exceeds the preceding month’s
depreciation by at least 10 percent is identified as a crisis.28 To make sure that this approach yields plausible crisis
dates, we supplement the analysis with our extensive country chronologies, which also shed light on balance of
payments difficulties.29 As noted, cases where a large devaluation took place but the exchange rate was re-pegged
are not included in the freely falling episodes. Again, our choice of thresholds (six months) is the one that seems to
give reasonable and robust results.

      Whereas the distinction between freely floating and freely falling has not been previously made in the literature,
it is clearly essential if one wants to understand anything about exchange rate regimes. Table 3 shows the cumulative
change in the exchange rate vis-à-vis the US dollar from January 1970 to December 2001 for selected countries. As
there is great divergence across currencies’ in their capacity to retain value vis-à-vis the US dollar, the figures shown
in this Table A.1 anticipate which countries are candidates for having one or more episodes that come under the
heading of freely falling.




26
     See Easterly (2001).
27
  This rules out cases where there was a devaluation and a re-peg and cases where the large exchange rate swing
occurred in the context of an already floating rate.
28
  Frankel and Rose (1996) do not date the specific month of the crisis but the year and the F-R criteria calls for a
twenty-five (or higher) depreciation over the year.
29
  For instance, the Thai crisis of July 1997 does not meet the modified Frankel-Rose criteria. While the
depreciation in July exceeded that of the preceding month by more than 10 percent, the depreciation of the Thai
Baht in that month did not exceed 25 percent. For these cases, we rely on the chronologies of events.
                                                          - 43 -

                      Table A.1. Cumulative Change in the Currency’s Value versus the US Dollar:
                                  Selected Cases, January, 1970-December, 2001

                       Country                                    Cumulative percent change
            Congo, Democratic Republic of                             9,924,011,976,047,800
                         Brazil                                         124,316,767,667,574
                       Argentina                                          2,855,714,286,430
                       Nicaragua                                            933,784,495,428
                          Peru                                                9,129,198,866
                        Bolivia                                                  54,040,304
                        Turkey                                                    7,500,585
                         Chile                                                    5,636,100
                        Mexico                                                       77,249
                        Malawi                                                        9,512
                       Indonesia                                                      2,798
                         Egypt                                                          783
                         Italy 1                                                        480
                         Korea                                                          312
                       Australia                                                        104
                   United Kingdom                                                        64
                        Canada                                                           39
                       Malaysia                                                          23
                        Panama                                                            0
                     Saudi Arabia                                                       -16
                       Germany                                                          -54
                         Japan                                                          -59
                      Switzerland                                                       -65
Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics.
1
  Versus the DM.
Notes: A negative entry denotes an appreciation.

     Since, as a rule, freely falling is not typically an explicit arrangement of choice, our classification also provide
for all the freely falling cases, the underlying de jure or de facto arrangement (for example, dual markets,
independently floating, etc.).

4. Managed and freely floating

          In reality, “pure” floating exchange rates are an artifact of economics textbooks. Even in countries where
the exchange rate is not an explicit target of policy, there are typically occasional (if relatively rare) instances where
there is unilateral or coordinated intervention in the foreign exchange market. Similarly, it is hard to come up with a
pure concept of “managed floating” that translates meaningfully into practice.

          Our approach here to identifying managed and freely floating episodes is basically to create these classes
out of the residual pool of episodes that, after comprehensive application of our algorithm, have not been identified
as an explicit or implicit peg or narrow band, and that are not included in the freely falling category. To proxy the
degree of exchange rate flexibility under freely floating and managed floats, we construct a composite statistic,

ε / P( ε < 1% ).

Here, the numerator is the mean absolute monthly percent change in the exchange rate over a rolling five-year
period, while the denominator flags the likelihood of small changes. For de jure or de facto pegs, this index will be
very low, while for the free falling cases it will be very large. At any rate, we only focus on this index for those
countries and periods which are candidates for freely or managed floating labels. We tabulate the frequency
distribution of our index for the currencies that are most transparently floating, these include: US Dollar/DM-Euro,
US Dollar/Yen, US Dollar/UK Pound, US Dollar/Australian Dollar, and US Dollar/New Zealand Dollar over the
                                                           - 44 -

post 1973 period (the exact subperiod for each currency can be ascertained from the chronologies). We have many
of these observations, as we tabulate the ratio for rolling 5-year averages for all the floaters.30 So, for example,
Brazil floated the real in January 1999—hence, we would calculate the ratio only from that date forward. If the
Brazil’s ratio falls inside the 99 percent confidence interval or is in the upper tail of the distribution of the floater’s
group, the episode is characterized as freely floating. If that ratio falls in the lower one percent tail, the null
hypothesis of freely floating is rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis of managed float.

          It is important to note that managed in this context does not necessarily imply active or frequent foreign
exchange market intervention—it refers to the fact that for whatever reason our composite exchange rate variability
index, ε / P( ε < 1% ), does not behave like the indices for the “clean” floaters (freely floating).

5. Dual or multiple exchange rate regimes and parallel markets

          Dual rates are, possibly the most hybrid of arrangements. There are cases or periods in which the premium
is nil and stable so that the official rate is representative of the underlying monetary policy. The official rate could be
pegged, crawling or maintained within some bands, or in a few cases allowed to float. But there are countless
episodes where the divergence between the official an parallel rate is so large, that the picture is incomplete without
knowledge of what the parallel market rate is doing.

         The country chronologies shown in Appendix III are critical in identifying these episodes. In the cases
where dual or multiple rates are present or parallel markets are active, we focus on the market-determined rates
instead of the official exchange rates. We subject the market-determined rate (dual, multiple or parallel) to the
battery of tests described in the preceding sections. 31 This particular category will especially re-shape how we view
the 1940s to the 1960s, where about half the cases in the sample involve dual markets. Our classification scheme
treats dual rates as a sister species, with a set of classifications parallel to those for unified rate.




30
  For instance, Australia floated on December 12, 1983, so the first five-year moving average of the ratio that we
would include in the frequency distribution for the floaters would be the one ending December 1988—since that
would include only observations during the floating regime. The distribution would include all subsequent 5-year
moving averages.
31
     There are a few such cases in the sample, where only government transactions take place at the official rate.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 - 45 -



                           Chart 1. Distribution of Exchange Rate Arrangements with Dual Rate Regimes as a
                                                       Separate Category, 1970-2001
           100
                                                                                                                        Standard                                                                                         Dual Separately
           90
           80
           70
           60
 Percent




           50
           40
           30
           20
           10
            0
                                               Managed floating

                                                                   Freely floating

                                                                                     Dual/Multiple




                                                                                                                                                                                   Managed floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Freely floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dual/Multiple




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Managed floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Freely floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dual/Multiple
                 Peg

                         Limited flexibility




                                                                                                                                 Peg

                                                                                                                                                    Limited flexibility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peg

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Limited flexibility
                                     1970-1973                                                                                                               1974-1990                                                                                                                              1991-2001


                                                                  Chart 5. Distribution of Exchange Rate Arrangements According to
                                                                          the Standard and Natural Classifications, 1950-2001
      100
                                                                                                                            Standard                                                                                                     Natural
           90
           80
           70
           60
 Percent




           50
           40
           30
           20
           10
            0
                 Peg

                              Other




                                                                                                     Peg

                                                                                                           Limited flexibility

                                                                                                                                 Managed floating

                                                                                                                                                                 Freely floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Freely falling




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Peg

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Limited flexibility

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Managed floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Freely floating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Freely falling




                       1950                                                                                                 1974-1990                                                                                                                                                 1991-2001




Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and International
Financial Statistics , Pick and Sedillot (1971), International Currency Analysis, World Currency Report , various issues.
                                                                                         - 46 -
                                                      Chart 2. The Essential Distinction Between Floating and Falling



                                                             Canada (1): Log of Market-Determined Exchange Rate:
                                                                          January 1946-December 1998
                                            0.4
   Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                            0.3

                                            0.2

                                            0.1

                                            0.0

                                            -0.1
                                               1946   1950   1954   1958   1962   1966   1970     1974   1978   1981   1986   1990   1994   1998



                                                   Canada (2): Log of Market-Determined Exchange Rate in Argentina's Scale:
                                                                         January 1946-December 1998
                                              5
     Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                              0

                                             -5

                                            -10

                                            -15

                                            -20

                                            -25

                                            -30
                                               1946   1950   1954   1958   1962   1966   1970     1974   1978   1981   1986   1990   1994   1998



                                                              Argentina: Log of Market-Determined Exchange Rate:
                                                                          January 1946-December 1998
                                              5
     Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                              0
                                             -5
                                            -10
                                            -15
                                            -20
                                            -25
                                            -30
                                               1946   1950   1954   1958   1962   1966   1970     1974   1978   1981   1986   1990   1994   1998



Sources: Pick's Currency Yearbook, World Currency Report, various issues.
                                                                                             - 47 -
                                                              Chart 3. The Prevalence of Crawling Pegs and Bands



                                                                 Chile: Log of Market-Determined Exchange Rate:
                                                                           January 1946-December 1998
                                               8
   Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)



                                               6
                                               4
                                               2
                                               0
                                              -2
                                              -4
                                              -6
                                              -8
                                             -10
                                             -12
                                               1946   1950    1954   1958   1962    1966   1970   1974   1978     1981   1986     1990   1994   1998



                                                                 India: Log of Market-Determined Exchange Rate:
                                                                           January 1946-December 1998
                                              4
      Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                             3.5

                                              3

                                             2.5

                                              2

                                             1.5

                                              1
                                               1946   1950    1954   1958   1962    1966   1970   1974   1978     1981   1986    1990    1994   1998



                                                                Greece: Log of Market-Determined Exchange Rate:
                                                                          January 1954-December 1998
                                             6.0
      Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                             5.5

                                             5.0

                                             4.5

                                             4.0

                                             3.5

                                             3.0
                                               1954    1958     1962    1966       1970    1974   1978     1981      1986       1990     1994   1998



Sources: Pick's Currency Yearbook, World Currency Report, various issues.
                                                                                                            - 48 -


                                Chart 4. Official Exchange Rates Typically Validate the Changes in The Market Rates

                                                                                   Official                    Market-Determined

                                                            Bolivia: Log of Official and Market-Determined Exchange Rates:
                                                                             January 1946-December 1972
                                            -10
   Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                            -11
                                            -12
                                            -13
                                            -14
                                            -15
                                            -16
                                            -17
                                            -18
                                                 1946 1948 1950 1952 1954 1956 1958 1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972



                                                           Indonesia: Log of Official and Market-Determined Exchange Rates:
                                                                             January 1946-December 1972
                                            8
     Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                            6
                                            4
                                            2
                                            0
                                            -2
                                            -4
                                            -6
                                            -8
                                             1946        1948    1950     1952    1954    1956       1958    1960     1962    1964    1966    1968    1970    1972



                                                                Iran: Log of Official and Market-Determined Exchange Rates:
                                                                                January 1946-December 1998
                                            10.0
     Log (local currency per U.S. dollar)




                                             9.0
                                             8.0
                                             7.0
                                             6.0
                                             5.0
                                             4.0
                                             3.0
                                                  1946    1950     1954    1958    1962       1966    1970     1974    1978    1981    1986    1990    1994    1998



Sources: Pick's Currency Yearbook, World Currency Report, various issues.
                                                                                     - 49 -


                                                Chart 6. Average Monthly Parallel Market Premium: 1946-1998


                                                Africa                                                                                   Asia

            250
                                                                                                        400

            200
                                                                                                        300
            150
  Percent




                                                                                              Percent
                                                                                                        200
            100

                                                                                                        100
             50


              0                                                                                           0
                  46   50   54   58   62   66    70   74   78   82   86   90   94   98                        46   50   54   58   62   66    70   74   78   82    86    90    94    98



                                                Europe                                                                             Western Hemisphere
                                                                                                        200
            80                                                                                          180
            70                                                                                          160                            Premia is 200-650%
            60                                                                                          140                             during 1955-1956

            50                                                                                          120

                                                                                              Percent
  Percent




            40                                                                                          100
            30                                                                                           80
            20                                                                                           60
            10                                                                                           40

             0                                                                                           20

            -10                                                                                           0
                  46   50   54   58   62   66    70   74   78   82   86   90   94   98                        46   50   54   58   62    66   70   74   78    82    86    90    94    98



Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and International Financial Statistics , Pick and Sedillot
(1971), International Currency Analysis, World Currency Report , various issues.
                                                                                     - 50 -

                     Chart 7. Absolute Monthly Percent Change in the Exchange Rate: Percent of Observations within a +/- 2 Percent Band
                                                                                   (5-year moving average)


                                                                      Regional Averages                                   Group of Floaters

                              Averages for Africa and the Group of Floaters                                                       Averages for Asia and the Group of Floaters
              100                                                                                              100

               90                                                                                               90

               80                                                                                               80




                                                                                                    Percent
  Percent




               70                                                                                               70

               60                                                                                               60

               50                                                                                               50

               40                                                                                               40
                    78   80     82    84   86   88    90   92    94     96    98    00                               78     80    82   84     86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00


                          Averages for Europe and the Group of Floaters                                                   Averages for Western Hemisphere and the Group of Floaters
              100                                                                                              100

               90                                                                                               90

               80                                                                                               80
    Percent




                                                                                                     Percent
               70                                                                                               70

               60                                                                                               60

               50                                                                                               50

               40                                                                                               40
                    78   80      82   84   86    88   90    92   94     96    98    00                               78      80   82   84     86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and International Financial Statistics, Pick and Sedillot (1971),
International Currency Analysis, World Currency Report, various issues.
                                                  - 51 -



                        Chart 8. The Cost of Having the Exchange Rate as the Nominal Anchor:
                                          Probability of Deflation, 1970-2001
          30


          25


          20
    Percent




          15


          10


              5


              0
                   Non CFA,       CFA, Africa       Asia          Europe        Transition     Western Hem.
                    Africa



                                     Chart 8. The Cost of Not Having a Nominal Anchor:
                                           Probability of Freely Falling, 1970-2001
              45

              40

              35

              30

              25
    Percent




              20

              15

              10

               5

               0
                   Non CFA,       CFA, Africa       Asia          Europe        Transition     Western Hem.
                    Africa



Source: IMF staff calculations.
                                                                       - 52 -




                                          Chart 9. Inflation Across Regime Types: 1970 - 2001
                                                          (averaging over all regions)
                                                          Standard              Natural                                 443%
                                                                                             174%


                       100



                        80
   Percent per annum




                        60



                        40



                        20



                         0
                                    Peg         Limited Flexibility    Managed float         Freely floating   Freely falling


                                 Chart 10. PPP Adjusted GDP Per Capita Across Regime Types: 1970-2001
                                                             (averaging over all regions)
                       16000
                                                            Standard               Natural

                       14000


                       12000


                       10000
   U.S. dollars




                        8000


                        6000


                        4000


                        2000


                             0
                                      Peg        Limited Flexibility    Managed float        Freely floating   Freely falling



Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and International Financial
Statistics, Pick and Sedillot (1971), International Currency Analysis, World Currency Report, various issues.
                                                                 - 53 -


                            Chart 11. Real Per Capita GDP Growth Across Regime Types: 1970 - 2001
                                                      (averaging over all regions)
                       3                              Standard             Natural



                       2



                       1
   Percent per annum




                       0



                       -1



                       -2



                       -3
                                Peg        Limited Flexibility    Managed float          Freely floating      Freely falling


                            Chart 12. Exports and Imports as a Percent of GDP Across Regime Types: 1970-2001
                                                             (averaging over all regions)
                       90
                                                           Standard                  Natural
                       80

                       70

                       60
   Percent of GDP




                       50

                       40

                       30

                       20

                       10

                        0
                                 Peg       Limited Flexibility    Managed float          Freely floating      Freely falling



Sources: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and International Financial
Statistics, Pick and Sedillot (1971), International Currency Analysis, World Currency Report, various issues.
                                                                   - 54 -

This draft: May 13, 2002

                        Appendix III. Exchange Rate Arrangements: Country Histories

                                        Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff

Albania
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–July 1, 1992                  Freely falling/Dual Market              Officially pegged to the ECU
July 1, 1992–September 1993                Freely falling/Freely floating          Markets are unified.
October 1993–December 1996                 Freely floating
January 1997–January 1998                  Freely falling/Freely floating
February 1998–December 2001                Freely floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and DM.
Algeria
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1878–November 1942                         Peg to French Franc                     Algerian Franc is introduced. French Franc is legal tender
                                                                                   alongside Algerian Franc after August 8, 1920. On May
                                                                                   20, 1940 foreign exchange controls are introduced.
November 1942–December 6, 1944             Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling     Incorporated into Sterling Area.
December 6, 1944–December 1946             Peg to French Franc                     Return to Franc Zone.
January 1947–December 1948                 Peg to French Franc/Freely falling
January 1949–April 10, 1964                Peg to French Franc
April 10, 1964–August 1, 1972              Band around French Franc/Parallel       Horizontal band, width is +/-5%. Dinar replaces Algerian
                                           market                                  Franc. Introduction of foreign exchange controls in 1967.
                                                                                   Parallel market premium in the 30–70% range.
August 1, 1972–January 21, 1974            Managed floating/Dual Market            Officially pegged to French Franc.
January 21, 1974–December 1987             De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%. Parallel market premium reaches
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                      469% on April 1985. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                   undisclosed currencies.
January 1988–March 1994                    Managed floating/Parallel Market
April 1994–January 1995                    Freely falling/Managed floating
February 1995–January 1, 1999              De facto crawling band around French Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001              De facto crawling band around Euro   Band width is +/-2%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, French Franc, and Euro.
Antigua and Barbuda
East Caribbean Central Bank States are: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Date                                       Classification:                      Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935-October 6, 1965                       Peg to Pound Sterling                British West Indies Dollar is introduced. It is issued by the
                                                                                East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
October 6, 1965-July 7, 1976               Peg to Pound Sterling                East Caribbean Dollar replaces British West Indies Dollar.
July 7, 1976-December 2001                 Peg to US Dollar                     On October 1, 1983 the East Caribbean Central Bank
                                                                                replaces the East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
                                                                     - 55 -

Argentina
Date                                        Classification:                        Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 10, 1931–1933                       De facto peg to US Dollar              Capital controls, convertibility into gold suspended on
                                                                                   December 16, 1929
1933–January 20, 1934                       Peg to French Franc
January 20, 1934–August 1939                Peg to Pound Sterling
August 1939–June 1950                       Managed floating/Multiple rates        US Dollar is reference currency and one rate is market
                                                                                   determined. Most transactions take place at the free rate.
July 1950-May 1952                          Freely falling/Managed                 US Dollar is reference currency and one rate is market
                                            floating/Multiple rates                determined. Most transactions take place at the free rate.
June 1952-November 1957                     Managed floating/Multiple rates        US Dollar is reference currency and one rate is market
                                                                                   determined. Most transactions take place at the free rate.
December 1957–March 1960                    Freely falling–Managed
                                            floating/Multiple rates
April 1960–March 1964                       Managed floating/Multiple rates
April 1964–March 13, 1967                   Peg to US Dollar                       Re introduction of widespread controls
March 13, 1967–May 1970                     Peg to US Dollar                       Inflation stabilization plan, one devaluation in June 1970.
                                                                                   Controls were largely eliminated. Parallel premium is nil
                                                                                   during this period.
June 1970–March 1971                        Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling
April 6, 1971–March 6, 1976                 Freely falling/ Freely floating/Dual   Parallel market premium hits 372 % in November 1974.
                                            Market
March 6, 1976–December 21, 1978             Freely falling/Freely floating         Premium is consistently above 20%.
December 21, 1978–February 1981             Pre–announced crawling peg to US       The Tablita Plan. Parallel market premia is in single digits
                                            Dollar/Freely falling                  during this period.
March 1981–December 1981                    Freely falling/Freely floating Dual
                                            Market
January 1982–July 1982                      Freely falling/Freely floating
July 1982–June 14, 1985                     Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual
                                            Market
June 14 1985–March, 1986                    Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling        The Austral Plan.
April 1986–December 20 1990                 Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual    The Austral Plan’s second phase was a crawling peg which
                                            Market                                 lasted until September 1986 but by the then, there was a
                                                                                   dual market. For May 1989–March 1990 the regime is a
                                                                                   “hyperfloat”
December 20, 1990–January 29, 1991          Freely falling/Freely floating
January 29, 1991–March 1991                 Freely falling/Freely floating         A “Target zone”—broad band is introduced.
April 1991–February 1992                    Currency Board/Peg to US               The Convertibility Plan, no adjustments to central parity.
                                            Dollar/Freely falling
March 1992–December 1, 2001                 Currency Board/Peg to US Dollar
December 1 2001–December 2001               De facto Dual Market                   Capital controls are introduced.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Armenia
Date                                        Classification:                        Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 31, 1991–November 1995             Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual    There is no price data before this date. Until the
                                            Market                                 introduction of the Dram on November 22, 1993 the
                                                                                   Russian Ruble was legal tender.
                                                                                   October 1993–December 1994 regime is a “hyperfloat”
December 1995–December 2001                 De facto crawling band around US       Band width is +/-2%.
                                            Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
                                                                  - 56 -

Australia
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 4, 1909–July 14, 1915           Peg                                      Gold Standard
July 14, 1915–April 25, 1925              Suspension of gold shipments
April 25, 1925–December 17, 1929          Peg                                      Gold Standard
December 17, 1929–1939                    Peg to Pound Sterling                    Suspension of gold standard and devaluation. Foreign
                                                                                   exchange controls introduced on August 28, 1939.
1940–February 14, 1966                    Peg to Pound Sterling                    There is an active black market for US Dollars. Through
                                                                                   1957 the premium remains in double digits.
February 14, 1966–December 22, 1971       Peg Pound Sterling                       Australian Dollar replaces the Australian Pound
December 22, 1971–September 25, 1974      Peg to US Dollar
October 1974–November 1982                De facto band around US Dollar           Horizontal band width is +/- 2%. Officially pegged to a
                                                                                   basket of currencies.
November 1982–October 31, 1983             Managed floating
December 12, 1983–December 2001            Freely floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Pound Sterling.
Austria
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 9, 1931                            Foreign exchange controls
October 9, 1931–April 25, 1938             Peg                                     Gold Standard, various adjustments.
April 25, 1938–December 1945               Exchange rate arrangement with no       Reischmark is legal tender until 1945. Military exchange
                                           separate legal tender                   rates are introduced in 1945. In December the Austrian
                                                                                   Schilling is reinstated. In 1947 inflation was 96%.
October 28, 1946–June 1948                Freely falling/Managed                   Adoption of military exchange rates for commercial
                                          floating/Multiple exchange rates         transactions. Parallel market premium hits 1,150% in
                                                                                   November 1947. Exchange controls are tightened on July
                                                                                   25, 1946.
July 1949–July 1950                       Managed floating/Multiple exchange
                                          rates
August 1950-October 6, 1950               Freely falling/Managed
                                          floating/Multiple exchange rates
October 6, 1950–August 1951               Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual     Parallel market premium remains in two digits throughout
                                          Market                                   this period.
September 1951-May 4, 1953                Managed floating/Dual Market             Parallel market premium remains in two digits throughout
                                                                                   this period.
May 4, 1953–February 17, 1959             Peg to US Dollar                         Black market dealings come to an end in late 1950s.
February 17, 1959–August 24, 1971         Peg to DM
August 24, 1971–July 1980                 De facto moving peg to DM
December 31, 1998–January 1, 1999         De facto peg to DM                       March 1991 registers as a currency crash versus US
                                                                                   dollar—none versus DM.
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Currency union                         Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the US Dollar, the Euro and the DM.
Azerbaijan
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 31, 1992–January 1996             Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual     There is no price data before this date. December 1992–
                                           Market                                  December 1994 regime is a “hyper float.”
February 1996–December 2001                De facto crawling peg to US dollar
Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Ruble.
Belarus
Date                                       Classification                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
August 25,1991–February 3, 1997            Freely falling/Freely floating/Multiple There is no price data before this date.
                                           rates
February 3, 1997–March 31, 1998            Freely falling/Freely floating
March 31, 1998–December 2001               Freely falling/Freely floating          There are multiple rates.
Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Ruble.
                                                                    - 57 -

Belgium
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 25, 1926–March 18, 1935            Peg                                       Gold Standard
March 18, 1935–March 31, 1936              Foreign exchange controls and
                                           suspension of convertibility
March 31, 1936–May 10, 1940                Peg                                       Gold Standard
May 10, 1940–October 5, 1944               Peg to Reichsmark                         Capital controls
October 5, 1944– April 1954                Managed floating/Parallel market          Officially pegged to US Dollar. The official foreign
                                                                                     exchange market was re opened on November 1949, after
                                                                                     this the parallel market premium fell to single digits.
April 1954–July 18, 1955                     Peg to US Dollar
July 18,1955–October 1971                    De facto peg to DM/Dual Market          Small parallel market premium.
November 1971–March 5, 1990                  De facto peg to DM/Dual Market
March 5, 1990–December 31, 1998              De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001                Currency union                          Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
US Dollar, DM, and Euro
Benin
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                        Classification:                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901–February 2, 1943              Peg to French Franc                      Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                     notes. Exchange controls are introduced within Franc zone
                                                                                     on September 9, 1939.
February 2, 1943– December 26. 1945         Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling      On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area.
December 26. 1945–May 12, 1962              Peg to French Franc                      Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
May 12, 1962–September 9, 1971              Peg to French Franc                      Creation of the Central Bank of West African States
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974            De facto peg to French Franc/Dual        The premium is in low single digits.
                                            Market
March 21, 1974–December 1993                Peg to French Franc
January 1994–December 1994.                 Peg to French Franc/Freely falling       One 100% devaluation.
January 1995–January 1, 1999                Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement at a later date.
Notes: Formerly Dahomey. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
Bolivia
Date                                         Classification:                         Comments
                                             Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
July 11, 1928–October 3, 1931                Peg                                     Gold Standard
October 3, 1931–January 1938                 Multiple rates                          The Boliviano is linked to Pound Sterling. Capital controls
                                                                                     are introduced and the gold standard is abandoned
1940–October 20, 1947                        Peg to US Dollar
October 20, 1947–December 1949               Managed floating/Multiple rates
January 1950-April 1951                      Freely falling/ Managed
                                             floating/Multiple rates
May 1951-March 1952                          Managed floating/Multiple rates         Official rate is inoperative by mid 1950s
April 1952-November 1957                     Freely falling/Managed
                                             floating/Multiple rates
December 1957–February 1971                  De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. On January 1, 1963 the Peso replaces
                                             Dollar/Multiple rates                   the Boliviano.
March 1971–September 1972                    Managed floating/Multiple rates         The official rate is pegged to US Dollar.
October 1972–December, 1974                  Freely falling/Managed floating         The official rates are pegged to US Dollar
January 1975–November 1979                   Managed floating/Multiple rates         The official rate is pegged to US Dollar—there are frequent
                                                                                     mega devaluations.
December 1979–March 24, 1982                 Freely falling/Freely floating/Multiple The official rates remain pegged to US Dollar.
                                             rates
March 24, 1982–August 29, 1985               Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual     The parallel market premium hits 2,023 % in August 1985.
                                             Market                                  April 1984–September 1985 regime is a “hyperfloat.”
August 29 1985–December, 1986                Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual     Markets are temporarily unified.
                                             Market
November 1987–December 1991                  De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%.
                                             Dollar/Dual Market
January 1992–December 1994                   De facto crawling peg to US             Parallel market premium is trivial.
                                             Dollar/Dual Market
January 1995–December 2001                   De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 58 -

Bosnia–Herzegovina
Date                                       Classification                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
July 1994–June 22,1998                     Peg to DM                                Bosnian Dinar is introduced in July 1994. Electronic
                                                                                    payments for the Bosnia–Herzegovina convertible Marka
                                                                                    ares introduced on August 12, 1997
June 22,1998–January 1, 1999               Currency board/Peg to DM                 Convertible Marka notes are introduced.
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Currency board/Peg to Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the Euro and the DM.
Botswana
Date                                       Classification                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1920–February 14, 1961                     Exchange rate arrangement with no        South Africa Pound is introduced, Rand Monetary Area.
                                           separate legal tender
February 14, 1961–August 23, 1976          Exchange rate arrangement with no        South African Rand replaces Pound as the legal tender.
                                           separate legal tender
August 23, 1976–December 1, 1976           Peg to South African Rand                The Pula is introduced and Botswana withdraws from Rand
                                                                                    Monetary Area.
December 1, 1976–June 3, 1980               Peg to US Dollar                        Two devaluations.
June 3, 1980–April 1982                     De facto crawling peg to South          Official peg to a basket of SDR and South African Rand.
                                            African Rand
May 1982–June 1986                          De facto crawling band around South     Band width is +/- 2%.
                                            African Rand
July 1986–January 1996                      De facto crawling peg to South          There is a parallel market with premium oscillating
                                            African Rand                            between single digits and 30%.
January 1996–August 1998                    De facto crawling peg to South          Premium is in single digits throughout most of this period.
                                            African Rand/Dual Market
September 1998–December 2001                De facto crawling band around South     Band width is +/- 2%.
                                            African Rand/Dual Market
Notes: Reference currencies are the South African Rand, the US Dollar, and the SDR.
Brazil
Date                                        Classification                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
May 18, 1931                                Foreign Exchange controls
November 21, 1933–November 1, 1942          Multiple exchange rates
November 1, 1942–July 22, 1946              Multiple exchange rates                 The Cruzeiro is introduced to replace the Milreis.
July 22, 1946–May 1947                      Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         Unified rate
June 1947-October 1949                      Peg to US Dollar
October 1949–October 1960                   Managed floating/Multiple exchange      The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar but there are
                                            rates                                   large and frequent devaluations.
November 1960-November 1966                 Freely falling/Managed                  The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar but there are
                                            floating/Multiple exchange rates        large and frequent devaluations.
December 1966–August 27 1968                Managed floating/Multiple exchange      The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar but there are
                                            rates                                   large and frequent devaluations. An inflation stabilization
                                                                                    plan begins in March 1964. However, the intense activity in
                                                                                    the parallel market scores as managed floating.
August, 27,1968–March 1975                  De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5% . A crawling peg to US Dollar—a
                                            Dollar/Multiple rates                   system of mini devaluations with a PPP rule is introduced.
April 1975-June 1977                        Freely falling/De facto crawling band
                                            around US Dollar/Multiple rates
July 1977–February 28 1986                  Freely falling/Managed floating         There are multiple exchange rates.
February 28,1986–September 1986             Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         The Cruzado Plan. The Cruzado replaces the Cruzeiro.
                                                                                    Parallel market premia remains above 30%.
September 1986–January 1989                 Freely falling/Freely floating          High parallel premium throughout. There are multiple rates.
January 16, 1989–April 1989                 Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         High parallel premium throughout
April 1989–July 1, 1994                     Freely falling/Freely floating/Multiple On December 1989 the parallel market premium rises to
                                            rates                                   235%. December 1989–March 1990 regime is a
                                                                                    “hyperfloat.”
July 1, 1994–May 1995                       Pre–announced crawling band to US       The Real Plan has a narrow band width. The Real replaces
                                            Dollar/Freely falling/Dual Market       the Cruzado. There is a dual market but parallel premium
                                                                                    during this period is trivial.
June 1995-January 18, 1999                  Pre–announced crawling band to US
                                            Dollar/Dual Market
February 1 1999–August 1999                 Freely falling/Managed floating         On January 18, 1999 the two rates were unified.
September 1999–December 2001                Managed floating
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 59 -

Bulgaria
Date                                         Classification                         Comments
                                             Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
May 2, 1990–December 1993                    Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual    There is no price data before this date.
                                             Market
January 1994–January 1, 1997                 Freely falling/Managed floating
January 1, 1997–January, 1998                Peg to DM/Currency board/Freely
                                             falling
January, 1998–January 1, 1999                Currency board/Peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December, 2001               Currency board/Peg to Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are US Dollar, DM and Euro.
Burkina Faso
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                        Classification                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901                               Peg to French Franc                    Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                   notes.
September 9, 1939                           Exchange controls are introduced in
                                            Franc Zone
February 2, 1943–December 26, 1945          Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling    On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26, 1945–May 12, 1962              Peg to French Franc                    Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
May 12, 1962–September 9, 1971              Peg to French Franc                    Creation of the Central Bank of West African States
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974            De facto peg to French Franc/Dual      The premium is in low single digits.
                                            Market
March 21, 1974–January 1, 1999              Peg to French Franc                    One 100% devaluation.
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement at a later date.
Note: Formerly Upper Volta. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro
Burundi
Date                                        Classification                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 1919–January 21, 1941                  Peg to Belgian Franc
June 7, 1940–January 21, 1941               Peg to French Franc
January 21, 1941–October 5, 1944            Peg to Pound Sterling                  Entry into Sterling Area
October 5, 1944– September 22, 1960         Peg to Belgian Franc
September 22, 1960–May 19, 1964             Peg to Belgian Franc/Dual Market       Rwanda–Burundi Franc replaced Congolese Franc. Parallel
                                                                                   market data not available.
May 19, 1964–January 26, 1965               Peg to Belgian Franc/Dual Market       Burundi Franc replaces Rwanda–Burundi Franc.
                                                                                   In 1965 the link to the Belgian Franc was broken
January 26, 1965–April 21, 1970             De facto peg to US Dollar              In February 11, 1965 the multiple rate structure was
                                                                                   terminated. Parallel market data not available.
April 21, 1970–December 1977                Peg to US Dollar
January 1978–July 1979                      Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling
August 1979–November 23, 1983               Peg to US Dollar
November 23, 1983–May, 1985                 De facto crawling peg to US Dollar     Officially pegged to the SDR..
May 1985–August 1985                        De facto crawling band around US       Officially pegged to the SDR since November 23, 1983.
                                            Dollar                                 Band width is +/-2%
September 1985–April 1, 1992                De facto crawling band around US       Officially pegged to SDR Band width is +/-5%.
                                            Dollar
April 1 1992–April 1996                     De facto crawling band around US       Band width is +/-5%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                            Dollar                                 undisclosed currencies.
May 1996–May 1997                           Freely falling/Managed floating        Officially pegged to a basket of undisclosed currencies
June 1997–November 18, 1999                 De facto crawling band around US       Officially pegged to a basket of undisclosed currencies. On
                                            Dollar/Parallel market                 July 1, 1999 the official arrangement was reclassified as
                                                                                   managed floating. Premium in the 10–40% range.
November 18, 1999–July 1, 2000              De facto crawling band around US       Managed to limit the spread between the official and
                                            Dollar/Dual Market                     parallel rates.
July 1, 2000–December 2001                  De facto crawling band around US       Markets were unirfied.
                                            Dollar
Notes: Reference currencies are the Belgian Franc, US Dollar, SDR, and South African Rand.
                                                                    - 60 -

Cameroon
Bank of Central African States: Central African Republic, Chad, Gabon, and Republic of Congo
Date                                        Classification                            Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 31, 1925                           Peg to French Franc                       Only notes issued by Banque de l’Afrique Occidental are
                                                                                      legal tender. Exchange controls are introduced within Franc
                                                                                      Zone on September 9, 1939.
December 26. 1945–January 26, 1948          Peg to French Franc/ Currency             The CFA Franc is introduced.
                                            union/Freely falling
January 26, 1948–December 1948              Freely falling/Dual Market                No parallel market data for this period.
January 1949–September 20, 1949             Dual Market
September 20, 1949–January 17, 1962         Peg to French Franc
January 17, 1962–September 9, 1971          Peg to French Franc                       Bank of Central African States is created.
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974            De facto peg to French Franc/Dual         The premium is in low single digits.
                                            Market
March 21, 1974–December 1995                Peg to French Franc                       One 100% devaluation.
January 1994–December 1994                  Peg to French Franc/ Freely falling
January 1995–January 1, 1999                Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
Canada
Date                                     Classification                            Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 16, 1939–July 5, 1946          Dual Market                               Foreign exchange controls
July 5, 1946– October 1, 1950            Peg to US Dollar
October 1, 1950–May 2, 1962              De facto peg to the US Dollar/Dual        Premium is trivial since 1949.
                                         Market
May 2, 1962–May 31, 1970                 Peg to US Dollar
May 31, 1970–December 2001               De facto moving band around US            Band width is +/-2%.
                                         Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Central African Republic
Bank of Central African States: Central African Republic, Chad, Gabon, and Republic of Congo
Date                                      Classification                            Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 6, 1925- February 8, 1944            Peg to French Franc                       Only notes issued by Banque de l’Afrique Occidental are
                                                                                    legal tender. Exchange controls are introduced within
                                                                                    Franc Zone on September 9, 1939.
February 8, 1944–December 26, 1945        Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling       On March 19, 1941 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945 – January 17, 1962 Peg to French Franc                            Return to Franc Zone. CFA Franc is introduced.
January 17, 1962–September 9, 1971        Peg to French Franc                       Bank of Central African States is Created
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974          De facto peg to the French Franc/Dual     The premium is in low single digits.
                                          Market
March 21, 1974–December 1993              Peg to French Franc
January 1994–January 1995                 Peg to French Franc/Freely falling        One 100% devaluation.
February 1995–January 1, 1999             Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001             Peg to Euro
Notes: Previously part of Ubangi–Shari. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
Chad
Bank of Central African States: Central African Republic, Chad, Gabon, and Republic of Congo
Date                                      Classification                            Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 6, 1925- February 8, 1944            Peg to French Franc                       Only notes issued by Banque de l’Afrique Occidental are
                                                                                    legal tender. Exchange controls are introduced within Franc
                                                                                    Zone on September 9, 1939.
February 8, 1944– December 26, 1945       Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling       On March 19, 1941 incorporated in the Sterling Area.
December 26. 1945 – January 17, 1962      Peg to French Franc                       Return to Franc Zone. CFA Franc is introduced.
January 17, 1962–September 9, 1971        Peg to French Franc                       Bank of Central African States is created.
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974          De facto peg to French Franc/Dual         The premium is in low single digits.
                                          Market
March 21, 1974–December 1993              Peg to French Franc
January 1994–January 1995                 Peg to French Franc/Freely falling        One 100% devaluation.
February 1995–January 1, 1999             Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999_December 2001             Peg to Euro
Notes: Previously part of Ubangi–Shari. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
                                                                 - 61 -

Chile
Date                                   Classification                           Comments
                                       Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 16, 1925- April 20, 1932     Peg                                      Gold standard. Foreign exchange controls are introduced in
                                                                                on July 30,1931.
April 20, 1932–1937                     Dual Market                             Pound Sterling is reference currency. Suspension of gold
                                                                                standard.
1937-February, 1946                    Managed floating/Multiple rates          US Dollar is the reference currency
March 1946-May 1947                    Freely falling/Managed                   US Dollar is the reference currency
                                       floating/Multiple rates
June 1947-October 1952                 Managed floating/Multiple rates
November 1952–April 16, 1956           Freely falling/Managed                   US Dollar is the reference currency
                                       floating/Multiple rates
April 16, 1956-August 1957             Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                       Market
September 1957–June 1958               Managed floating/Dual Market
July 1958-January 1, 1960              Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                       Market
January 1, 1960–January 15, 1962       Peg to US Dollar                         The Escudo replaces the peso.
January 15, 1962–April 1964            Freely falling/Managed
                                       floating/Multiple rates
January 15, 1962–June 1971             Managed floating/Multiple rates
July 1971-June 29, 1976                Freely falling/Multiple exchange rates   On September 29, 1975 the Peso replaced the Escudo.
                                                                                October 1973 classifies as a hyperfloat.
June 29, 1976–January 1978             Freely falling/Crawling peg to US
                                       Dollar
February 1978–June 1978                Pre announced crawling peg to US         The Tablita Plan
                                       Dollar/Freely falling
July 1978–June 30, 1979                Pre announced crawling peg to US         The Tablita Plan
                                       Dollar
June 30, 1979–June 15, 1982            Peg to US Dollar                         The second phase of the Tablita Plan
June 15, 1982–December, 1982           Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                       Market
December 1982–December 8, 1984         Managed floating/Dual Market             Parallel market premium reaches 102% in early 1983. On
                                                                                March 1983 the intentions to follow a PPP rule was
                                                                                announced.
December 8, 1984–January 1988          Managed floating/Dual Market             PPP rule. The official rate is kept within a +/- 2% crawling
                                                                                band to US Dollar the June 1985. Yet, while the official
                                                                                rate remains within the band, parallel market premia remain
                                                                                in the 20–40% range and scores as managed floating.
January 1988–January 1, 1989           De facto crawling band around US         PPP rule. Band width is +/-5%. Official pre–announced
                                       Dollar/Dual Market                       crawling band to US Dollar. Band width is +/– 3%. While
                                                                                the official rate remains within the band narrower band,
                                                                                parallel market premia remain in double digits.
June 1, 1989–January 22, 1992          Pre announced crawling band around       PPP rule. Band width is +/- 5%.
                                       US Dollar/Dual Market
January 22, 1992– January 20, 1997     De facto crawling band around US         PPP rule. Band is +/-5%. Official pre–announced crawling
                                       Dollar/Dual Market                       band to US Dollar. Band width is +/- 10%. Parallel
                                                                                premium declines to below 15% and into single digits.
January 20, 1997–June 25, 1998         De facto crawling band to US             Official pre–announced crawling band to US Dollar. Band
                                       Dollar/Dual Market                       width is +/- 12.5%, de facto band is +/-5% for the official
                                                                                rate and +/-2% for the parallel rate.
June 25, 1998–September 16, 1998         Pre–announced crawling band to US      Band width is, +/- 2.75%.
                                         Dollar/Dual Market
September 16, 1998–December 22,          Pre announced crawling band to US      Band width is +/- 3.5%.
1998                                     Dollar/Dual Market
December 22, 1998–September 2,           Pre announced crawling band to US      Band width is +/- 8%.
1999                                     Dollar/Dual Market
September 2, 1999–December 2001          Managed floating                       Rates are unified.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 62 -

China
Date                                     Classification                             Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
November 3, 1935–March 14, 1938          Peg to Pound Sterling                      Abandoned silver standard. Monetary breakup. Canton
                                                                                    Dollar and Northern China Dollar are created. Canton Dollar
                                                                                    is pegged to Chinese Dollar. Northern China Dollar is not
                                                                                    pegged to any currency until March 1, 1938 in which it pegs
                                                                                    to the Yen.
March 14, 1938-1939                      Capital controls
1939– August 19, 1948                    Freely falling/Dual Market                 Most transactions take place at free market rate.
August 19, 1948–December 1951            Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual        Gold Yuan is introduced to replace China Dollar on
                                         Market                                     September 21, 1949.
January 1952– June 1969                  Managed floating/Dual Market               Jen Min Piao (Yuan) is introduced to replace Gold Yuan.
                                                                                    Parallel market premium climbs to 347% on July 1958 and
                                                                                    763% on June 1962.
June 1969– December 1973                 Managed floating/Dual                      Renmimbi is introduced.
                                         Market/Multiple rates
January 1974–February 1981               De facto crawling band around US           Band width is +/-2%.
                                         Dollar/Multiple rates
March 1981–July 1992                     Managed floating/Multiple rates
August 1992–January 1, 1994              De facto crawling band around US           Band width is +/-2%. Premium peaks at 124% on June
                                         Dollar/Multiple rates                      1991.
January 1, 1994–December 2001            De facto peg to US Dollar                  Unification of markets. There is a parallel market where the
                                                                                    premium is in single digits.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Colombia
Date                                     Classification                             Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1935–April 1944                  Managed float/Dual Market                  Free market rate applied to most transactions
April 1944–September 1946                Peg to US Dollar
October 1946-June 1947                    Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling
July 1947-January 1948                   Peg to US Dollar
January 1948–February 1952               De facto peg to US Dollar/Multiple rates   Parallel market premium reaches 183% on March 1957.
March 1953–September 1962                 De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. PPP rule. Pre announced crawling peg
                                         Dollar/Multiple rates                      to US Dollar. Premium usually in single digits.
October 1962-December 1963               Freely falling/De facto crawling band      Band width is +/-5%. PPP rule. Pre announced crawling peg
                                         around US Dollar/Multiple rates            to US Dollar. Premium usually in single digits.
January 1964-April 1974                   De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. PPP rule. Pre announced crawling peg
                                         Dollar/Multiple rates                      to US Dollar. Premium usually in single digits.
April 1974–September 1983                 De facto band around US                   Band width is +/- 2%. On May 1984 the premium rises to
                                         Dollar/Multiple rates                      36%.
October 1983–November 1984               Managed floating/Multiple rates            More accurately, the rate of crawl had been accelerated.
December 1984–January 24, 1994            De facto band around US                   Band width is +/- 5%.
                                         Dollar/Multiple rates
January 24, 1994– June 28, 1999           De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. Official pre announced crawling band
                                         Dollar                                     around US Dollar, width is +/- 7.5%
June 28, 1999–September 25, 1999          De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. There is an official pre announced
                                         Dollar                                     crawling band around US Dollar, which is +/- 10%. Parallel
                                                                                    market premium remains below 20%.
September 25, 1999–December 2001          Managed floating
Notes: Reference currency is the US dollar.
                                                                   - 63 -

Congo, Democratic Republic of
Date                                     Classification                            Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 1919–June 7, 1940                   Peg to Belgian Franc
June 7, 1940–January 21, 1941            Peg to French Franc
January 21, 1941–October 5, 1944         Peg to Pound Sterling                     Entry into Sterling Area
October 5, 1944– November 6, 1962        Parallel market                           The official rate is pegged to the Belgian Franc. No parallel
                                                                                   market data available.
November 6, 1962–October 1963            Managed floating/Dual Market
November 1963–November 9, 1963           Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual      The official rate is pegged to the Belgian Franc.
                                         Market
November 9, 1963–May 1964                Freely falling/Managed                    The official rate is pegged to the Belgian Franc.
                                         floating/Parallel market
June 1965–July 23, 1967                  Managed floating/Parallel Market          The official rate is pegged to the Belgian Franc.
July 23, 1967–August 24, 1971            Managed floating/Parallel market          Zaire replaces Congolese Franc. The official rate is pegged
                                                                                   to the Belgian Franc.
August 24, 1971–December 1974            De facto Crawling band around US          The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar. Band width is
                                         Dollar/Parallel market                    +/-5%.
January 1975–March 12, 1976              Freely falling/Managed                    The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
                                         floating/Parallel market
March 12, 1976–September 12, 1983        Freely falling/Freely floating            Official Peg to SDR
September 12, 1983–November 1997         Freely falling/Dual Markets/Managed       There were short–lived efforts to unify markets on March 1,
                                         floating                                  1984 and again on August 19, 1991.
                                                                                   October 1991–September 1992 and November 1993–
                                                                                   September 1994 regimes are “hyperfloats”.
December 1997–December 2001                                                        No inflation data post February 1998. No exchange rate
                                                                                   data for 2001. Effective May 2001 the exchange rates were
                                                                                   unified.
Notes: Formerly Belgian Congo and Zaire. Reference currencies are the Belgian Franc, US Dollar. SDR, and South African Rand.
Congo. Republic of
Bank of Central African States: Central African Republic, Chad, Gabon, and Republic of Congo
Date                                    Classification                             Comments
                                        Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 6, 1925- February 8, 1944          Peg to French Franc                        Only notes issued by Banque de l’Afrique Occidental are
                                                                                   legal tender. Exchange controls are introduced in franc
                                                                                   Zone on September 9, 1939 .
February 8, 1944– December 26, 1945     Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling        On March 19, 1941 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945–December 1947         Peg to French Franc                        Return to Franc Zone. CFA Franc is introduced.
January 1948–December 1949              Peg to French Franc/Freely falling
January 1950–January 17, 1962           Peg to French Franc
January 17, 1962–September 9, 1971      Peg to French Franc/Currency union         Bank of Central African States is created
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974        Market/De facto peg to French Franc        The premium is in low single digits.
March 21, 1974–December 1993            Peg to French Franc/Currency union
January 1994–January 1995               Peg to French Franc/Currency union/        One 100% devaluation.
                                        Freely falling
February 1995–January 1, 1999           Peg to French Franc/Currency union
January 1, 1999–December 2001           Peg to Euro
Notes: Previously Middle Congo. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
                                                                     - 64 -

Costa Rica
Date                                      Classification                              Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 10, 1922–October 13, 1948         Peg to US Dollar
October 13, 1948–February 1963            De facto peg to US Dollar/Multiple          Official peg to the US Dollar. On June 1950 the parallel
                                          rates                                       market premium peaks at 64%.
March 1963–December 24, 1969              De facto crawling band around US            Band width +/-2%. Official Peg to the US Dollar
                                          Dollar/Multiple rates
December 24, 1969– June 19, 1971          Peg to US Dollar
June 19, 1971– April 25, 1974             De facto crawling band around US            Band width +/-5%. Official Peg to the US Dollar. Parallel
                                          Dollar/Dual Market                          market premium consistently above 50%.
April 25, 1974–September 26, 1980         Peg to US Dollar
September 26, 1980-December 1980          Managed floating
January 1981–March, 1981                  Freely falling/Managed floating
March 9, 1981–November 11, 1983           Freely falling/Managed                      Periodic attempts to fix the official rate are interspersed
                                          floating/Multiple rates                     with frequent devaluations.
November 11, 1983– December 1990          De facto crawling band around US            De facto band width is +/- 5%., much narrower band if
                                          Dollar/Dual Market                          official rate is used.
January 1991– December 2001               De facto crawling band around US Dollar     De facto band width is +/- 2%. Parallel market premia is
                                                                                      in low single digits. De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
                                                                                      since 1995 if official rate is used.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Cote D’Ivoire
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                      Classification                             Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901- February 2, 1943           Peg to French Franc                        Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                     notes. Exchange controls are introduced in Franc Zone on
                                                                                     September 9, 1939.
February 2, 1943– December 26, 1945       Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling        On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945–January 26,             Peg to French Franc/Currency union         Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
1948
January 26, 1948–September 20, 1949       Dual Market                                Parallel market data is not available for this period. Linked
                                                                                     to French Franc.
September 20, 1949–May 12, 1962           Peg to French Franc
May 12, 1962–September 9, 1971            Peg to French Franc                        Creation of the Central Bank of West African States
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974          De facto peg to French Franc/Dual          The premium is in low single digits.
                                          Market
March 21, 1974–January 1, 1999            Peg to French Franc                        One 100% devaluation.
January 1, 1999–December 2001             Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement on June 1, 1984. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
Croatia
Date                                        Classification                           Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 22, 1993–September 1994             Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual      There is no price data before this date.
                                            Market
October 1994–January 1, 1999                De facto band around DM                  Band width is +/- 2%.
January 1, 1999–December 2001               De facto band around Euro                Band width is +/- 2%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM and the Euro.
Cyprus
Date                                        Classification                           Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 5, 1917–June 29, 1972             Peg to Pound Sterling                    Cyprus Pound is introduced.
June 29, 1972–July 9, 1973                  Peg                                      Gold
July 9, 1973–March 1992                     De facto crawling band around DM         Band width is +/- 2%.
April 1992–January 1, 1999                  De facto peg to DM                       Officially there is a +/-2.25% band.
January 1, 1999–December 2001               De facto peg to Euro                     In January 2001, it was announced that the band width
                                                                                     would be widened to +/-15% to be become effective in
                                                                                     August 2001.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the Pound Sterling, DM and the Euro.
                                                                    - 65 -

Czech Republic
Date                                       Classification                            Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 1990–February 28, 1996           De facto crawling band around DM          Band width is +/-2%. Officially tied to a currency basket
                                                                                     and then changed to the ECU.
February 28, 1996–May 27, 1997             De facto crawling band around DM          Band width is +/5-%. Official pre–announced crawling
                                                                                     band around DM. Official band width is +/-7.5%.
May 27, 1997–December 2001                 Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM and the Euro.
Denmark
Date                                      Classification                             Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 22, 1926– September 29, 1931 Peg                                            Gold Standard
September 29, 1931–November 1936          Peg to Pound Sterling                      Suspension of convertibility. Joined the Sterling Area. On
                                                                                     November 18, foreign exchange controls are introduced.
November 1936–April 1940                   Peg to Pound Sterling                     Tightening of controls
April 1940–August 1945                     Peg to Reichsmark
August 1945–September 16, 1950             Peg to US Dollar and Pound              Parallel market premia peaks in the fall of 1948 at around
                                           Sterling/Parallel Markets               110%.
September 16, 1950–October 17, 1951        De facto band around US Dollar/Dual     Band width is +/-5%. Parallel market premium oscillates in
                                           Market                                  the 20–60% range.
October 17, 1951–August 23, 1971           Peg to DM
August 23, 1971–December 1978              De facto moving band around DM          Band width is +/-2%.
December 1978–January 1, 1999              De Facto moving peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001              De facto peg to Euro                    Participant of ERM II. There is an official +/-2.25% band.
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the US Dollar, the DM and the Euro.
Dominica
East Caribbean Central Bank States are: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Date                                        Classification:                        Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935-October 6, 1965                        Peg to Pound Sterling                  British West Indies Dollar is introduced. It is issued by the
                                                                                   East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
October 6, 1965-July 7, 1976                Peg to Pound Sterling                  East Caribbean Dollar replaces British West Indies Dollar.
July 7, 1976-December 2001                  Peg to US Dollar                       ON October 1, 1983 the East Caribbean Central Bank
                                                                                   replaces the East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Dominican Republic
Date                                        Classification                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 21, 1905–February 1, 1948              Exchange rate arrangement with no      US Dollar is legal tender. On October 1947 Peso bank
                                            separate legal tender                  notes began to be issued.
February 1, 1948–September 1966             Managed floating/Parallel Market       Official rate is pegged to US Dollar
October 1966–September 1978                 De facto crawling band around US       Band width +/-2%. Official rate is pegged to US Dollar.
                                            Dollar/Parallel Market
October 1978–August 24, 1982                De facto crawling band around US       Official rate is pegged to US Dollar.
                                            Dollar/Parallel Market
August 24, 1982– January 23 1985            Managed floating/Dual Market           Band width +/-5%. Official rate is pegged to US Dollar.
                                                                                   Parallel market premium oscillates in the 50–90% range.
                                                                                   Parallel market premium climbs to 213% prior to the
                                                                                   devaluation on January 1985
January 23 1985–November 1985               Freely falling/Managed floating
December 1985–September 4, 1986             De facto crawling band around US       Band width +/-5%.
                                            Dollar
September 4, 1986–June 1987                 De facto crawling band around US       Band width +/-5%.
                                            Dollar/Dual Market
July 1987–November 12, 1987                 Freely falling/ De facto crawling band
                                            around US Dollar/Dual Market
November 12, 1987– February 11, 1988        Freely falling/Managed floating
February 11, 1988–August, 1991              Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual   There was a temporary unification in 1991.
                                            Market
September, 1991–October 1992                Managed floating/Dual Market           Parallel market premium oscillates and is declining.
November 1992–December 2001                 De facto crawling band around US       Band width is +/-2%. Parallel market data ends December
                                            Dollar/Dual Market                     1998—cannot verify 1999 onwards. Premium is in single
                                                                                   digits during this period.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 66 -

Ecuador
Date                                       Classification                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 4, 1927–February 9, 1932             Peg                                      Gold Standard
April 30, 1932–December 19, 1935           Dual Market                              Capital controls introduced and lifted on December 1935
July 31, 1936–July 31, 1937                Controls re–introduced
July 31, 1937– June 4, 1940                Dual Market
June 4, 1940                               Foreign exchange controls reintroduced
April 28, 1942–June 6. 1947                Peg to US Dollar
June 6, 1947–June 1950                     Managed floating/Multiple rates/Dual     An official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
                                           Market
July 1950–June 1957                        De facto peg to US Dollar/ Multiple
                                           rates/ Dual Market
July 1957–August 17, 1970                  De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Dollar/Multiple rates/Dual Market
August 17, 1970–November 22, 1971          Peg to US Dollar
November 22, 1971–February 26, 1973        Dual Market/ De facto crawling band      Band width is +/-2%
                                           around US Dollar
February 26, 1973– March 3, 1982           Peg to US Dollar                         The parallel rate behaves like a crawling band. Band width
                                                                                    is +/-2%.
March 3, 1982–April, 1984                  Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                           Market
May 1984–March 1987                        Managed floating/Dual                    There was a short–lived unification on November 12, 1985.
                                           Market/Multiple rates
April, 1987–September, 1993                Freely falling/ Managed floating         Parallel market premium hits 150% in 1988.
October 1993–March 3, 1997                 De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. Parallel market premium declines
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                       into single digits during this period.
March 3, 1997–September, 1997              De facto crawling band around US         Pre–announced crawling band around US Dollar, official
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                       band is +/-5%, the de facto band is +/-2%.
October 1997– February 12, 1999            Freely falling/Pre–announced crawling    The band is widened to +/-10% on March 25, 1998 and
                                           band around US Dollar.                   +/-15% on September 14, 1998.
February 12, 1999–March 13, 2000           Freely falling/Freely floating           Markets are unified.
March 13, 2000–April, 2001                 Exchange rate arrangement with no        US Dollar
                                           separate legal tender/Freely falling
May 2001–December, 2001                    Exchange rate arrangement with no        US Dollar
                                           separate legal tender
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Egypt
Date                                        Classification                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 29, 1931–1950                     Peg to Pound Sterling                   Suspension of Gold Standard, remained in Sterling Area
                                                                                    until July 14, 1947 but continued to be linked to the pound.
1950–May 7, 1962                           Managed floating/Multiple rates          Links to US Dollar
May 7, 1962–July 25, 1971                  De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. Official rate is pegged to US Dollar
                                           Dollar/Multiple rates                    and periodically adjusted. Parallel market premium remains
                                                                                    consistently above 150%.
July 25, 1971–October 8, 1991              De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar/Multiple rates
October 8, 1991–December 2001              De facto peg to US Dollar/Multiple       Parallel market premia is in single digits through December
                                           rates                                    1998, when the data ends.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
El Salvador
Date                                        Classification                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 1934–April 1961                       Peg to US Dollar                        Parallel market becomes important in the early 1960s when
                                                                                    Foreign exchange controls are reinstated.
May 1961–August 9, 1982                    De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%. Official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                   Dollar.
August 9, 1982–June 1, 1990                Managed floating/Dual Market             Third illegal market exists. Premium peaks at 472 percent
                                                                                    prior to the January 1986 devaluation.
March 19, 1990–June 1, 1990                De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Dollar/Multiple rates
June 1, 1990–January 1, 2001               De facto peg to US Dollar                Parallel market premium is in the 10–20 percent range
                                                                                    through most of this period.
January 1, 2001–December 2001               Peg to US Dollar                        En route to full Dollarization.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                    - 67 -

Equatorial Guinea
Date                                       Classification                            Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1885–October 12, 1969                      Exchange rate arrangement with no         Spanish Peseta
                                           separate legal tender
October 12, 1969–December 1973             Peg to Spanish Peseta                     Spanish Peseta is replaced by Peseta Guineana

January 1974–April 19, 1979                 Peg to Spanish Peseta/Dual Market
April 19, 1979–August 6, 1979               Peg to SDR/Dual Market
August 6, 1979– August 27, 1984             Crawling band around French               Band width is +/-2%. For official rate no parallel market
                                            Franc/Dual Market                         data is available.
August 27, 1984–December 2001               Peg to French Franc                       Joined Central African Monetary Union. One devaluation.
January 1994–December 1994                  Peg to French Franc/Freely falling        One 100% devaluation.
January 1995–January 1, 1999                Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the Spanish Peseta, the SDR, and the French Franc.
Estonia
Date                                        Classification                            Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–June 20, 1992                  Freely falling/Managed floating           There is no price data before this date.
June 20, 1992–December 1994                 Peg to DM/Currency board/Freely falling
January 1991–January 1, 1999                Peg to DM/Currency board
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro/Currency board
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM and the Euro
Finland
Date                                        Classification                            Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 1933– October 26, 1939                Peg to Pound Sterling                     Foreign exchange controls are introduced.
1940-June 1944                              Peg to US Dollar/Parallel
July 1944-April 1948                        Freely falling/Parallel market            Premium above 200 on July 1949. Official rate is pegged to
                                                                                      US Dollar.
May 1948-June 11, 1951                      Peg to US Dollar/Parallel market
June 11, 1951–October 12, 1967              De facto band around US                   Band width is +/-5%. Premiums in 50–130% range are the
                                            Dollar/Multiple rates                     norm through 1957. In June 1958 premiums reach single
                                                                                      digits for the first time.
October 12, 1967–January, 1973              Peg to US Dollar
January 1973–September 8, 1992              De facto band around DM                   Band width is +/- 2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                      currencies or the ECU during this period.
September 8, 1992–March 1993                Freely falling/Managed floating           ERM crisis
April 1993–December 1994                    De facto moving band around DM            Band width is +/- 2%.
January 1995–January 1, 1999                De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Currency union                            Euro
Notes: Specifics on the evolution of the currency basket, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are the US
Dollar, the DM and the Euro
                                                                    - 68 -

France
Date                                       Classification                            Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 9, 1939- May 17, 1940            Peg                                       Capital controls froze the exchange rate of the Franc versus
                                                                                     the US Dollar and Pound Sterling.
May 17, 1940–May 1944                      Peg to Reichsmark
June 1944–December 26, 1945                Peg to Reichsmark/Freely falling
December 26, 1945–January 26, 1948         Freely falling/Managed                    Officially pegged to US Dollar. Through 1953 premiums
                                           floating/Parallel Market                  were in the 50–200 % range.
January 26, 1948–December 1948             Freely falling/Managed
                                           floating/Parallel Market
January 1949–June 1956                     De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/- 5%.
                                           Dollar/Multiple rates
July 1956–December 13, 1968                De facto band around US                   Band width is +/- 2%. Through 1957 the premium
                                           Dollar/Multiple rates                     oscillated in the 10–40% range.
December 13, 1968– August 8, 1969          Peg to US Dollar                          Temporary unification.
August 8, 1969–December 1970               De facto band around US Dollar/Dual       Band width is +/- 2%. Parallel market premium in single
                                           market                                    digits.
January 1971–August 21, 1971               Peg to US Dollar
August 21, 1971–March 19, 1973             De facto band around DM/Dual              Band width is +/- 2%.
                                           market
March 19, 1973–March 21, 1974              Pre–announced band/Dual Market            Band width is +/-2.25%. Parallel market premium in single
                                                                                     digits. Common Margins agreement.
March 21, 1974–June 1974                   Managed floating
July, 1974–March 13, 1979                  De facto moving band around DM          Band width is +/- 2%.
March 13,1979–December 1986                De facto crawling peg to DM             Officially pegged to the ECU
January 1987–January 1, 1999–              De facto peg to DM                      Officially pegged to the ECU
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Currency union                          Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the US Dollar, the DM and the Euro.
Gabon
Bank of Central African States: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, and Republic of Congo
Date                                       Classification                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 6, 1925- February 8, 1944             Peg to French Franc                     Only notes issued by Banque de l’Afrique Occidental are
                                                                                   sole legal tender. Exchange controls are introduced within
                                                                                   Franc Zone on September 9, 1939.
February 8, 1944– December 26. 1945        Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling     On March 19, 1941 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945 – January 17, 1962       Peg to French Franc                     Return to Franc Zone. CFA Franc is introduced.
January 17, 1962–September 9, 1971         Peg to French Franc                     Bank of Central African States is Created
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974           De facto peg to French Franc/Dual       Parallel market premium in single digits.
                                           Market
March 21, 1974–December 1993               Peg to French Franc
January 1994–December 1994.                Peg to French Franc/Freely falling      One 100% devaluation.
January 1995–January 1, 1999               Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Peg to Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the French Franc and the Euro.
Gambia
Date                                       Classification                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1916– May 13, 1964                         Currency board/ Peg to Pound Sterling West Africa Pound is introduced by the West African
                                                                                    Currency Board
May 13, 1964–July 1, 1971                  Currency board/ Peg to Pound Sterling Gambia Pound replaces West Africa Pound
July 1, 1971–December 1980                 Currency board/ Peg to Pound Sterling    Dalasi replaces Gambia Pound
January 1981–December 1985                 Multiple Rates/parallel market           Cannot classify, as parallel market data is not available for
                                                                                    this period
January 1986–January 20, 1986              Freely falling/Multiple Rates/Freely
                                           floating
January 20, 1986–February 1987             Freely falling/freely floating
March 1987–September 1991                  Freely floating
October, 1991–December, 2001               De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%. Maximum parallel market premium is
                                           Dollar                                   about 30%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Pound Sterling.
                                                                   - 69 -

Georgia
Date                                        Classification                           Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–April 1993                     Freely falling/Exchange arrangement      Russian Ruble
                                            with no separate legal tender
April, 1993–September 1996                  Freely falling/Dual Market               September 1993–September 1994 regime is a “hyper float.”
October 1996–December 7, 1998               Dual Market
December 7, 1998–December 2001              Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Ruble.
Germany
Date                                        Classification                           Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
July 13, 1931–April 1945                    Multiple exchange rates                  Foreign exchange controls are introduced. There are
                                                                                     several quasi currencies in circulation. In 1936 capital flight
                                                                                     warranted the death penalty.
April 1945–June 20, 1948                    Managed floating/Multiple rates          Officially Reichsmark is pegged to the US Dollar.
                                                                                     The parallel market premia is 2,000–3,200% during this
                                                                                     period
June 20, 1948–March 31, 1951                De facto moving band around US           Band width is +/-5%. Reference currency is the US Dollar,
                                            Dollar/Multiple rates                    The Deutschemark replaces the Reichsmark. The parallel
                                                                                     premium oscillates in the 50–500% range through 1949 and
                                                                                     in the 20–50% range through mid–1952.
March 31, 1951–April 1,1954                 De facto moving band around US           Band width is +/-5%. Introduction of a quasi currency the
                                            Dollar/Multiple rates                    Sperrmark.
April 1, 1954–December 29, 1958             De facto peg to US Dollar/Multiple       Introduction of a second quasi currency the Bekomark.
                                            rates                                    Parallel market premia is trivial after mid–1955.
December 29, 1958– September 30, 1969       Peg to US Dollar/Parallel Market         The Deutschemark fully convertible Bekomark abolished.
                                                                                     The Sperrmark had been consolidated in 1954.
September 30, 1969–October 26, 1969        Mini–Float
October 26,1969–May 10, 1971               Peg to US Dollar
May 10, 1971– December 21, 1971            Managed floating
December 21, 1971–January 1973             Peg to US Dollar
January 1973–January 1, 1999               Float
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Currency Union                            Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the US Dollar, Yen and the Pound Sterling.
Ghana
Date                                       Classification                            Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1916– July 14, 1958                        Currency Board/Peg to Pound Sterling West African Pound is introduced by the West Africa
                                                                                     Currency Board.
July 14, 1958– July 19, 1965               Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market     Ghana Pound replaces the West African Pound
July 19, 1965–November 4, 1971             Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market     The Cedi replaced the Ghana Pound. The new Cedi was
                                                                                     introduced in 1967.
November 4, 1971–September 1973            Managed floating/Parallel market          The Cedi is officially pegged to US Dollar.
October 1973– June 19, 1978                Freely Falling/Managed                    The Cedi is officially pegged to US Dollar. There are
                                           floating/Parallel market                  multiple exchange rates.
June 19, 1978–May 1984                     Freely falling/Managed                    The official peg to the US Dollar is abandoned. There are
                                           floating/Parallel Market                  multiple exchange rates.
June 1984–April 1986                       Freely floating/Parallel market           There are multiple exchange rates.
May 1986–September 19, 1986                Freely falling/Freely floating/Parallel   There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           Market
September 19, 1986–September 1987          Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual       There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           Market
October 1987–July 1989                     Freely floating/Dual Market               There are multiple exchange rates.
August 1989– April 27, 1990                Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual      There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           Market
April 27, 1990–September 1990              Freely falling/Managed floating           There are multiple exchange rates.
October 1990–February 1994                 Managed floating                          There are multiple exchange rates. Since early 1993, the
                                                                                     parallel market premia has been in single digits.
March 1994–July 1996                       Freely falling/Managed floating
August 1996–October 1999                   Managed floating
November 1999–March 2001                   Freely falling/Managed floating
April 2001–December 2001                   Managed floating
Notes: Formerly Gold Coast. Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the Pound Sterling, and the South African Rand.
                                                                    - 70 -

Greece
Date                                         Classification                          Comments
                                             Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 21, 1931                           Foreign exchange controls are
                                             introduced.
1933–September 21, 1936                      Peg to French Franc
September 28, 1936–April 1941                Peg to Pound Sterling
April 1941–November 11, 1944                 Freely falling/Freely floating          Hyperinflation. Officially pegged to Reichsmark
November 11, 1944–January 1947               Freely falling/Managed floating          Officially pegged to the US Dollar
February 1947–September 1948                 Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                             Market
October 1948–April 1950                      Managed floating/ Dual Market
May 1950–May 1, 1954                         De facto band around US Dollar/Dual     Band width is +/-2%. Parallel market premia dips into
                                             Market                                  single digits at the end of 1952.
May 1, 1954–December 22, 1965                Peg to US Dollar/Parallel Market
December 22, 1965–March 8, 1975              De facto band around the US Dollar      Band width is +/-2%. Officially pegged to the US Dollar
March 8, 1975–November, 1977                 De facto crawling peg to US Dollar      Officially pegged to a basket of currencies.
December 1977–June, 1981                     De facto crawling band                  Band width is +/- 2%. Parallel market premia rises in this
                                             around US dollar                        period and hits 31% in early 1981.
July 1981–August 1984                        Managed floating
September 1984– August 1989                  De facto band crawling band around      Band width is +/- 2%.
                                             DM
September 1989–January 1, 1999               De facto peg to DM                      On March 15, 1998 the drachma entered the ERM
January 1, 1999–December 2001                Currency union                          Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the Pound Sterling, and the DM and the Euro.
Grenada
East Caribbean Central Bank States are: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Date                                         Classification:                         Comments
                                             Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935-October 6, 1965                         Peg to Pound Sterling                   British West Indies Dollar is introduced. It is issued by the
                                                                                     East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
October 6, 1965-July 7, 1976                 Peg to Pound Sterling                   East Caribbean Dollar replaces British West Indies Dollar.
July 7, 1976-December 2001                   Peg to US Dollar                        ON October 1, 1983 the East Caribbean Central Bank
                                                                                     replaces the East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Guatemala
Date                                        Classification:                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
November 26,1926–October 13, 1962           Peg to US Dollar                        The Quetzal replaces the Guatemalan Peso.
October 13, 1963–May 25,1963               Multiple Rates                           Foreign exchange controls were introduced. There is no
                                                                                    data on the parallel rate for this period.
May 1963–November 16, 1984                 Peg to US Dollar/Parallel market
November 16, 1984–March, 1985              Multiple exchange rates                  There are three rates. There is no data on the parallel rate
                                                                                    for this period.
March, 1985–June 1986                       Freely falling/Managed                  Multiple exchange rates
                                            floating/Parallel Market
July 1986–June 23, 1988                     Managed floating/Multiple rates         Parallel market premium hits 400%.
June 23, 1988–May 1989                     De facto crawling peg to US
                                            Dollar/Multiple rates
June 1989–April 1991                        Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-2%. There are multiple rates.
                                            around US Dollar
May 1991–December 2001                      De facto crawling peg to US Dollar      Parallel market premia is in single digits during this period.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                  - 71 -

Guinea
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
July 21, 1934–September 9, 1939           Peg to French Franc                      Controls are introduced in 1939 in the CFA Franc Zone.
February 2 1943– December 6, 1944         Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling      Incorporated into Sterling Area
December 6, 1944–March 1, 1960            Peg to French Franc                      Return to Franc Zone.
March 1, 1960–December 1970               Peg to US Dollar                         Parallel Market .The Guinea Franc replaced the CFA Franc
                                                                                   withdrawal from CFA Franc zone. On October 2, 1972, the
                                                                                   Syli replaced the Guinean Franc.
January 1971–June 11, 1975                De facto band around US Dollar           Band width is +/-5%. The official rate remains pegged to
                                                                                   the US Dollar but the parallel market is active with
                                                                                   premiums occasionally of over 1,000%.
June 11, 1975–October 1978                De facto moving peg to US Dollar         Officially pegged to the SDR. Active parallel market
November 1978 December 1, 1982–           De facto crawling band around US         Officially pegged to the SDR.
                                          Dollar                                   Band width is +/-2% for the official rate. The parallel rate
                                                                                   oscillates within a wider +/-5% band.
December 1, 1982–October 7, 1985          Parallel Market/De facto crawling        Band width is +/-5%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                          band around US Dollar
October 7, 1985–June 1, 1986              Freely falling/De facto crawling band    Band width is +/-5%. Officially pegged to the SDR. On
                                          around US Dollar/Dual Market             January 1986, the currency was devalued by 1, 235%. The
                                                                                   Guinean Syli was replaced by the New Guinean Franc. On
                                                                                   December 1985 the parallel market premia had reached 1,
                                                                                   423%. There are multiple exchange rates.
June 1, 1986–December 1986                Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling
January 1987–February 1, 1991             Peg to US Dollar                         Frequent adjustments
February 1, 1991–May 1991                 De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%. Officially pegged to the SDR
                                          Dollar
June 1991–September, 1999                 De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
September, 1999–April, 2000               De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%.
                                          Dollar
May 2000–December 2001                    Managed floating
Notes: Formerly French Guinea.
Guinea–Bissau
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1879-February 29, 1976                     Currency arrangement with no              Portugese Escudo
                                           separate legal tender
February 29, 1976-May 26, 1978             Peg to Portugese Escudo                   Introduction of Guinea-Bissau Peso.
May 26, 1978-December 23, 1983             Peg to SDR
December 23, 1983-December 1992            Crawling peg to SDR
January 1993–May 2, 1997                   Parallel Market/Dual Market               There are multiple exchange rates. No data on parallel
                                                                                     market.
May 2, 1997–January 1, 1999                Peg to French Franc                       Joined the CFA Franc Zone. The Guinea Bissau Peso was
                                                                                     converted to the CFA Franc through July 31, 1997.
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement on June 1, 1984. Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro.
                                                                   - 72 -

Guyana
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935–November 15, 1965                     Exchange arrangement with no            British West Indies Dollar is pegged to Pound Sterling
                                           separate legal tender
November 15, 1965–October 9, 1975          Peg to Pound Sterling                   Guyana Dollar was issued to replace British West Indies
                                                                                   Dollar
October 9, 1975–June 2 1982                Peg to US Dollar/Parallel Market
June 2, 1982–February 2, 1987              De facto crawling peg to the US         Officially the Guyana Dollar is repegged to a basket of
                                           Dollar                                  currencies. Multiple exchange rates prevail except in 1985.
                                                                                   There is an active parallel market. In effect, through 1991
                                                                                   it is a system where the official exchange rate is pegged to
                                                                                   the US Dollar and devalued frequently.
January 1988–March 13, 1990               Freely falling/De facto crawling band    Band width is +/-5%. The premium surpassed 1,100% in
                                          around US Dollar/Parallel Market         late 1986 on the eve of the January 1987 devaluation.
March 13, 1990–April 1, 1991               Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%. On March 13, 1990 the parallel
                                          around US Dollar/Dual Market             market was legalized creating an official dual arrangement.
April 1, 1991–December 1991               Freely falling/De facto crawling band    Markets were unified. Band width is +/-5%.
                                          around US Dollar
January 1995–December, 2001                De facto crawling peg around US         Since January 1995 parallel market premia have remained
                                          Dollar                                   in single digits.
Notes: Formerly British Guiana. Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Haiti
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 16, 1915–December 1984           Peg to US Dollar                        US Dollar also legal tender, although there was no black
                                                                                   market, premiums in the 10–15% range were offered for
                                                                                   payments New York post 1958.
January 1985-April 1989                    De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                  Dollar
May 1989-September 16, 1991                De facto crawling band around US        Premia peaked at 300% prior to the abandonment of the
                                           Dollar /Parallel market                 peg. Band width +/-5%. The official rate remains pegged
                                                                                   to the US Dollar through September 16.
September 16, 1991–March 1992              Freely falling/Crawling band around     Band width +/-5%.
                                           US Dollar
March 1992– May 1993                       Crawling band around US Dollar          Band width +/-5%.
May 1993–February 1995                     Freely falling/Freely floating
March 1995–December 2001                   Freely floating                         Despite its floating status the parallel premia remained near
                                                                                   50% through end–1998
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Honduras
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1918– April 3, 1926                       Peg to US Dollar
April 3, 1926–March 27, 1934              Peg to US Dollar                         The Lempira replaces the Honduras Peso.
March 27, 1934–June 30, 1950              Dual Market                              Capital controls are introduced.
June 30, 1950– March 19, 1985             Peg to US Dollar                         Controls were lifted.
March 19, 1985–March 13, 1990             De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. There are multiple rates.
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                   Parallel market premium peaks at 143% just before the
                                                                                   devaluation.
March 13,1990–September 3, 1990            Freely falling/De facto crawling band   In September 3, 1990 a dual market was introduced. Band
                                           around US Dollar                        width is +/-5%.
September 3, 1990–March 1991               Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%.
                                           around US Dollar/Dual Market
April 1991–June 18, 1992                    De facto crawling band around US       Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar/Dual Market
June 18, 1992–January 1996                 De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar
January 1996–December 1998                 De facto crawling band around the US    Band width is +/- 5%. Parallel market premia has been in
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                      single digits since 1993. The official rate is a de facto
                                                                                   crawling peg.
January 1999–December 2001                De facto crawling peg to US Dollar       There is an official +/-7% band.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 73 -

Hong Kong
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 5, 1935, 1941– January 5, 1942 Peg to Pound Sterling
January 5, 1942– December 19, 1946        Peg to Yen
December 19, 1946– September 18,          Peg to Pound Sterling                    Parallel rate peaks at 79% just before the peg is abandoned.
1949
September 18, 1949–August 22. 1962        De facto band around Pound               Band width is +/- 5%.
                                          Sterling/Multiple Rates
August 22. 1962– July 6, 1972             Peg to Pound Sterling
July 6, 1972– October 17, 1983            De facto moving band around US           Band width is +/- 2%. An Official and an Effective
                                          Dollar/Dual Markets                      exchange rate were in place. Parallel market premia is trivial.
October 17, 1983–December 2001            Currency board/Peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currencies are the Pound Sterling and the US Dollar.
Hungary
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
August 1, 1946–April 1, 1957              Peg/Parallel market                      Hungary entered Ruble zone and the Forint replaced the
                                                                                   Pengoe.
April 1, 1957–July 1, 1992                De Facto crawling band around the        Band width is +/- 5%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                          DM/Multiple rates                        currencies. On December 1, 1991 the basket was changed
                                                                                   to comprise the ECU and the US Dollar with equal weights.
July 1, 1992–May 16, 1994                 De Facto crawling band around the        Band width is +/- 5%. On August 2, 1993 the DM replaced
                                          DM                                       the ECU.
May 16, 1994 1994–January 1, 1999         De Facto crawling band around the        Band width is +/-2%. At this time the weight of the DM in
                                          DM                                       the basket was increased to 70%.
January 1, 1999–December 2001             Pre–Announced crawling band around       Band width is +/- 2.25%.
                                          the Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the DM, the Euro, the Ruble and the US Dollar.
Iceland
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 1925–December 18, 1946             Peg to Pound Sterling                   Joined Sterling Area
December 18, 1946–March 8, 1951            Peg to US Dollar/Parallel market        De facto devalued with Pound Sterling. Parallel market
                                                                                   premia as high as 285%.
March 8, 1951–October 1968                 De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. Until late 1962 premia is in high
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                  double digits. There are multiple exchange rates.
November 1968–April 1973                   De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market
May 1973–January 1976                      Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           around US Dollar/Parallel Markets
February 1976–April 1977                   De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                  currencies.
                                                                                   There are multiple exchange rates
May 1977– July 29, 1983                    Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual    Travel Rate is abolished.
                                           Markets
July 29, 1983–May 1984                     Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%.
                                           around DM
June 1984–September 1986                   De facto crawling band around DM.       Band width is +/-5%
                                                                                   Officially pegged to a basket of currencies.
September 1986–October 2000                De facto crawling band around DM.       Band width is +/–2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                   currencies. During this period the weight attached to the
                                                                                   US Dollar is declining. On January 3, 1992, the ECU has a
                                                                                   weight of 76%.
October 2000–March 28, 2001                 De facto managed floating              Officially pegged to a basket of currencies
March 28, 2001–December 2001                Managed floating
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 74 -

India
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
August 1914–March 22, 1927                Peg to Pound Sterling                    Convertibility into sterling is suspended.
March 22, 1927–September 24, 1931         Peg                                      Gold Standard
September 24, 1931–September 3, 1939      Peg to Pound Sterling                    Suspension of Gold Standard adherence to Sterling Area.
September 3, 1939–October 1941            Peg to Pound Sterling                    Capital controls are introduced
November 1941-October 1943                Peg to Pound Sterling/Freely falling
November 1943-October 1, 1965             Peg to Pound Sterling
October 1, 1965–June 6, 1966              De facto band around Pound               There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/– 5%.
                                          Sterling/Parallel Market
June 6, 1966–August 23, 1971              Peg to Pound Sterling
August 23, 1971–December 20, 1971         Peg to US Dollar
December 20, 1971–September 25, 1975      Peg to Pound Sterling
September 25, 1975–February 1979          De facto crawling band around Pound      Band width is +/- 2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                          Sterling                                 currencies.
March 1979–July 1979                      Managed floating
August 1979–July 1989                     De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/- 2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                          dollar.                                  currencies
August 1989–July 1991                     De facto crawling peg to US dollar
August 1991–June 1995                     De facto peg to US dollar                One devaluation on March 1993—parallel market premia
                                                                                   rose to 27% in February.
July 1995–December 2001                   De facto crawling peg to US dollar       During this period the parallel market premium has been
                                                                                   consistently in single digits.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Pound Sterling.
Indonesia
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1877– September 1940                      Peg                                      Gold Standard
September 1940–1942                       Peg to Pound Sterling                    Peg to Sterling following German occupation of the
                                                                                   Netherlands.
1942– September 1945                      Peg to Yen                               Military Yen (Gumpyo) is introduced.
September 1945–March 7, 1946              Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market
March 7, 1946–November 2, 1949            Peg to Netherlands Guilder               Indonesian Guilder, formerly Netherlands East Indies
                                                                                   Guilder, re–circulates.
November 2, 1949–December 1949            Managed floating                         The Rupiah replaces the Indonesian or Netherlands East
                                                                                   Indies Guilder. Reference currency is the US Dollar. There
                                                                                   are multiple exchange rates
October 1950–January 1952                 Freely falling/Managed floating          Inflation is 68%. There are multiple exchange rates
February 1952–August 1954                 Managed floating
September 1954-November 1955              Freely falling/Managed floating
December 1955-March 1969                  Managed floating                         Escalating instability in early 1960’s the parallel market
                                                                                   premium is 2,678% in July 1962, 5,100% in August 1965
                                                                                   and peaks at 11,100% in November 1965. There are
                                                                                   multiple exchange rates.
April 1969–December 10, 1970              De facto crawling band to US             Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is pegged to US
                                          Dollar/Parallel market                   Dollar. There are multiple exchange rates. On February
                                                                                   1967 the premium is in single digits for the first time.
December 10, 1970–August 23, 1971         Peg to US Dollar                         Temporary unification.
August 23, 1971–June 1972                 De facto crawling band to US             Band width is +/-5%. %. The official rate is pegged to US
                                          Dollar/Parallel market                   Dollar. There are multiple exchange rates
July 1972–December 1973                   Freely falling/ De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%. %. The official rate is pegged to US
                                          to US Dollar/Parallel market             Dollar. 1973 was the last year in which multiple rates are
                                                                                   listed by the IMF.
January 1974–June 1974                    Freely falling/ De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%. %. The official rate is pegged to US
                                          to US Dollar/Parallel market             Dollar
July 1974–November 16, 1978               De facto crawling band to US             Band width is +/-5%. %. The official rate is pegged to US
                                          Dollar/Parallel market                   Dollar
November 16, 1978–July 1997               De facto crawling peg to US Dollar       Officially pegged to a basket of undisclosed currencies.
                                                                                   Premium consistently below 20% and mostly in single digits.
August, 1997–March 1999                   Freely falling/Freely floating           A dual rate comes into effect briefly in February 1998, when
                                                                                   a subsidized rate was applied to certain food imports.
April 1999–December 2001                  Freely floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and Yen.
                                                                     - 75 -

Iran
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 13, 1932–March 1, 1933              Peg                                      Silver standard, the Rial replaced the Kran.
March 1, 1933–1945                        Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market    Reestablishment of foreign exchange controls.
1945–January 1954                         Dual Market                              There are multiple exchange rates.
February 1954–May 27,1957                 De facto band around US Dollar/Dual      Band width is +/-2%. The US Dollar is the reference
                                          Market                                   currency.
May 27, 1957–January 14, 1974             Peg to US Dollar
January 14, 1974–December 1976            De facto band around US Dollar/Dual      Band width is +/-2%. On February 12, 1975 the Rial’s links
                                          Market                                   to the US Dollar were officially terminated and the
                                                                                   currency was linked to the SDR.
January 1977–January 1994                 Managed floating/Parallel Market         There are multiple exchange rates during 1978–1984 and
                                                                                   again 1990–1994. Since January 1987, the parallel market
                                                                                   premium is consistently above 1,000%. There is a major
                                                                                   devaluation of the official rate in early 1993.
February, 1994–February 1996              Freely falling/Managed                   There are multiple exchange rates. After hitting a peak of
                                          floating/Parallel Market                 3,618% on February 1993, the parallel market premium
                                                                                   settles around 50%.
March 1996–December 2001                  Managed floating/Dual Market             Three rates reduced to two on March 31, 2000. The official
                                                                                   rate is a de facto peg to the US Dollar during this period.
                                                                                   Parallel market premium is consistently above 150% and
                                                                                   occasionally above 200%.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Iraq
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1900–1931                                 Arrangement with no separate legal       Egyptian Pounds and Indian Rupees circulate as legal
                                          tender                                   tender.
April 19, 1931–April 1, 1932              Peg                                      Gold Standard. Iraqui Dinar is introduced
April 1, 1932–June 23, 1959               Peg to Pound Sterling                    Iraq withdrew from Sterling Area but continued to peg to
                                                                                   Pound Sterling.
June 23, 1959–June 23, 1972               De facto peg to Pound Sterling/Dual
                                          Market
July 3, 1972–December 1981                Peg to US Dollar                         Parallel market premia is small during this period.
January 1982–December 1998                Managed floating/Parallel Market         There are multiple rates in 1982 and 1983. The official
                                                                                   rate is pegged to the US Dollar. There is no data on market
                                                                                   determined rates after this date.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar. There is no price data.
Ireland
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
August 20, 1927–September 26, 1931        Peg                                      Gold
September 26, 1931– March 30, 1979        Peg to Pound Sterling                    Adherence to the Sterling area. On September 3, 1939
                                                                                   foreign exchange controls are introduced. The Irish Pound
                                                                                   remains officially pegged to Pound Sterling but the “green
                                                                                   pound” is applied to a variety of transactions. Until 1976,
                                                                                   the IMF records a dual rate. However, parallel market
                                                                                   premia is nil.
March 30, 1979–October 1996                De facto moving band around DM          Band width is +/- 2%.
November, 1996–January 1, 1999             De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Currency union                         Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the DM, the Euro, the Pound Sterling, and the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 76 -

Israel
Date                                    Classification:                         Comments
                                        Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
August 16, 1948–December 1950           Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market   Creation of Israel Pound to replace Palestinian Pound (on
                                                                                May 14 1948 Israel became an independent state).
January 1951–January 1952               Freely falling                          Parallel market premia rising steadily—it peaks in February
                                                                                1952 at 678%.
February 17, 1952–February 1962         Multiple Rates/Parallel Market          Parallel market premia falls into double digits on July 1955.
                                                                                There are multiple rates.
February 1962–August 17, 1970           Peg to Pound Sterling                   Beginning November 1963 parallel market premia
                                                                                remained mostly in single digits until August 1968.
August 17, 1970–September 1973          Managed floating/Parallel Market        There are multiple rates. The official rate is linked to the
                                                                                US Dollar.
October, 1973–October 28, 1977          Freely falling/Managed                  June 17, 1975–July 8, 1976 a crawling peg policy was
                                        floating/Parallel Market                announced for the official rate. Premium oscillates in the
                                                                                20–70% range. There are multiple rates. On July 19, 1976
                                                                                the Israeli Pound was officially linked to a basket of
                                                                                currencies.
October 28, 1977–September, 1985        Freely falling/Managed floating         Multiple rates abolished and the peg to a basket to a basket
                                                                                of currencies discontinued.
October, 1985–August 1986               Pre announced crawling band around      Band width is +/-2%. Inflation stabilization plan.
                                        US Dollar/ Freely falling
September 1986–December 1986            Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-2%. Inflation stabilization plan continues.
                                        around US Dollar                        Officially the Shekel is now pegged to a basket of
                                                                                currencies.
January 1986–January 3, 1989            De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. Inflation stabilization plan continues.
                                        Dollar                                  Officially the Shekel is now pegged to a basket of currencies.
January 3, 1989–March 1, 1990           Pre announced crawling band around      Official band is +/-3% but there is a de facto band that is
                                        US Dollar                               narrower +/-2%
March 1, 1990–January 1991              De facto crawling band around US        Official band width is +/-5%, but de facto band remains at
                                        Dollar                                  +/-2%.
February 1991-December 2001             De facto crawling band around US        Officially, there is a pre announced crawling band around
                                        Dollar                                  US Dollar Since July 26 1993, the upper limit is 6% and
                                                                                the lower is 2% since August 6, 1998. Hence it is an ever
                                                                                widening band, which was 39.2 % as of December 30,
                                                                                2000. There is a de facto band width of +/–5%.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Italy
Date                                      Classification:                       Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 29, 1936–June 1943                  Multiple Rates                        The reference currency is the US Dollar. On May 26, 1934
                                                                                capital controls are introduced and convertibility is
                                                                                suspended.
June 1943– March 26, 1946               Freely falling/Multiple Rates           The part of Italy occupied by the Allied forces is pegged to
                                                                                the US Dollar, the rest pegs to the Reichsmark.
March 26, 1946–December 1947            Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual    There is an active free market and multiple rates. The
                                        Market                                  parallel premia peaks on May 1947 at 41%.
February 1948–September 1951            Managed floating                        There are multiple rates.
October 1951–December 29, 1958          De facto Peg to US Dollar               There are multiple rates. After April 1952parallel premium
                                                                                remains in single digits until 1973.
December 29, 1958–June 1, 1959          De facto peg to US Dollar/Dual Market
June 1, 1959–1969                       Peg to US Dollar
1969–January 22, 1973                   Peg to US Dollar/Parallel Market
January 22, 1973–March 22, 1974         De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%.
                                        Dollar /Dual Market
March 22, 1974–September 1975           De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. There are dual rates.
                                        Dollar
October 1975–December 1982              Managed floating                        There are Dual rates. Different exchange rates arise for
                                                                                outward transfers of resident–owned capital.
January 1983–September 13, 1992         De facto crawling band around DM        Band width is +/-2%.
April 1976–September 13, 1992           De facto crawling band around DM        Band width is +/-2%.
September 13, 1992–March 1993           Freely falling
April 1993–July 1995                    De facto crawling band around DM        Band width is +/-2%.
August 1995–November 1996               De facto crawling peg to DM
December 1996–January 1, 1999           De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001           Currency union                          Euro
                                                                   - 77 -

Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the DM, the Euro, the Pound Sterling, and the US Dollar.

Jamaica
Date                                       Classification:                            Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 1920–September 8, 1959               Peg to Pound Sterling                      Jamaican Dollar is introduced.
September 8, 1959-January 17, 1973         Peg to Pound Sterling                      The Jamaican Dollar replaces the Jamaican Pound
January 17, 1973–April 27, 1977            Peg to US Dollar
April 27, 1977–December 1977               Peg to US Dollar/Dual Market
January 1978–May 9, 1978                   Freely falling/Peg to US Dollar/Dual       Parallel market premia hits a peak of 149% on January 1978
                                           market
May 9, 1978–April 1979                     Freely falling/Peg to US Dollar
May 2, 1979–January 10, 1983               Peg to US Dollar
January 10, 1983–November 1, 1989          De facto crawling band around US           Band width is +/-2%. Official rate remains pegged until
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                         October 1983.
November 1, 1989–September 17, 1990        Peg to US Dollar
September 17, 1990–May 1992                Freely falling/De facto crawling band
                                           around US Dollar
June 1992–December 1992                    Freely falling/De facto peg to US Dollar
January 1993–April 1993                    De facto peg to US Dollar
May 1993–September 1993                    De facto crawling band around US           Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar
October 1993–July 1996                     De facto crawling band around US           Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Dollar
August 1996–December 2001                  De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Japan
Date                                      Classification:                             Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1933–September 1939                       Peg to Pound Sterling                       On July 1, 1932 foreign exchange controls are introduced.
                                                                                      The official peg ended on September 1939.
December 29, 1941–                         Peg to Reischsmark
July, 1944-August 1945                     Peg to Reischsmark/Freely falling
August 1945–June 1946                      Freely falling/Managed                     There are multiple rates. Military exchange rate. Black
                                           floating/Parallel market                   market skyrocketed. Official yen 15 to a dollar—black
                                                                                      market 875 to the dollar on February 1946 Inflation was
                                                                                      513% in 1946.
July 1949–April 25, 1949                   Managed floating/Parallel Market           There are multiple rates.
April 25, 1949–May 11, 1953                De facto band around US                    Band width is +/-5%. Military rate abolished. Multiple rates
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                     temporarily unified. Official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
                                                                                      Parallel market premium oscillate in the 10–75% range.
May 11, 1953–March 1959                    De facto band around US                    Band width is +/-5%. Official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                     Dollar.
April 1959–August 27, 1971                 De facto band around US Dollar             Band width is +/-2%. Premium in parallel market remained
                                                                                      in double digits through the spring of 1960. Official rate is
                                                                                      pegged to the US Dollar.
August 27, 1971–December 20, 1971          Managed floating
December 20, 1971–February 12, 1973        Peg to US Dollar
February 12, 1973–November 1977            De facto moving band around US             Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Dollar
December 1977–December 2001                Freely floating
Reference currencies are the DM, the Euro, the Pound Sterling, and the US Dollar.
                                                                    - 78 -

Jordan
Date                                       Classification:                             Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
November 1, 1927–September 21, 1931        Peg                                         Gold Standard. Palestine Pound replaces Egyptian Piastre.
September 21, 1931– July 1, 1950           Peg to Pound Sterling                       Foreign exchange controls are introduced on September
                                                                                       21, 1939.
July 1, 1950–August 17, 1971               Peg to Pound Sterling                       Dinar is introduced to replace Palestine Pound.
August 17, 1971–February 22, 1975          Peg to US Dollar
February 22, 1975–September 1988           Peg to SDR
October 1988–April 1989                    Freely falling/De facto crawling band       Band width +/- 5%.
                                           around US Dollar
May 1989–July 31, 1989                     De facto crawling band around US Dollar     Band width +/- 5%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                       currencies
July 31, 1989–February 17, 1990            De facto crawling band around US            Band width +/- 5%.
                                           Dollar/Dual Market
February 17, 1990–December 1992            De facto crawling band around US Dollar     Band width +/- 5%.
                                                                                       Officially pegged to a basket of currencies
March 1993–August 1995                     De facto crawling peg to US Dollar          Except for the 1988–1992 period parallel premiums have
                                                                                       been nil.
September 1995–December 2001              De facto peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currencies are the SDR, the Pound Sterling, and the US Dollar.
Kazakhstan
Date                                      Classification:                            Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–June 1996                    Freely falling/Freely floating/Multiple    Ruble is the legal tender until November 15, 1993 when
                                          exchange rates                             the tenge was issued as the national currency.
                                                                                     There is no price data before this date.
June 1996–December 2001                   De facto crawling band around US           Band width is +/-2%.
                                          Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Kenya
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1, 1922–September 14, 1966         Currency Board/Union                      East African Shilling
                                           Ped to
September 14, 1966–October 11, 1971        Peg Pound Sterling
October 11, 1971–October 27, 1975          Peg to US Dollar
October 27, 1975– December 1978            Peg to SDR
December, 1978– December 1986              Peg to SDR                                There are multiple exchange rates. De facto peg to the US
                                                                                     dollar until August 1981—frequent devaluations versus
                                                                                     SDR afterwards.
January 1987–September 1991                Managed floating                          Officially pegged to a currency basket
October 1991–May 1994                      Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual      Officially pegged to a currency basket. Parallel market
                                           Market                                    premium peaked at 110% on December 1992.
May 1994–December 1995                     Managed floating                          There are multiple rates.
January 1996–December 2001                 Managed floating
Notes: Tanzania and Uganda were part of this currency union. Reference currencies are the SDR, the Pound Sterling, and the US Dollar.
Kuwait
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1959–April 1, 1961                        Peg to Pound Sterling                    Persian Gulf Rupee replaces Indian Rupee
April 1, 1961–April 1969                    Dual Market/Currency board             Dinar is introduced and replaces Persian Gulf Rupee. No
                                                                                   data on parallel market available.
May 1969–June 24, 1972                    De facto peg to US Dollar/Dual           Parallel market premia is trivial.
                                          Market
June 24, 1972–March 17, 1975              Peg to US Dollar
March 17, 1975–April 19, 1984             De facto moving peg to US Dollar         Officially pegged to a basket of currencies
April 9, 1984–August 12,1984              De facto moving peg to US
                                          Dollar/Dual Market
August 12, 1984–December 2001               De facto Moving Peg to the US          Officially pegged to a basket of currencies,.
                                          Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                    - 79 -

Kyrgyz Republic
Date                                        Classification:                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January, 1991–November 1999                 Freely falling/Managed floating         There is no price data before this date.
December 1999–December 2001                 De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%.
                                            Dollar
1
  A twenty four–month window picks up the crawling band in late 1999 none is detected if the five–year window.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Lao
Date                                        Classification:                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
May 31, 1930–October 2, 1936                Peg                                      Gold Standard
October 2, 1936–December 1942               Peg to French Franc                      Abandonment of the Gold Standard
September 9, 1939                           Foreign Exchange Controls within
                                            Franc–Zone framework
January 1943–December 1945                  Peg to Yen
December 1945–May 5, 1955                   Peg to French Franc/Parallel Market
May 5, 1955–October 10, 1958                Parallel Market                          Kip replaces Indochina Piaster. There are multiple rates.
October 10, 1958–January 1, 1962            Peg to US Dollar
January 1, 1962–January 1, 1964             Managed floating/Parallel Market         The official rate is pegged and there are periodic
                                                                                     large devaluations.
January 1, 1964–April 3, 1972               Crawling band around US                  There are multiple rates. There are two currencies after
                                            Dollar/Parallel Market                   March 1969.
April 3, 1972– March 28, 1973               Crawling band around US Dollar/          Band width is +/-2%. Temporary unification of rates.
                                            Parallel Market
March 28, 1973–April 1988                   Managed floating/Parallel Market         There are multiple rates.
May 1988–May 1990                           Freely falling/Crawling band around      Band width is +/-2%.
                                            US Dollar/Dual Market
June 1990– September 31, 1995               Crawling band around US Dollar/Dual Band width is +/-2%.
                                            Market
September 31, 1995–December 1996            Crawling band around US                  Band width is +/-2%. There was a short–lived unification
                                            Dollar/Parallel Market                   of the rates.
January 1997–March, 2000                    Freely Falling/Crawling band around      Band width is +/-5%.
                                            US Dollar/Dual Market
April 2000–December 2001                    Dual Market                              If a 24–month window is used a crawling +/-2% band is
                                                                                     detected for this period for the official rate. There is no
                                                                                     data for the paralllel rate.
Notes: Reference currencies are the French Franc and the US Dollar. No data on parallel market is available.
Latvia
Date                                        Classification:                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January, 1991–January 1994                  Freely falling/Managed floating         There is no price data before this date. On July 20, 1992
                                                                                    the Lativian Ruble replaced the Russian Ruble. On October
                                                                                    19, 1993the Latvian lats became sole legal tender.
February 1994–August 1994                   Peg to SDR/Freely falling
September 1994–December 2001                Peg to SDR
Notes: Reference currencies are the SDR and the US Dollar.
Lebanon
Date                                        Classification:                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 24, 1928–October 1, 1936               Peg                                     Gold Standard
October 1, 1936–February 1944              Peg to French Franc                      Suspension of Gold standard
February 1944–October 1946                  Peg to Pound Sterling
October 1946–June 1950                      De facto band around US Dollar/Dual     Band width +/-5%. The Lebanese Pound replaces the
                                            Market                                  Lebanon–Syria Pound
July 1950–August 1975                       De facto band around US Dollar/Dual     Band width is +/-2%. Official rate is applied to some
                                            Market                                  government transactions only.
September 1975–February 1984                De facto band around US Dollar/Dual     Band width +/-5%.
                                            Market
March 1984–July 1991                        Freely falling/Freely floating          On February 1, 1985 a second rate was used for the
                                                                                    purpose of customs valuation of imports.
August 1991–February 1993                   De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
March 1993–December 2001                    De facto peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                    - 80 -

Lesotho
Date                                       Classification:                             Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1910–January 22, 1980                      Exchange arrangement with no                South African Pound—then South african Rand.
                                           separate legal tender
January 22, 1980–February 7, 1983          Peg to South African Rand/Dual              The Loti is introduced.
                                           Market
February 7, 1983–September 2, 1985         Peg to South African Rand                   No adjustments
September 2, 1985–March 13, 1995           Peg to South African Rand/Dual
                                           Market
March 13, 1995–December 2001               Peg to South African Rand                   No adjustments
Note: Lesotho is a member of the Southern Africa Customs Union, which also includes South Africa and Swaziland. Reference currency is the
South African Rand.
Liberia
Date                                       Classification:                             Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1822–January 1, 1944                       Exchange rate arrangement with no           The US Dollar and the Pound Sterling co–circulate as legal
                                           separate legal tender                       tender.
January 1, 1944–1988                       Exchange rate arrangement with no           US Dollar, a limited number of coins circulate as well.
                                           separate legal tender                       British currency ceased to be legal tender.
1988–October 30, 1997                      Parallel Market/Multiple exchange           US Dollar, there are two notes issued the Liberty notes
                                           rates                                       introduced in 1992 and the JJ Roberts notes printed in
                                                                                       1988–1992
October 30, 1997– August 31, 1998          Peg to US Dollar                            3,925% devaluation in the official rate and a re–peg until
                                                                                       August.
August 31, 1998–December 2001              De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
                                           but it is not possible to fully classify ar
                                           there is no inflation data and this
                                           period is a strong candidate for freely
                                           falling.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar. Price data is not available since 1991.
                                                                  - 81 -

Libyan Arab Republic
Date                                      Classification:                         Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 1927–1942                        Peg to US Dollar                        The French Franc and Pound Sterling also circulate. On
                                                                                  October 1, 1930 foreign exchange controls are introduced.
1942–March 24, 1952                       Exchange rate arrangement with no       The Algerian Francs, Egyptian Pound, and Military Lira
                                          separate legal tender.                  co–circulate.
March 24, 1952– March 24, 1952            Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market   The Syrian pound is introduced.
March 24, 1952–November 1955              Managed floating                        Check this vs. sterling
December 1955–December 15, 1971           Peg to Pound Sterling/Dual Market
December 15, 1971–April 18, 1981          Managed floating/Parallel Market        Libya ceases to be a member of the Sterling Area. The
                                                                                  official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
April 18, 1981–March 18, 1986             Managed floating/Parallel Market
March 18, 1986–May 1, 1986                Managed floating/Parallel Market        Band width is +/-5%. The Syrian Pound is Officially
                                                                                  pegged to the SDR.
May 1, 1986–March 1992                    De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is +/–
                                                                                  3.75%
March 1992–July 1992                      De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is +/–
                                                                                  5.5%
July 1992–August 1992                     De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is
                                                                                  +/-6.75%. The parallel market premium is consistently
                                                                                  above 400%.
August 1992–August 19, 1993               De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is
                                                                                  +/-8%. The parallel market premium is consistently above
                                                                                  400%.
August 19, 1993–November 1, 1994          De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is
                                                                                  +/-12.5%. The parallel market premium is consistently
                                                                                  above 400%.
November 1, 1994–October 31, 1998         De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity , width is +/-
                                                                                  21.5% The parallel market premium is consistently above
                                                                                  400%.
October 31, 1998–February 14, 1999        De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is
                                                                                  +/-38.75%.
February 14, 1999–December 2001           Dual Market                             Band width is +/- 5%. The official regime is a pre
                                                                                  announced band around a central SDR parity, width is
                                                                                  +/-38.75%. The parallel market was legalized.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Lithuania
Date                                        Classification:                        Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–April 1995                     Freely falling/Managed floating        On May 1, 1992 the Talonas was introduced as legal tender.
May 1995–April 1, 1994                      De facto peg to US Dollar
April 1, 1994–December 2001                 Peg to US Dollar/Currency board
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Luxembourg
Date                                        Classification:                       Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 1, 1935–May 1940                      Peg to Belgian Franc                  Capital controls are introduced
May 1940–January 20, 1941                  Peg to Reichsmark                      Capital controls intensified
January 20, 1941–September 4, 1944          Exchange rate arrangement with no     Reichsmark
                                            separate legal tender
September 4, 1944–July 18, 1955             Peg to US Dollar
July 18, 1955–March 5, 1990                De facto peg to DM/Dual Market         Small parallel market premium.
March 5, 1990–December 31, 1991             De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Currency union                        Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies.
                                                                     - 82 -

Macedonia
Date                                       Classification:                             Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1993–December 1994                 Freely falling                              There is no price data before this date.
January 1995–January 1, 1999               De facto crawling peg to DM
January 1, 1999–January 2000               De facto crawling peg to Euro
February 2000–December 2001                De facto band around Euro                   Band width +/-2%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM and the Euro.
Madagascar
Date                                       Classification:                             Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 12, 1900–June 6, 1925              Exchange rate arrangement with no           French Franc
                                           separate legal tender
June 6, 1925– February 8, 1944–            Peg to French Franc                         Only notes issued by Banque de Madagascar et des
                                                                                       Comores are sole legal tender.
September 9, 1939                           Exchange controls are introduced
                                            within Franc zone
February 8, 1944– December 26, 1945         Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling        On March 19, 1941 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26, 1945–December 1946             Peg to French Franc                        Return to Franc Zone. CFA Franc is introduced.
January 1947–December 1948                  Peg to French Franc/Freely falling
January 1949–July 1, 1963                   Peg to French Franc
July 1, 1963–September 4, 1971              Peg to French Franc                        Malagasy Franc is introduced.
September 4, 1971–August 6, 1973            Dual Market                                Parallel market data is not available for this period.
August 6, 1971–April 2, 1982                Peg to French Franc
April 2, 1982–June 1985                     De facto crawling band around French       Band width is +/-2%.
                                            Franc
July 1985–April 1994                        Managed floating                      Officially pegged to a basket of currencies, frequent
                                                                                  adjustments
May 1994–October 1995                    Freely falling/Managed floating          Despite the flexibility of the official rate, there is a parallel
                                                                                  market with premium in double digits.
November 1995–December 2001              Freely floating                          See comment above.
Notes: Formerly Malagasy Republic. Reference currencies are the French Franc and US Dollar.
Malawi
Date                                     Classification:                          Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1891–1940                                Exchange arrangement with no             Pound Sterling
                                         separate legal tender.
1940– April 1, 1956                      Peg to Pound Sterling/Currency Board Southern Rhodesia Pound replaces British Pound
April 1, 1956–November 16, 1964          Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market    Rhodesia and Nyasaland Pound replace Southern Rodesia
                                                                                  Pound.
November 16, 1964–February 15, 1971      Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market    Malawi Pound is introduced replacing the Rhodesia and
                                                                                  Nyasaland Pound.
February 15, 1971–November 19, 1973      Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel Market    Kwacha is Introduced to replace Malawi pound.
November 19, 1973- June 9, 1975          Managed floating                         Official rate is pegged to a basket of undisclosed
                                                                                  currencies.
June 9, 1975–January 17, 1984            Managed floating                         Officially Pegged to SDR. Parallel premiums over 100% in
                                                                                  1977 and again in 1982.
January 17, 1984–January 1994            Freely floating                          Officially pegged to a basket of currencies
February 1994–December 1994              Freely falling/Freely floating
January 1995–July 1997                   Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling          Since early 1996 parallel market premia is in single digits.
August 1997–August 1999                  Freely falling/Managed floating
September 1999–December 2001             Managed floating
Notes: Formerly Nyasaland. Reference currencies are the Pound sterling, the SDR and the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 83 -

Malaysia
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 25, 1903–February 1906               Peg                                      Silver
February 1906–February 15, 1942           Peg to Pound Sterling                    On September 18, 1939 foreign exchange controls are
                                                                                   introduced.
February 15, 1942–September 2, 1945         Exchange rate arrangement with no      Japanese military Yen (Gumpyo) are declared legal tender.
                                            separate legal tender.
April 1, 1946–June 12, 1967                 Peg to Pound Sterling                 The Straits Dollar became known as the Malayan Dollar.
June 12, 1967–September 5, 1975             Peg to Pound Sterling                 Malaysian Dollar, since renamed Ringgit, is introduced.
September 5, 1975–July 1997                 De facto moving band around US        Band is +/-2%. Officially the ringgit is pegged to a basket
                                            Dollar                                of currencies
August 1997–September 30, 1998              Freely floating
September 30, 1998–December 2001            Peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currencies are the Pound sterling and the US Dollar.
Mali
Central Bank of West African States are: Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                        Classification:                       Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901- February 2, 1943             Peg to French Franc                   Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                  notes. Exchange controls are introduced in Franc zone on
                                                                                  September 9, 1939.
February 2, 1943– December 26, 1945         Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling   On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945–January 26, 1948          Peg to French Franc/Currency union    Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
January 26, 1948–September 20, 1949         Dual Market                           There is no parallel market data for this period.
September 20, 1949–July 2, 1962             Peg to French Franc/Currency union
July 2, 1962–February 1967                  Peg to US Dollar                      Mali Franc replaces CFA Franc with Mali Franc,
                                                                                  withdraws from Franc zone.
February 1967–September 9, 1971             Peg to French Franc/Currency union
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974            De facto Peg to the French Franc/Dual Small parallel market premia.
                                            Market
March 21, 1974–January 1, 1999              Peg to French Franc                   Mali joined WAMU on June 1, 1984.
January 1, 1999-December 2001               Peg to Euro
Notes: reference currencies are the French franc and US Dollar.
Malta
Date                                        Classification:                       Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 16, 1915–July 1949                     Exchange rate arrangement with no     Pound Sterling
                                            separate legal tender
July 1949–July 8, 1972                      Peg to Pound Sterling                 The Malta Pound (also known as Malta Lira) is introduced.
                                                                                  Pound sterling no longer legal tender.
July 8, 1972–December 1977                  Moving band around Pound sterling     Pound Sterling, narrow. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                  currencies
January 1978–January 1, 1999                Moving band around DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Moving band around Euro
Notes: reference currencies are the Pound Sterling, US Dollar, DM, and Euro.
Marshall Islands
Date                                        Classification:                       Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1885-1919                                   Exchange rate arrangement with no     German Mark
                                            separate legal tender
1919-1947                                   Exchange rate arrangement with no     Yen
                                            separate legal tender
1947-2001                                   Exchange rate arrangement with no     US Dollar
                                            separate legal tender
                                                                   - 84 -

Mauritania
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 21, 1851                         Peg to French Franc                      Banque du Senegal began to issue bank notes.
June 29, 1901                             Peg to French Franc                      Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                   notes.
September 9, 1939                         Exchange controls are introduced in
                                          Franc zone
February 2, 1943– December 26, 1945       Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling      On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26, 1945–September 1, 1973       Peg to French Franc/Parallel Market      CFA Franc is introduced.
September 1, 1971–June 29, 1973           De facto peg to French Franc/Dual        Small parallel market premium.
                                          Market
June 29, 1973–January 22, 1974            Peg to French Franc/Parallel Market      The introduction of the Ouguiya unified the market.
January 22, 1974–October 1983             De facto crawling band around US         Band width +/-2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                   currencies
November 1983–October 18, 1992            De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                   currencies. Premia in parallel market reached 257% in
                                                                                   August 1992—prior to the October devaluation.
October 18, 1992–August 1994              De facto crawling peg to US
                                          Dollar/Dual Market
September 1994–December 31, 1995          De facto crawling band around US         Band width +/-2%. Since May 1995 parallel market
                                          Dollar/Dual Market                       premium is in single digits.

December 31, 1995–December, 2001           De facto crawling band around US        Band width +/-2%.
                                           Dollar                                  Markets are unified.
1
  During September 28, 1978–March 4, 1980, linked to the French Franc for banknote transactions.
Notes: Formerly Senegal. Reference currencies are the French Franc and US Dollar.
Mauritius
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1878–1934                                  Exchange rate arrangement with no       Indian Rupee
                                           separate legal tender
1934– November 21, 1967                    Peg to Pound Sterling/Currency board The Mauritian Rupee was introduced.
November 21, 1967–January 5, 1976          Dual Markets                            Link to Pound Sterling is maintained. There is no data for
                                                                                   the free market rate for this period.
January 5, 1976–May 1982                   De facto crawling band around US        Officially pegged to SDR until February 28, 1983. Band
                                           Dollar for official rate/Dual Market    width is +/-2%. Parallel market data begins in 1985.
June 1982–January 1993                     De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                           Dollar                                  currencies
November 1992–December 2001                De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%
                                           Dollar
Notes: Reference currencies are the Pound Sterling, the SDR and the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 85 -

Mexico
Date                                      Classification:                        Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
July 1933–May 1945                        Peg to US Dollar                       Premium in parallel market is nil.
May 1945-December 1946                    Peg to US Dollar/freely falling        Premium in parallel market is nil until March 1976—by
                                                                                 August it had reached 100%.
January 1947–September 1, 1976            Peg to US Dollar                       Premium in parallel market is nil until March 1976—by
                                                                                 August it had reached 100%.
September 1, 1976–February 1977           Managed floating
March 1977–April 1981                     De facto peg to US Dollar
May 1981–January 1982                     De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
February 18, 1982–March 1 1988            Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual   The parallel market premia oscillates in the 15–100%
                                          Market                                 range.
March 1, 1988–December 1988               Freely falling/Peg to US Dollar/Dual   Official rate is pegged during this period. Parallel market
                                          Market                                 premium has declined to low single digits.
December 1988–November 11, 1991           Crawling Peg/Dual Market
November 11, 1991–April 1992              De facto crawling peg to US Dollar     The rates were unified in November 1991. The official
                                                                                 arrangement was an ever widening crawling band (see
                                                                                 below).
May 1992–January 1994                     De facto peg to US Dollar              Officially three is a band. The annualized rate of crawl of
                                                                                 the upper limit of the band is 2.4% through October 20,
                                                                                 1992 and 4.7% through June 30, 1993.
February 1994–December 22, 1994           Pre announced crawling band around     Pre–announced band becomes binding
                                          US Dollar
December 22 1994–March 1996               Freely falling/Freely floating         In December 1994 the parallel market premia jumped to
                                                                                 27% from single digits.
April 1996–December 2001                  Managed floating
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Moldova
Date                                      Classification:                        Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–February 1995                Multiple Rates/Freely falling          There is no price data before this date. On November 29,
                                                                                 1993 the Leu replaces the Ruble.
March 1995–May 1998                       De facto Peg
June 1998–February 2000                   Freely falling/Managed floating
March 2000–December 2001                  De facto peg
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Micronesia, Federated States
Date                                      Classification:                        Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1991–February 1995                Multiple Rates/Freely falling          There is no price data before this date. On November 29,
                                                                                 1993 the Leu replaces the Ruble.
March 1995–May 1998                       De facto Peg
June 1998–February 2000                   Freely falling/Managed floating
March 2000–December 2001                  De facto peg
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Mongolia
Date                                      Classification:                        Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
February 1991–May 27, 1993                Freely floating/Dual Market            There is no price data before this date
May 27. 1993–August 1997                  Freely falling/Managed floating
September 1997–November 2001              De facto crawling band around the US   Band width is +/-2%. The Mongolian Tugrik was renamed
                                          Dollar                                 Togrog on December 14, 1998.
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Monaco
Date                                      Classification:                        Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1925-December 2001                        Exchange rate arrangement with no      French Franc
                                          separate legal tender
                                                                    - 86 -

Morocco
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 30,1924–1939                      Peg to French Franc                       Capital controls are introduced in Franc–Zone
November 1942–December 6, 1944             Peg to Pound Sterling and US Dollar
December 6, 1944–December 1944             Peg to French Franc                       Return to Franc Zone.
January 1945–December 1948                 Peg to French Franc/Freely falling
January 1949–October 17, 1959              Peg to French Franc
October 17, 1959–May 17, 1973              Peg to French Franc                       The Dirham replaced the Moroccan Franc
May 17, 1973–December 1985                 Moving band around French Franc           Band width is +/-2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                     currencies. Dual rates, parallel market premia is trivial.
January 1986–January 1, 1999                Moving band around                       Band width is +/-2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                            French Franc                             currencies.
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Moving band around                       Band width is +/-2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                            Euro                                     currencies.
Notes. The reference currencies are the French Franc, the US Dollar, and the Euro.
Myanmar
Date                                        Classification:                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 1, 1937–1943                          Peg to Pound Sterling                    Burmese Rupee is introduced. Indian Rupee is no longer
                                                                                     legal tender after 1939.
1943–1945                                  Peg to Yen
1945–July,1952                             Peg to Pound Sterling
July 1952–July 1972                        Peg to Pound Sterling                     Kyat replaces Burmese Rupee
August 1972–July 1, 1974                   Peg to Pound Sterling/Freely falling      There are multiple rates. These are taxes on the purchases
                                                                                     of Sterling and US Dollar.
July 1, 1974–January 25, 1975              Freely falling/Managed
                                           floating/Parallel Market
January 25, 1975–February 1976             Freely Falling/ Moving band around        The official rate for the Kyat is linked to the SDR.
                                           US Dollar/Parallel market
March 1976–April 1983                      Moving band around US                     Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar/Parallel market
May 1983–March 1986                        Managed floating/Parallel market          The official rate is pegged to the SDR. Parallel market
                                                                                     premium oscillates in the 20–35% range.
April 1986–March 1988                      Moving band around US                     The official rate is pegged to the SDR. There is break in
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                    the data for the parallel rate from April 1987 to December
                                                                                     1988.
April 1988–May 1991                        Freely falling/Moving band around US      Band width is +/-5%. Parallel market premia double
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                    during this period from about 45% to 90%. Although the
                                                                                     official rate fas not be devalued versus the SDR since 1977
                                                                                     there are periodic bouts of inflation.
June 1991–December 1992                    Moving band around US                     Band width is +/-5%. Official rate is pegged to the SDR
                                           Dollar/Parallel market
January 1993–January, 1994                 Freely falling/Moving band around US      Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar/Parallel market
February 1994–July 1996                    De facto moving band around US            Band width is +/-5%. Official rate is pegged to the SDR.
                                           Dollar/Parallel market
August 1996–January 1999                   Freely falling/De facto moving band       The official rate remains pegged to the SDR.
                                           around US Dollar/Dual Market              Parallel market premia is consistently above 100% and
                                                                                     reached 294% in July 1997. An unofficial parallel market
                                                                                     also exits.
February 1999–December 2001                Dual Market                               There is no data for the period for the parallel rate.
                                                                                     Officially pegged to the SDR. An unofficial parallel market
                                                                                     also exits.
Notes: Formerly Burma. Reference currencies are US Dollar and SDR.
                                                                    - 87 -

Nepal
Date                                       Classification:                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
19th century–1945                          Exchange rate arrangement with no        Indian Rupee
                                           separate legal tender.
1945–August 1958                           Managed floating                         First issuance of the Nepalese Rupee. Indian Rupee is also
                                                                                    accepted as legal tender.
August 1958–October 17, 1966               Peg to Indian Rupee
October 17, 1966–December 1973             Peg to Indian Rupee                      Indian Rupee is no longer accepted as legal tender.
January 1974–March 30, 1978                Peg to Indian Rupee                      There are multiple rates.
March 30, 1978–September 19, 1981          De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. There are multiple rates. An official
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                       rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
September 19, 1981–March 4, 1992           De facto crawling band                   Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Around US Dollar
March 4, 1992–February 12, 1993            De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. An official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                       Dollar November 1992.
February 12, 1993–June 1995                Peg to US Dollar                         While the official rate is pegged, parallel market premia
                                                                                    oscillate in the 10–20% range.
July 1995–December 2001                    De facto crawling band                   Band width is +/-2%. There are sub periods where the
                                           around US Dollar                         exchange rate is pegged interspersed with moderate
                                                                                    devaluations. Since September 1997 parallel market premia
                                                                                    have remained in single digits.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and Indian Rupee.
Netherlands
Date                                       Classification:                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
May 10, 1940–September 14, 1944            Peg to Reichsmark
September 14, 1944–August 1950             Managed floating/Parallel market         The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar. Parallel
                                                                                    market premium peaks at 154% on November 1946 and
                                                                                    remains in double digits through early 1952.
September 1950–November 1952               De facto band around US Dollar           Band width is +/-2%.
December 1952–May 9, 1971                  Peg to US Dollar
May 9, 1971–May 1974                       De facto crawling band around DM         Band width is +/-2%.
June 1974–February 1983                    De facto crawling peg around DM
March 1983–January 1, 1999                 De facto peg around DM                    One currency crash versus the dollar on March 1991, none
                                                                                     versus the DM.
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Currency union                            Euro
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
New Zealand
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 21,1931–July 10, 1967            Peg to Pound Sterling                     Adherence to Sterling Area, On December 1938 foreign
                                                                                     exchange controls were introduced. Parallel market premia
                                                                                     is trivial since the data was collected beginning in 1947.
July 10, 1967–December 23,1971             Peg to Pound Sterling                     New Zealand Dollar replaces New Zealand Pound
December 23,1971–July 9, 1973              Peg to US Dollar                          Parallel market premia never exceeded 4% right after
                                                                                     WWII and has been nil since.
July 9, 1973– March 4, 1985                De facto moving band around               Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Australian Dollar
March 4, 1985–December 2001                Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the Australian Dollar, and the Pound Sterling.
                                                                  - 88 -

Nicaragua
Date                                     Classification:                         Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1931–October 20, 1950            Peg to US Dollar
October 20, 1950–March 1, 1963           De facto band around US Dollar/Dual     There are multiple rates. Band width is +/-5%.
                                         Market
March 1, 1963–December 1969              Peg to US Dollar
January 1970–November 16, 1974           De facto band around US                 There are multiple rates. Band width is +/-2%.
                                         Dollar/Parallel market
November 16, 1974–September 8, 1978      Peg to US Dollar
September 8, 1978–April 6, 1979          De facto band around US Dollar /Dual    Band width is +/-2%.
                                         Market
April 6, 1979–August 1982                Freely floating/Dual Market             There are multiple rates. The parallel market premium
                                                                                 oscillates between 20–300%.
September 1982–April 30, 1991            Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual     There are multiple rates. The period from June 1986–July
                                         Markets                                 1987 registers as a “hyperfloat.” On November 1987 the
                                                                                 parallel premium hit its historic high of 11,329%. On
                                                                                 February 15, 1988 the new Cordoba replaced the old
                                                                                 Cordoba. Inflation peaks at 63, 776%.
April 30, 1991–February 1992             Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         In the early stages of the peg inflation was as high as
                                                                                 24,293%.
March 1992–December 1992                 Peg to US Dollar
January 1993–December 2001               Crawling peg to US Dollar               Since 1995, the parallel market premia has all but
                                                                                 disappeared.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Niger
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901- February 2, 1943             Peg to French Franc                 Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                notes. Exchange controls are introduced in Franc zone on
                                                                                September 9, 1939.
February 2, 1943– December 26. 1945         Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945– May 12, 1962             Peg to French Franc                 Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
September 20, 1949–                         Peg to French Franc
May 12, 1962–September 9, 1971              Peg to French Franc                 Creation of the Central Bank of West African States
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974            De facto peg to French Franc/Dual   Low parallel premium.
                                            Market
March 21, 1974–                             Peg to French Franc
January 1994–January 1995                   Peg to French Franc/Freely falling  One 100% devaluation.
January 1995–January 1, 1999                Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement at a later date.
Note: Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro
                                                                     - 89 -

Nigeria
Date                                      Classification:                          Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1916–July 1, 1959                         Peg to Pound Sterling/Currency board     West Africa Pound is introduced.
July 1, 1959– August 23, 1971             Peg to Pound Sterling                    Nigerian Pound is issued to replace West Africa Pound.
August 23, 1971–November 1, 1971          Managed floating/Dual Market             The official rate is pegged to the Pound.
November 1, 1971–January 1, 1973          Managed floating/Parallel market         The link to the Pound is severed and the official rate is now
                                                                                   pegged to the US Dollar. The official dual market was
                                                                                   abolished but an active parallel market continued.
January 1, 1973–April 1, 1974             Managed floating/Parallel market         The Naira replaces the Nigerian Pound. The link to the US
                                                                                   Dollar for the official rate is discontinued and the official
                                                                                   rate is a pegged to the a basket of currencies. Parallel
                                                                                   market premia are in the 30–100% range.
April 1, 1974–February 1983               Managed floating                          The Naira is officially pegged to a basket of currencies
April 1983–September 1984                 Freely falling/Managed                   From August 1983 to May 1984, the official rate is pegged
                                          floating/Parallel market                 to the US Dollar. On December 1983 the parallel market
                                                                                   premium reached 457%.
September 29, 1985–January 1987           Managed floating/Dual Market             The official rate applied to only some government
                                                                                   transactions.
February 1987–December, 1989              Freely floating/Freely falling/Dual
                                          Market
January 1990–May 1991                     Managed floating/Dual Market
June 1991–March 1996                      Freely falling/Managed floating//Dual    The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
                                          Market
April 1996–December 2001                  Managed floating/Dual Market             Through December 1998, the official rate is pegged to the
                                                                                   US Dollar. The parallel market premium is consistently
                                                                                   above 250% through December 1998. On January 1999 the
                                                                                   Naira was devalued by 291%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Pound Sterling.
Norway
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 28, 1931–August 29, 1939         Peg to Pound Sterling                   Suspension of gold standard, joined the Sterling Area.
April 1940–May 16, 1945                    Peg to Reichsmark
May 16, 1945–March 1954                    De facto band around US                 Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                  Dollar. Parallel market premium climbs to 86% on
                                                                                   December 1948.
April 1954–April 1956                     De facto band around US                  Band width is +/-2%. Substantially lower premium in the
                                          Dollar/Parallel market                   parallel market in this period—the peak is 13%.
May 1956–1967                             Peg to US Dollar
1967– March 19, 1973                      Peg to US Dollar                         A second rate—the Investment Dollar Krone is introduced.
March 19, 1973–June 1982                  Moving band around DM                    Band width is +/-2%.
July 1982–June 1987                       Managed floating                         Officially pegged to a basket of currencies
July 1987–December 10, 1992               Moving band around DM                    Band width is +/-2%. December 1992 does not register as
                                                                                   a currency crash.
December 10, 1992–December 2001          Managed floating
Notes: Specifics on the common margins (snake) agreement, EMS, etc. are available from the detailed chronologies. Reference currencies are
the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
                                                                     - 90 -

Pakistan
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 1, 1948–January 15, 1959             Peg to Pound Sterling                     Pakistan Rupee is introduced. On June 1954 premium in
                                                                                     parallel market reached 103%.
January 15, 1959– September 17, 1971       Multiple rates/Parallel Market            The Rupee is linked to the Pound Sterling
September 17, 1971–January 8, 1982         Peg to US Dollar/Parallel Market          In December 1971 the parallel market premium peaks at
                                                                                     212%.
January 8, 1982–January 1984               De facto crawling peg to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market
February 1984–August 1989                  De facto crawling band around the US      Band width is +/-2%. If the parallel rate is used the band
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                    width is +/- %5%.
September 1989–April 1991                  De facto crawling peg/Parallel Market
May 1991–April 1994                        De facto crawling band around the US      Band width is +/–2%. If the parallel rate is used the band
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                    width is +/- %5%. From August 1993 through May 1998
                                                                                     the parallel market premium is in single digits.
May 1994–July 22, 1998                     De facto crawling peg/Parallel Market     A more precise description of the post–November 1996
                                                                                     period is mini pegs lasting a few moths interspersed with a
                                                                                     regular devaluation.
July 22, 1998–May 19, 1999                 De facto crawling band/Dual Market        Band width is +/-2% (on the basis of the parallel market
                                                                                     rate). There are multiple rates.
May 19, 1999–August 2000                   De facto crawling peg/Parallel Market
September 2000–December 2001                De facto crawling band/Parallel Market   Band width is +/-2%.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Panama
Date                                        Classification:                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 27, 1904–December, 2001                Exchange rate arrangement with no        US Dollar
                                            separate legal tender
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Paraguay
Date                                        Classification:                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1903–March 1923                             Peg to Argentine Gold Peso
March 1923–October 5, 1943                  Peg to Argentine Paper Peso
October 5, 1943–December 18, 1946           Peg to Argentine Paper Peso              Guarani replaces Paraguayan Peso
December 18, 1946–November 5, 1949          Peg to US Dollar
November 5, 1949–August 12, 1957            De facto band around US Dollar           Band width is +/-5%. There are multiple exchange rates. In
                                                                                     September 1951 the parallel premium rose to 500%.
August 12, 1957–October 1960               De facto peg to the US Dollar/Dual        Parallel market premium in single digits during this period.
                                           Market
October 1960–July 23, 1973                 De facto band around US                   Band width is +/- 2%. The official rate is pegged to US
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                    Dollar.
July 23, 1973–August 1981                  De facto band around US                   Band width is +/- 5%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market
September 1981–March 1985                  Managed floating/Parallel market          Official rate is still pegged to the US Dollar. Parallel
                                                                                     market premia begins its ascent in late 1982 and reaches
                                                                                     257% ion October 1983.
April 1985–April 1986                      Freely falling/Freely floating/Parallel   There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           market
May 1986–February 27, 1989                 De facto crawling band around US          There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/–5%.
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                    The peg of the official rate to the US Dollar is terminated.
February 27, 1989–January 1991             Freely falling/De facto crawling band     Unification and float. Band width is +/-5%. Despite
                                           around US Dollar                          unification parallel market premia do not decline into
                                                                                     single digits until March 1996.
February 1991–June 1999                    De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
July 1999–December 2001                     De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%, PPP rule
                                            Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                    - 91 -

Peru
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
February 1930–October 1946                 Peg to US Dollar
November 1946-September 7, 1948            Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling
September 7, 1948–May 1959                 De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/- 5%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           Dollar                                    An official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
May 1959–May 17, 1960                      Peg to US Dollar                          There are multiple exchange rates.
May 17, 1960–October 5, 1967               Peg to US Dollar
October 5, 1967–June 1971                  De facto band around US Dollar/Dual       Band width is +/- 5%. On May 16, 1970 capital controls
                                           Market                                    are reintroduced. An official rate is pegged to the US
                                                                                     Dollar.
July 1971–August 1975                      Dual Market/Freely floating               An official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
September 1975–October 7, 1977             Freely falling/Freely floating            There are multiple exchange rates.
October 7, 1977–December 13, 1977          Freely falling/Freely floating            There is a short–lived unification of exchange rates.
May 10, 1978–February 29, 1984             Freely Falling/Freely floating/Parallel   There are multiple exchange rates. There was a short–lived
                                           market                                    unification of rates in 1982. There was a pre–announced
                                                                                     crawling peg during this period.
February 29, 1984- August 2, 1986          Freely falling/Freely floating            The crawling peg policy is abandoned. There are multiple
                                                                                     rates. An official rate is pegged to the US Dollar from
                                                                                     September 1985 to December 1986 and again from January
                                                                                     1988 to August 1988. On February 1, 1985 the Inti replaced
                                                                                     the Sol.
August 2, 1986–December 2, 1986            Freely falling/Freely floating            Yet another short–lived unification.
December 2, 1986–August 9, 1990            Freely falling/Freely floating            There are multiple exchange rates. Parallel market
                                                                                     premium hits 1, 067% in August 1988—September 1988
                                                                                     classifies as a “hyperfloat.” The 12–month rate of inflation
                                                                                     reaches 12, 378%.
August 9, 1990–November 1993               Freely falling/Freely floating            Unification of rates.
November 1993–March 1999                   De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-2%. Parallel market premium in single
                                           Dollar                                    digits.
April 1999–December 2001                   De facto peg to US Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Philippines
Date                                        Classification:                          Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 2, 1903–1942                          Peg to US Dollar
1942–1945                                   Peg to Yen/Freely falling                Circulation of Gumpyo, or Military Yen
1945–                                       Managed floating                         The official rate is re–pegged at the same US Dollar parity
                                                                                     as in 1903.
March 1950–April 25, 1960                  De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. The official rate remains pegged to
                                           Dollar                                    the US Dollar.
April 25, 1960–November 7, 1965            De facto peg to US Dollar                 There are multiple exchange rates. After reaching a peak of
                                                                                     124% in January 1962, parallel market premia settles in
                                                                                     single digits.
November 7, 1965–February 21, 1970         Peg to US Dollar
February 21, 1971–December 31, 1972        De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Dual Market                        Dollar.
December 31, 1972–September 1983           De facto crawling band around US          Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel Market                    Dollar.
October 1983–October 15, 1984              Freely falling/Managed                    The official rate remains pegged to the US Dollar. Parallel
                                           floating/parallel market                  market premia reaches 50% on January 1984, From June
                                                                                     1984 to October there were multiple rates.
October 14, 1984–February 1985             Freely falling/Managed floating           The Philippine peso’s official link with the US Dollar is
                                                                                     ended.
March 1985–April, 1992                      De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
May 1992–April 1993                         De facto band around US Dollar           Band width is +/-2%.
May 1993–August 1995                        De facto band around US Dollar           Band width is +/-5%.
September, 1995–June 1997                   De facto peg to US Dollar
July 1997–December 1997                     Freely falling/Freely floating           Parallel market premia peaked at 17% on July 1997.
December 1997–December 2001                 Managed floating
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                       - 92 -

Poland
Date                                          Classification:                        Comments
                                              Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1988– March 15, 1989                  Freely falling/Freely floating         There are multiple rates.
March 15, 1989–January 1, 1990                Freely falling/ Freely floating/Dual   Parallel market is legalized.
                                              Market
January 1, 1990–May 17, 1991                  Freely falling/Dual Market             Official rate is pegged to US Dollar.
May 17, 1991–April 1993                       Freely falling/Dual Market             Official rate is set as a pre announced crawling peg to US
                                                                                     Dollar.
May 1993–May 16, 1995                         Dual Market                            Official rate is set as a pre announced crawling peg to US
                                                                                     Dollar. There is no parallel market data for this period.
May 16, 1995–February, 25, 1998               De facto crawling band around Euro     De facto band width is +/-5%. There is a pre announced
                                                                                     crawling band around the DM and US Dollar that is
                                                                                     +/- 7%.
February 25, 1998–October 29, 1998            De facto crawling band around Euro     De facto band width is +/-5%. There is a pre announced
                                                                                     crawling band around the DM and US Dollar that is
                                                                                     +/- 10%.
October 29, 1998–March 24, 1999               De facto crawling band around          De facto band width is +/-5%. There is a pre announced
                                              DM/Euro                                crawling band around the DM and US Dollar that is
                                                                                     +/- 12.5%.
March 24, 1999–April 12, 2000                 De facto crawling band around Euro     De facto band width is +/-5%. There is a pre announced
                                                                                     crawling band around the DM and US Dollar that is
                                                                                     +/- 15%.
April 12, 2000–December 2001               Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
Portugal
Date                                      Classification:                            Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 28, 1928– November 14, 1939         Peg to Pound Sterling
November 14, 1939–March 19, 1973          Peg to US Dollar
March 19, 1973–February 1981               De facto crawling band around DM          Band width +/-5%. The parallel premia shot up in August
                                                                                     1975 to 67% and again in February 1977ahead of large
                                                                                     depreciations.
February 1981–August 1993                  De facto crawling band around DM          Band width is +/-2%.
September 1992–June 1993                  De facto crawling peg to DM
July 1993–January 1, 1999                 De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001             Currency union                             Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
Romania
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
July 1957–January 1990                     Dual Market                               There are multiple exchange rates—25 rates were applied to
                                                                                     exports alone. On July 1, 1983 the number of rates was
                                                                                     reduced to two.
February 1990–November 11, 1991            Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual       CPI data available only from October 1989
                                           Market
November 11, 1991–March 2001               Freely falling/Freely floating
April 2001–December 2001                   De facto crawling band                    Band width is +/-5%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the DM, the Euro, and the US Dollar.
Russian Federation
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January, 1992–June 1, 1995                 Freely falling/ Market                    There is no price data before this date.
July 6, 1995–July 1996                     Freely falling/ Market                    Pre announced crawling band around US Dollar for the
                                                                                     official rate.
August 1996–August 17, 1998                Dual Market                               Pre announced crawling band around US Dollar for the
                                                                                     official rate.
August 17, 1998–November 1999              Freely falling/Dual Market                The band was widened on August 17 and eliminated on
                                                                                     September 2. On June 29, 1999 the two rates are unified
                                                                                     temporarily.
December 1999–December 2001                   De facto crawling band around US       Band width +/-2%. There are multiple rates.
                                              Dollar
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                   - 93 -

Saint Kitts and Nevis
East Caribbean Central Bank States are: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935-October 6, 1965                        Peg to Pound Sterling               British West Indies Dollar is introduced. It is issued by the
                                                                                East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
October 6, 1965-July 7, 1976                Peg to Pound Sterling               East Caribbean Dollar replaces British West Indies Dollar.
July 7, 1976-December 2001                  Peg to US Dollar                    ON October 1, 1983 the East Caribbean Central Bank
                                                                                replaces the East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Saint Lucia
East Caribbean Central Bank States are: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935-October 6, 1965                        Peg to Pound Sterling               British West Indies Dollar is introduced. It is issued by the
                                                                                East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
October 6, 1965-July 7, 1976                Peg to Pound Sterling               East Caribbean Dollar replaces British West Indies Dollar.
July 7, 1976-December 2001                  Peg to US Dollar                    ON October 1, 1983 the East Caribbean Central Bank
                                                                                replaces the East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
Notes: Reference currency is US Dollar.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
East Caribbean Central Bank States are: Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1935-October 6, 1965                        Peg to Pound Sterling               British West Indies Dollar is introduced. It is issued by the
                                                                                East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
October 6, 1965-July 7, 1976                Peg to Pound Sterling               East Caribbean Dollar replaces British West Indies Dollar.
July 7, 1976-December 2001                  Peg to US Dollar                    ON October 1, 1983 the East Caribbean Central Bank
                                                                                replaces the East Caribbean Monetary Authority.
San Marino
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1, 1999                             Exchange rate arrangement with no   Italian Lira. Some local coins were minted in 186, 1898,
                                            separate legal tender               1925 and 1932.
January 1, 1999-December 2001               Exchange rate arrangement with no   Euro
                                            separate legal tender
Saudi Arabia
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 22, 1928–June 4, 1958               Peg to British gold Sovereign
June 4, 1958–January 8, 1960                De facto band around US Dollar/Dual Band width is +/- 2%. Since December 1959 the parallel
                                            Market                              market premia is nil—prior to that time its oscillated in the
                                                                                20–30% range.
January 8, 1960–March 15, 1975              Peg to US Dollar
March 15, 1975–December 2001                De facto US Dollar peg              Officially the Riyal is pegged to the SDR.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the SDR.
Senegal
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                        Classification:                     Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901- February 2, 1943             Peg to French Franc                 Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                notes. Exchange controls are introduced in Franc zone on
                                                                                September 9, 1939.
February 2, 1943– December 26. 1945         Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945– May 12, 1962             Peg to French Franc                 Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
May 12, 1962–September 9, 1971              Peg to French Franc                 Creation of the Central Bank of West African States
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974            De facto peg to French Franc/Dual   Very low parallel market premium.
                                            Market
March 21, 1974–December 1993                Peg to French Franc
January 1994–November 1994                  Peg to French Franc/Freely falling  One 100% devaluation.
December 1994–January 1, 1999               Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001               Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement at a later date.
Note: Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro
                                                                    - 94 -

Singapore
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
February 1906–June 25, 1972                Peg to Pound Sterling                   Malayan/Straits Dollar
June 12, 1967–June 25, 1972                Peg to Pound Sterling                   Introduction of the independent and separate currencies of
                                                                                   Singapore, Malaysia, and Brunei
June 25, 1972–June 21, 1973                Peg to US Dollar
June 21, 1973–November 1998                De facto moving band around the US      Band width is +/-2%. Officially adjusted on the basis of a
                                           Dollar                                  basket of currencies
December 1998–December 2001                Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are is the US Dollar and theYen.
Slovak Republic
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
February 8, 1993–March 1993                Freely falling                          The Slovak Koruna is introduced.
April, 1993–July 31,1996                   De facto crawling band around DM        Band width is +/–2%
July 31, 1996–January 1, 1997                                                      De facto band width is +/-2%. Pre announced crawling
                                                                                   band is +/-5% wide. The official basket also includes the
                                                                                   US Dollar with a lower weight than the DM.
January 1, 1997–September 1997             De facto crawling band around the       De facto band width is +/-2%. Pre announced crawling
                                           DM                                      band is +/-7% wide.
September 1997–October 1, 1998             De facto crawling band around DM        De facto band width is +/-5%. Pre announced crawling
                                                                                   band is +/-7% wide.
October 1, 1998–December 2001              Managed floating                        100% of the observations remain within a +/-5% band of
                                                                                   the DM/Euro.
Notes: Reference currencies are the DM, the Euro, and the US Dollar.
Slovenia
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 1991–February 1992                 Freely falling                          There is no price data before this date. The Tolar is
                                                                                   introduced to replace the Yugoslav Dinar.
March 1992–March 1993                      Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/- 2%.
                                           around DM
April 1993–January 1, 1999                 De facto crawling band around DM        Band width is +/- 2%.
October 1996–December 2001                 De facto crawling band around Euro      Band width is +/- 2%.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
South Africa
Date                                        Classification:                        Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1920–February 14, 1961                      Peg to Pound Sterling                  The South African Pound is introduced.
February 14, 1961–August 23, 1971           Peg to Pound Sterling                  The Rand is introducing to replace the Pound.
August 23, 1971–December 22, 1971           Peg to US Dollar
December 21, 1971–October 24,               Peg to Pound Sterling
1972
October 24, 1972–January 24, 1979           Managed floating/Parallel market       The official rate is pegged to US Dollar. The parallel
                                                                                   premium fluctuates considerably and peaks at 62% on April
                                                                                   1976.
January 24, 1979–February 7, 1983          Managed floating/Dual Rate              The official rate is de facto peg to the US Dollar until April
                                                                                   1981. Premium rises to a maximum of 27% in this period.
February 7, 1983– September 2,             Managed floating
1985
September 2, 1985–March 13, 1995           Dual Rate/Managed floating              There are several spikes in the premium including in 1985
                                                                                   and 1987, when the premium approached 40%.
March 13, 1995–December 2001               Freely floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, and the Pound Sterling.
                                                                   - 95 -

South Korea
Date                                       Classification:                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
October 1945-November 1948                 De facto band around US                  Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                   Dollar, but there are frequent and large devaluations.
December 1948–February 15, 1953            Freely falling/De facto band around      Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           US Dollar/Parallel market                Dollar, but there are frequent and large devaluations. In
                                                                                    1947 the parallel market premium hit 2,400%.
February 15, 1953–December 1954            De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-2%. Hwan issued to replace Won. On
                                           Do/Parallel market                       June 10, 1962 Won is reintroduced. There are multiple
                                                                                    exchange rates. Parallel market premium around 350%.
January 1955–December 1955                 Freely falling/ De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-2%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                           around US Dollar/Parallel market
January 1956–May 3, 1964                   De facto crawling band around US         There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                   Parallel market premium above 100% through 1960 and
                                                                                    oscillating in the 20–120% range through 1965
May 3, 1964–April 1974                     Crawling band to US Dollar/Parallel      Band width is +/- 5%. Parallel market premia mostly in
                                           market                                   single digits.
May 1974–February 27, 1980                 Peg to US Dollar                         Parallel market premia rose to 28% in February 1980.
February 27, 1980–July, 1980               De facto crawling peg to US Dollar       Officially pegged to a basket of currencies and the SDR
March 2, 1990–September 2, 1991            Pre announced crawling band around       Band width +/- 0.4%. This fits into our definition of
                                           US Dollar                                crawling peg.
September 2, 1991–July 1, 1992             Pre announced crawling band around       Band width +/- 0.6%. This fits into our definition of
                                           US Dollar                                crawling peg.
July 1, 1992–October 1, 1993               Pre announced crawling band around       Band width +/- 0.8%. This fits into our definition of
                                           US Dollar                                crawling peg.
October 1, 1993–November 1, 1994           Pre announced crawling band around       Band width +/- 0.1%. This fits into our definition of
                                           US Dollar                                crawling peg.
November 1, 1994–December 1, 1995          De facto crawling peg to US Dollar       Pre announced band is +/- 1.5%. Does not fit into our
                                                                                    definition of peg, which stops at a +/-1% band.
December 1, 1995–November, 1997             De facto crawling peg to US Dollar      Officially the pre announced band is +/- 2.25%
December 17, 1997–June 1998                 Freely falling                          The won was allowed to float.
July 1998–December 2001                     Freely floating
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Spain
Date                                        Classification:                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 1939– August 25, 1946             Peg to US Dollar
August 25, 1946–October 1948               Managed floating/Parallel market         There are multiple exchange rates
November 1948–May 1951                      De facto band around US                 Band width +/-5%. There are multiple exchange rates
                                            Dollar/Parallel market
June 1951–July 17, 1959                     De facto band around US                 Band width +/-2%. There are multiple exchange rates
                                            Dollar/Parallel Market
July 17, 1959–January 22, 1974             Peg to US Dollar/Parallel Market         Frequent devaluations
January 22, 1974–December 1980              De facto crawling band around US        Band width +/-2%. Until July 12, 1977 the peseta was
                                            Dollar                                  officially still pegged to the US Dollar—but with continuous
                                                                                    adjustments.
January 1981–April 1994                    De facto crawling band around DM         Band width +/-2%.
May 1994–January 1, 1999                   De facto peg to DM
January 1, 1999–December 2001              Currency Union                           Euro
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
                                                              - 96 -

Sri Lanka
Date                                  Classification:                         Comments
                                      Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
December 16, 1929–June 1941           Currency board/Peg to Indian Rupee
                                      which is pegged to the Pound Sterling
July 1941-February 1943               Currency board/Peg to Indian Rupee
                                      which is pegged to the Pound
                                      Sterling/Freely falling
March 1943-December 16, 1949          Currency board/Peg to Indian Rupee
                                      which is pegged to the Pound Sterling
December 16, 1949–1959                Peg to Indian Rupee which is pegged     Parallel market premium oscillates in the 25–40% range.
                                      to the Pound Sterling
1959–February 1966                    Peg to Pound Sterling/Parallel market   Premium peaks at 128% on August 1962.
February 1966–May 6, 1968             Peg to Pound Sterling                   Parallel market premium remains above 100% and keeps
                                                                              climbing hitting 223% in February 1965.
May 6, 1968– November 8, 1971         Managed floating/Parallel market        There are multiple exchange rates. An official rate is linked
                                                                              to Pound Sterling
November 8, 1971–July 10, 1972        De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%.There are multiple exchange rates. An
                                      Dollar/Parallel market                  official rate is linked to the US Dollar.
July 10, 1972–May 24, 1976            De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-2%. On June 1, 1973 the Ceylon Rupee
                                      Dollar/Dual Market                      became the Sri lanka Rupee. An official rate is pegged to
                                                                              the Pound Sterling.
May 24, 1976–November 15, 1977        De facto crawling band to US            Band width is +/-2%. The official rate is linked to an
                                      Dollar/Dual Market                      undisclosed basket of currencies.
November 15, 1977–June 1981           De facto crawling band to US Dollar     Band width is +/-2%. Unification of rates.
July 1981–September 1989              De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
October 1989–July 1990                Peg to US Dollar
August 1990–March 20, 1995            De facto crawling peg to US Dollar
March 20, 1995–February 1998          Pre announced crawling band around      Band width is +/-2%. Since 1994 the parallel market
                                      US Dollar                               premium has been in single digits.
March 1998–January 12, 2000           Pre announced crawling band around      Band width is +/-2%.
                                      US Dollar
January 12, 2000– June 20, 2001       Pre announced crawling band around      Band width is +/-5%.
                                      US Dollar
June 20, 2000–November 3, 2000        De facto crawling band around US        The de facto band width is +/-5%. The pre–announced
                                      Dollar                                  official band is +/-6%.
November 3, 2000– December 11, 2000   De facto crawling band around US        The de facto band width is +/-5%. The pre–announced
                                      Dollar                                  official band is +/-8%.
December 11, 2000– January 22, 2001   De facto crawling band around US        The de facto band width is +/-5%. The pre–announced
                                      Dollar                                  official band is +/-10%.
January 22, 2001–December 2001        De facto crawling band around US        The de facto band width is +/-5%. Officially it is
                                      Dollar                                  independently floating.
Notes: Formerly Ceylon.
                                                                  - 97 -

Suriname
Date                                      Classification:                         Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
November 20, 1815–May 10, 1940            Peg to Dutch Guilder                    Suriname Guilder represented a colonial issue of the Dutch
                                                                                  Guilder
May 10, 1940–June 1974                    Peg to US Dollar                        Suriname Guilder is created and breaks the relation with
                                                                                  Dutch Guilder
July 1974–March 1975                      Crawling band around US                 Band width is +/-2%. The official rate is still pegged to the
                                          Dollar/Parallel market                  US Dollar.
April 1975–April 1982                     Crawling band around US                 Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is still pegged to the
                                          Dollar/Parallel market                  US Dollar
May 1982–March 1986                       Managed floating/Parallel market        The official rate is still pegged to the US Dollar but there
                                                                                  are large oscillations in the exchange rate in the parallel
                                                                                  market.
April 1986–December 1987                  Freely falling/Managed                  The official rate is still pegged to the US Dollar
                                          floating/Parallel market
January 1988–June 15, 1989                Managed floating/Parallel market
June 15, 1989–April, 1991                 Managed floating                        There are multiple exchange rates.
May 1991–July 11, 1994                    Freely falling/Managed                  An official rate is still pegged to the US Dollar. Since
                                          floating/Parallel market                March 1993 the parallel market premia is consistently in the
                                                                                  thousands—peaking at 8,583% in April 1994—a few
                                                                                  months ahead of the 10,387% devaluation in July of that
                                                                                  year.
July 11, 1994–November, 1995              Freely falling/De facto crawling band   The official rate is no longer pegged to the US Dollar. Band
                                          around US Dollar                        width is +/-5%. The multiple exchange rate system was
                                                                                  unified—however the informal parallel market remains
                                                                                  extremely active.
December 1995–January 1998                De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%. The official rate is re–pegged to the
                                          Dollar/Parallel Market                  US Dollar.
February 1998–January 1, 1999             Freely falling/Dual Market              The official exchange is pegged to the US Dollar. There is
                                                                                  also a parallel market premia is in single digits through
                                                                                  December 1998. There are separate rates for some imports.
January 1, 1999–October 3, 2000           Freely falling/Crawling Band around     Band width is +/-3%. There are multiple exchange rates.
                                          US Dollar/Dual Market
October 3, 2000–December 2000             Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         Dual market unified. There are separate rates for some
                                                                                  imports. Inflation data for 2001 is not yet available.
                                                                                  Following an 88% percent devaluation the Guilder was once
                                                                                  again pegged to the US Dollar.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the Dutch Guilder.
Swaziland
Date                                        Classification:                       Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1920–February 14, 1961                      No separate legal tender              South Africa Pound
February 14, 1961–September 6, 1974         No separate legal tender              South Africa Rand
September 6, 1974– January 24, 1979         Peg to South Africa Rand              The Ligaleni is introduced.
January 24, 1979–February 7, 1983           De facto peg to South Africa
                                            Rand/Dual Market
February 7, 1983– September 2, 1985         Peg to South Africa Rand
September 2, 1985–March 13, 1995            De facto peg to South Africa          On May 1986 the South African Rand ceased to be legal
                                            Rand/Dual Market                      tender. Parallel market premium peaks at 30% on May 1987.
March 13, 1995–December 2001                Peg to South Africa Rand              Parallel market premia in single digits.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar and the South African Rand.
                                                                      - 98 -

Sweden
Date                                          Classification:                    Comments
                                              Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1920–April 1, 1924                            Suspension of convertibility
April 1, 1924– September 28, 1931             Peg                                Gold Standard
September 28, 1931–September 1939             Peg to Pound Sterling              Suspended convertibility into gold and joined the Sterling
                                                                                 Area.
1940–1946                                     Capital controls
July 13, 1946–February 1952                   De facto crawling band around US   Band width is +/-5%. Official rate is pegged to the US
                                              Dollar/Parallel Market             Dollar. On March 1949, five months before the devaluation
                                                                                 of the official rate, the parallel market premium peaked at
                                                                                 49%––although subsequently declining it would remain in
                                                                                 double digits through early 1953.
March 1952–September 1954                  De facto Band around US Dollar        Band width is +/-2%. Official rate is pegged to the US Dollar
October 1954–March 19, 1973                Peg to US Dollar                      On July 1, 1959 Investment Dollar Krona is introduced.
March 19, 1973– November 19, 1992          De facto crawling around DM           Band width is +/-2%.
November 19, 1992–December 2001            Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
Switzerland
Date                                       Classification:                       Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
November 1934–June 1935                    Dual Market
September 27, 1936–January 19, 1942        Peg to US Dollar
January 19, 1942–June 1946                 De facto band around US Dollar/Dual   Band width is +/-5%. Exchange controls
                                           Market
July 1946– September 25, 1949              De facto band around US Dollar/Dual   Band width is +/-2%.
                                           Market
September 25, 1949–January 23, 1973        Peg to US Dollar                      Controls are lifted.
January 23, 1973– September 1981           Managed floating
September 1981–December 2001               De facto moving band around DM        Band width is +/-2%.
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
Syrian Arab Republic
Date                                       Classification:                       Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1918–May 1, 1920                           Exchange rate arrangement with no     Egyptian pound, British occupation
                                           separate legal tender
May 1, 1920–January 1, 1948                Peg to French Franc                   Creation of Lebanon–Syrian Pound.
January 1, 1948–                           Parallel Market                       Split of Lebanon and Syrian monetary system. There are
                                                                                 multiple exchange rates
January 1970–July 1973                        De facto band around US Dollar     Band width is +/-2%. Data on parallel market begins.
August 1973–April 24, 1976                    De facto crawling band around US   Band width is +/-5%.
                                              Dollar/Parallel market
April 24, 1976–April 22, 1981                 De facto crawling band around US   There are multiple exchange rates. All official rates are
                                              Dollar/Parallel market             pegged to the US Dollar,
April 22, 1981–May 24, 1982                   De facto crawling band around US
                                              Dollar/Dual market
May 24, 1982–January 1, 1988                  De facto crawling band around US   There are multiple exchange rates All official rates are
                                              Dollar/Parallel market             pegged to the US Dollar. In the run–up to the devaluation
                                                                                 parallel market premia hit a record high of 1,047% on
                                                                                 December 1987
January 1, 1988–December 2001                 De facto crawling band around US   There are multiple exchange rates. All official rates are
                                              Dollar/Parallel market             pegged to the US Dollar, one 186% devaluation, January
                                                                                 1988. Parallel premia remained in the 250–400% range
                                                                                 through December 1998, when the data ends.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Tajikistan
Date                                        Classification:                      Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1992–December 1995                  Freely falling/Dual Market           The Tajik Ruble was introduced on May 10, 1995. There is
                                                                                 no price data before this date.
January 1996–October 1997                     Freely falling/Freely floating
October 1997– September 1998                  Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling
October 1998–July 2001                        Freely falling/Freely floating     On October 26, 2000, the Tajik Somoni replaced the Tajuk
                                                                                 Ruble. More recent inflation data is not available.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                 - 99 -

Tanzania
Date                                     Classification:                          Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1906–January 1, 1922                     Currency union/Peg                       Pound Sterling, East African Rupee is created German
                                                                                  until 1918, British subsequently
January 1, 1922–June 14, 1966            Currency union/Peg                       Pound Sterling, East African Shilling is created
June 14, 1966–August 25, 1971            Peg to Pound Sterling                    Tanzania Shilling is introduced
August 25, 1971–November 1973            Managed floating/Parallel market         Official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
December 1973–March 1975                 Freely falling/Managed                   Official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
                                         floating/Parallel market
April 1975–October 27, 1975              Managed floating/Parallel market         Official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
October 27, 1975–January 20, 1979        Managed floating/Parallel market         Official rate is pegged to the SDR. On June 1976 the
                                                                                  parallel market premia hit 255%
January 20, 1979–August 1983             Managed floating/Parallel market
September 1983–May 1985                  Freely falling/Managed                   There are multiple exchange rates. Through 1988 parallel
                                         floating/Parallel market                 premia are over 100% without exception.
June 1985–August 1991                    Managed floating market/Parallel         In the run–up to the large devaluation in early 1986 the
                                         market                                   parallel premia was over 300%.
September, 1991–August 3, 1993           Freely falling/Managed                   On August 3, 1993 official and bureau rates were unified.
                                         floating/Parallel market                 Since that time (through December 1998), parallel market
                                                                                  premium have been in single digits.
January 1994–March 1996                  De facto crawling band around US         There are multiple rates through 1995. Band width +/-5%.
                                         Dollar
May 1995–December 2001                   De facto crawling band around US         Band width +/-2%.
                                         Dollar
Notes: On October 29, 1964 Tanganyika and Zanzibar were renamed Tanzania.
Thailand
Date                                    Classification:                          Comments
                                        Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 15, 1928–May 11, 1932             Peg                                      Gold, Baht replaces Tical
May 11, 1932–September 7, 1939          Peg to Pound Sterling
1939–April 22, 1942                     Exchange controls
April 22, 1942–May 1, 1946              Peg to Yen
May 1, 1946–1947                        Peg to Pound Sterling                    Parallel market premia over 100% prevail through 1949.
1947–January 1, 1956                    De facto band around US                  There are multiple exchange rates. Parallel market premia
                                        Dollar/Parallel market                   oscillate in the 50–90% range.
January 1, 1956–October 20, 1963        De facto band around US Dollar           Band width is +/-2%. Exchange rates were unified. Parallel
                                                                                 market premia drop to single digits.
October 20, 1963–March 8, 1978              Peg to US Dollar
March 8, 1978–July 1997                     De facto peg to US Dollar            The Baht is officially pegged to a basket of currencies.
July 1997–January 1998                      Freely falling/Freely floating
January 1998–December 2001                  Managed floating
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Togo
Central Bank of West African States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire, Guinea–Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo1
Date                                         Classification:                     Comments
                                             Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 29, 1901                                Peg to French Franc                 Banque de l’Afrique Occidentale is allowed to issue bank
                                                                                 notes.
September 9, 1939                            Exchange controls are introduced in
                                             Franc zone
February 2, 1943– December 26. 1945          Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling On December 1942 incorporated in the Sterling Area
December 26. 1945– May 12, 1962              Peg to French Franc                 Return to Franc Zone. The CFA Franc is introduced.
September 20, 1949–                          Peg to French Franc
May 12, 1962–September 9, 1971               Peg to French Franc                 Creation of the Central Bank of West African States
September 9, 1971–March 21, 1974             De facto peg to French Franc/ Dual  Low parallel market premium
                                             Market
March 21, 1974–December 1993                 Peg to French Franc
January 1994–December 1994                   Peg to French Franc/Freely falling  One 100% devaluation.
January 1995–January 1, 1999                 Peg to French Franc
January 1, 1999–December 2001                Peg to Euro
1
  Mali joined the currency arrangement at a later date.
Note: Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro
                                                                - 100 -

Tunisia
Date                                     Classification:                         Comments
                                         Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
May 2, 1929–September 6, 1939            Peg to French Franc                     Tunisian Franc on gold standard
September 6, 1939–June 1943              Capital controls
June 1943–December 6, 1944               Peg to US Dollar and Pound Sterling
December 6, 1944–November 1945           Peg to French Franc                     Return to Franc–Zone
December 1945-January 26, 1948           Peg to French Franc/Freely falling
January 26, 1948-March 1949              Freely falling/ De facto band around
                                         French Franc
April 1949–November 1, 1958              De facto band around French Franc       Band width is +/-2%. There are multiple exchange rates.
November 1, 1958– March 21, 1974         Peg to French Franc                     Tunisian Dinar replaces Tunisian Franc. Active parallel
                                                                                 market In May 1962 parallel market premia peaks at 257%.
                                                                                 It remains in three digits through mid–1963 and oscillates
                                                                                 in the 20–90%range through 1972.
March 21, 1974– January 1, 1999          De facto crawling band around French    Band width is +/-2%. Since 1992 parallel market premia is
                                         Franc                                   in single digits.

January 1, 1999–December 2001            De facto crawling band around Euro      Band width is +/-2%.

Note: Reference currencies are the French Franc and the Euro
Turkey
Date                                       Classification:                       Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
September 1930–August 1931                 Peg to Pound Sterling
September 1931–September 26, 1936          Peg to French Franc
September 26, 1936–November 28,            Peg to Pound Sterling
1939
November 28, 1939–February 1941            Parallel market                       There are multiple exchange rates.
March 1941–August 1943                     Freely falling/Parallel market        There are multiple exchange rates.
September 1943-September 9, 1946           Parallel market                       There are multiple exchange rates.
September 9, 1946–September 3, 1953        De facto crawling band around US      The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar. Band width is
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                +/-5%.
September 3, 1953–August 20, 1960          Managed floating/Parallel market      There are multiple exchange rates. Parallel market premia
                                                                                 is consistently in three digits and peaks at 537% on July
                                                                                 1958.
August 20, 1960–June 6, 1961             Peg to US Dollar
June 6, 1961–August 9, 1970              De facto crawling band around US        Band width is +/-5%. Parallel market premia oscillates in
                                         Dollar/Dual Rates                       the 30–60% range.
August 9, 1970–December 22, 1971         Peg to US Dollar
December 22, 1971–August, 1976           De facto crawling band around US        There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/-5%.
                                         Dollar/Parallel market                  The official rates are pegged but there are frequent
                                                                                 adjustments. There is an official horizontal 4.5% band.
September 1976–March, 1981               Freely falling/De facto crawling band   There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/-5%.
                                         around US Dollar/Parallel market        The official rates are pegged but there are frequent
                                                                                 adjustments.
April 1981–March 22, 1983                Managed floating/Parallel market        There are multiple exchange rates. On May 1, 1981 the lira
                                                                                 was formally de–linked from the US Dollar.
March 22, 1983–April 1984                Managed floating                        Since 1984 the parallel market premia has largely remained
                                                                                 in single digits.
May 1984–January 1998                      Freely falling/Managed floating
February 1998–January 1, 1999              Crawling band around DM/Freely        Band width is +/-5%. The crawling band is only detected
                                           falling                               with the 24–month window.
January 1, 1999–January 2001               Crawling band around Euro/Freely      Band width is +/-5%
                                           falling
February–2001October 2001                  Freely falling/Freely floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, and the Euro.
Turkmenistan
Date                                      Classification:                        Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1993–October 1997                 Freely falling/Dual market             On November 1, 1993 the Manat replaced the Russian
                                                                                 Ruble as legal tender. There is no price data before this
                                                                                 date. There are multiple exchange rates
November 1997–December 2001              Dual Market                             There was a short–lived unification on April 20, 1998.
                                                                                 Since the introduction of the Manat the official rate has
                                                                                 been pegged to the US Dollar with periodic large
                                                                                 devaluations.
                                                                      - 101 -

Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
Uganda
Date                                        Classification:                         Comments
                                            Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January 1, 1922–August 15, 1966             Peg to Pound Sterling/Currency union    East African Shilling is introduced Uganda, Kenya, and
                                                                                    Tanzania form the East African Currency Area.
August 15, 1966–October 11, 1971           Peg to Pound Sterling/Currency union     Ugandan Shilling replaces the East African Shilling
October 11, 1971–October 27, 1975          Managed floating/Parallel market         While the official rate is linked to the US Dollar, there is
                                                                                    an active parallel market.
October 27, 1975–June 8, 1981              Managed floating/Parallel market         The Ugandan shilling is officially pegged to the SDR. On
                                                                                    July 1977 the East African Currency Area came to its end.
                                                                                    From 1977 onwards, the parallel market premium is
                                                                                    hovering close to 1,000% .On June 1981 the currency was
                                                                                    devalued by 840%.
August 23, 1982–October 1983                  Freely floating/Dual Market           Officially the Shilling is linked to a basket of currencies.
Novembert 1983–June 15, 1984                  Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual
                                              Market
June 15, 1984– May 28, 1986                   Freely falling/Freely floating        The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar through May
                                                                                    1985. In that month the parallel market premium reached
                                                                                    2,109%.
May 28, 1986–August 23, 1986                  Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual
                                              Market
August 23, 1986– September 1989               Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling       Following a 329% devaluation, on May 18, 1987 a currency
                                                                                    reform exchanged old shillings for the new shilling.
October 1989–July 2, 1992                  Freely falling/De facto crawling band    Band width is +/-5%. On April 1987 the parallel market
                                           around US Dollar                         premium reached 1,186%.
July 2, 1992–December, 1992                Freely falling/De facto crawling band    Band width is +/-5%.
                                           around US Dollar/Dual Market
January 1993–November 1, 1993              De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%.
                                           Dollar/Dual Market
November 1, 1993––December 2001            De facto crawling band around US         Band width is +/-5%. Since 1995 parallel market premium
                                           Dollar                                   fell to the 10–15% range and into single digits since 1996.
Notes: Reference currencies are US Dollar, Pound Sterling, and SDR.
Ukraine
Date                                       Classification:                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
January, 1991–October, 1996                Freely falling/Dual Markets              There is no price data before this date.
October 1996–September 4, 1998             Dual Markets
September 4, 1998–November 1999            De facto crawling band around US         In September 1998 the Ukranian Hryvnia was devalued by
                                           Dollar                                   51% versus the US Dollar and markets were unified. There
                                                                                    is a pre–announced official horizontal band.
February 21, 2000–December 2001               De facto peg to US Dollar             On February 2000 the central bank formally announced a
                                                                                    floating rate policy.
Notes: Reference currency is the US Dollar.
                                                                  - 102 -

United Kingdom
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
April 25, 1925–September 21, 1931          Peg                                       Gold
September 21, 1931– March 1940             Managed floating                          On August 25, 1939 foreign exchange controls are
                                                                                     introduced.
March 1940–July 1948                       De facto band around US                   Band width is +/-5%. There are multiple exchange rates. The
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                    official rate is pegged to the US Dollar/Exchange controls
                                                                                     introduced on August 25, 1939. The Pound is only
                                                                                     convertible during July 15–August 21, 1947. In February
                                                                                     1946 the parallel market premium peaked at 97%.
August 1948–September 1950                 De facto band around US                   Band width is +/-2%. The official rate is pegged to the US
                                           Dollar/Parallel market                    Dollar but there are multiple rates. Through August 1949
                                                                                     parallel premium oscillates in the 30–90% range.
September 1950–August 19, 1970             Peg to US Dollar/Dual Market              Introduction of the Switch Pound. There are multiple rates.
                                                                                     The Switch pound was abolished on April 1967. The
                                                                                     Property Dollar was abolished
August 19, 1970–June 23, 1972              Peg to US Dollar/Dual Market
June 23, 1972–October 8, 1990              Managed Floating                          Until the dissolution of the Sterling Area on October 24,
                                                                                     1979 and the dismantling of capital controls, the UK had a
                                                                                     dual rate system.
October 8, 1990–September 12, 1992         Pre announced band around ECU/DM          Band width +/- 6%.
September 12, 1992–December 2001          Managed floating
Notes: Reference currencies are the US Dollar, the DM, the Euro, and the Yen.
United States
Date                                       Classification:                           Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
June 30, 1919–March 9, 1933                Peg                                       Gold Standard
March 9, 1933–January 31, 1934             Capital controls                          The US Dollar’s convertibility into gold is suspended
December 19, 1946–August 15, 1971          Peg                                       Gold and SDR, same parity as 1934. On August 15, the
                                                                                     US notified the IMF it would no longer freely buy or sell
                                                                                     gold for the settlement of international transactions
August 15, 1971– February 13, 1973         Mini float                                On May 8, 1972 there is further devaluation versus gold
                                                                                     and other currencies
February 13, 1973 February, 1978           De facto moving band with the Yen         Further devaluation versus gold and other currencies. Band
                                                                                     width +/- 2%.
February 1978–December 2001                Freely floating                           On April 1, 1978 the law that required the par value of the
                                                                                     US Dollar in terms of gold and SDRs is repealed.
Notes: Reference currencies are the Pound Sterling, the DM, the Euro, and the Yen.
                                                              - 103 -

Uruguay
Date                                 Classification:                         Comments
                                     Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1931–January 10, 1941                Peg to Pound Sterling                   On December 1929 the gold standard was suspended.
January 10, 1941–July 1944           Peg to US Dollar
July 1944–July 1947                  Dual Market/De facto crawling band
                                     around US Dollar
July 1947–September 1948             Peg to US Dollar
September 1948–May 1958              De facto crawling band around US        There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/-5%.
                                     Dollar/parallel market
June 1958–December 17, 1959          Freely falling/De facto crawling band   There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/-5%.
                                     around US Dollar/Parallel market
December 17, 1959–October 1960       Freely falling/Managed floating         Exchange and monetary reform. Exchange rates were
                                                                             unified and fluctuating rate applied to all transactions.
November 1960–November 1962          Managed floating
December 1962–July 19, 1963          Freely falling/Managed floating
July 19, 1963–July 1965              Freely falling/De facto crawling band   Band width is +/-5%.
                                     around US Dollar/Dual Markets
August 1965–May 1968                 Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual    The official rate is pegged to the US Dollar there are
                                     Markets                                 periodic large devaluations. In October 1965 the parallel
                                                                             market premium reached 196%. The official rate was
                                                                             devalued by 150% that same month.
June 1968-January 1969               Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         There is an inflation stabilization plan—while the official
                                                                             rate is tied to the US Dollar parallel market activity
                                                                             remains considerable in some months.
February 1969–December 1970          Peg to US Dollars
January 1971–April 26, 1971          Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual    There are multiple exchange rates.
                                     Markets
April 26, 1971–November 1974         Freely falling/Managed                  On November 1971 the free market premium reached 182
                                     floating/Parallel market                %–– on march 1972 the official rate was devalued by 100%.
December 1974–October 17, 1978       Freely falling/De facto crawling band   There are multiple exchange rates. Band width is +/-5%. In
                                     around US Dollar/Parallel market        October 1974
October 17, 1978–November 26, 1982   Pre announced crawling peg to US
                                     Dollar, the Tablita/Freely falling
November 26, 1982–December 1985      Freely falling/Freely floating
January 1986–December 1990           Freely falling/Freely floating          There are multiple exchange rates.
December 1990–December 1, 1991       Pre announced crawling band/Freely      Official and de facto band +/-2%
                                     falling
December 1, 1991–November 2, 1992    Freely falling/Pre announced crawling   Official +/-4%, de facto band +/-2%
                                     band
November 2, 1992–September 1995      Freely falling/de facto crawling band   Official +/-7%, de facto band +/-2%. Since 1994 the
                                                                             parallel market premium has been in single digits.
October 1995-December 1998           De facto crawling band                  Official +/-7%, de facto band +/-2%.
December, 1999–December 2001         De facto crawling band                  Official +/-3%, de facto band +/-2%. On January 4, 2002
                                                                             the band was widened to +/-6% and the pace of
                                                                             depreciation was accelerated.
                                                                  - 104 -

Venezuela
Date                                      Classification:                           Comments
                                          Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
August 1934–July 23, 1941                 Peg to US Dollar                          Foreign exchange controls introduced
July 23, 1941–July 1, 1976                Peg to US Dollar                          There are multiple exchange rates.
July 1, 1976–February 28, 1983            Peg to US Dollar/ Dual Market             Up until lawe 1982 free market premia is in single digits.
February 28, 1983–November 1986           Managed floating/Parallel market          There are multiple exchange rates officially linked to the US
                                                                                    Dollar. In July 1983 parallel market premia rose to 319%.
December 1986–March 13, 1989              Freely falling/Managed floating           There are multiple exchange rates. Parallel market premia
                                                                                    are consistently above 100%.
March 13, 1989–March 1990                 Freely falling/Managed floating
April 1990–September 1992                 Managed floating
October 1992–May 4, 1994                  Freely falling/Managed floating
May 4, 1994–April 22, 1996                Freely falling/Dual market/De facto       Band width is +/-5%. Parallel market premium jumped to
                                          crawling band around US Dollar            100% ion November 1995.
April 22, 1996–July 8, 1996               Freely falling/De facto                   Band width is +/-5%.
                                          crawling band around US Dollar
July 8, 1996–July 1997                    Pre announced crawling band around        Official band is +/- 7.5%, de facto band is +/-2%. Parallel
                                          US Dollar/Freely falling                  market premium declines to single digits during this period.
August 1997–December 2001                 Pre announced crawling band around        Official band is +/- 7.5%, de facto band is +/-2%.
                                          US Dollar
Notes: reference currency is the US Dollar
Zambia
Date                                       Classification:                          Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
1891–1940                                  Exchange arrangement with no             Pound Sterling
                                           separate legal tender.
1940– April 1, 1956                        Peg to Pound Sterling/Currency Board     Southern Rhodesia Pound replaces British Pound
April 1, 1956– November 16, 1964           Peg to Pound Sterling                    Rhodesia and Nyasaland Pound replaces Southern
                                                                                    Rhodesia Pound
November 16, 1964– January 16, 1968       Peg to Pound Sterling                     Zambia Pound replaces Rhodesia and Nyasaland Pound.
                                                                                    Exchange controls are introduced.
January 16, 1968–December 6, 1971         Peg to Pound Sterling                     Kwacha replaces Zambia Pound
December 6, 1971–July 9, 1976             Managed floating/Parallel market          Official rate is pegged to the US Dollar.
July 9, 1976–July 1983                    Managed floating/Parallel market          Multiple rates are introduced in 1979. Official rate is
                                                                                    pegged to SDR. Through 1979 parallel market premia is in
                                                                                    three digits.
October 1985–March 17, 1987                Freely falling/Freely floating/Parallel
                                           market
March 17, 1987–May 4, 1987                 Freely falling/Freely floating/Dual
                                           Market
May 2, 1987–November 9, 1988               Freely falling/Freely floating/Parallel Official rate is pegged to US Dollar. In November 1988 the
                                           market                                  parallel market premium reached 974%.
November 9, 1988–February 19, 1990         Freely falling/Freely floating/Parallel Official rate is pegged to SDR In May 1989 the parallel
                                           Market                                  premium reached an all–time high of 1,222%.
February 19, 1990–December 1998            Freely falling/Dual Market/Freely       There was a short–lived unification in 1997.
                                           floating
January 1999–August 2001                   Freely falling/Freely floating
August 2001–December 2001                  Freely floating
Notes: Zambia was formerly northern Rhodesia. Reference currencies are the South African Rand, the SDR, the Pound Sterling and the US
Dollar.
Zimbabwe
Date                                       Classification:                         Comments
                                           Primary/Secondary/Tertiary
March 7, 1980–June, 1983                   De facto crawling band around US        The Rhodesian Dollar’s peg to the South African Rand was
                                           Dollar                                  ended. The currency was renamed the Zimbabwe Dollar.
                                                                                   Band width is +/-2%. Officially pegged to a basket of
                                                                                   currencies.
July 1983–April 1991                       Managed floating/Dual Market
May 1991–July 2, 1994                      Freely falling/Managed floating/Dual
                                           Market
July 2, 1994–November 1997                 Managed floating
November 1997–March 31, 1999               Freely falling/Managed floating
March 31, 1999–December, 2001              Peg to US Dollar/Freely falling         One major devaluation in August 2000
January 2000–August 1, 2000                Peg to US Dollar
August 1, 2000–December, 2001              Crawling peg                            Officially there is a +/-5% band around the central parity.
Notes: Reference currencies are the South African Rand and the US Dollar. Zimbabwe was formerly part of Rhodesia.
