                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                BOOM-BUSTS IN ASSET PRICES, ECONOMIC INSTABILITY,
                             AND MONETARY POLICY


                                           Michael D. Bordo
                                            Olivier Jeanne


                                          Working Paper 8966
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8966


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




Previous versions of this paper benefited from comments by Ben Bernanke, Luis Catao, Mark Gertler,
Charles Goodhart, Allan Meltzer, and Anna Schwartz. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the IMF.


© 2002 by Michael D. Bordo and Olivier Jeanne. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Boom-Busts in Asset Prices, Economic Instability, and Monetary Policy
Michael D. Bordo and Olivier Jeanne
NBER Working Paper No. 8966
June 2002
JEL No. E52, N20



                                              ABSTRACT

        The link between monetary policy and asset price movements has been of perennial interest to
policy makers. In this paper we consider the potential case for pre-emptive monetary restrictions when
asset price reversals can have serious effects on real output. First, we provide some historical background
on two famous asset price reversals: the U.S. stock market crash of 1929 and the bursting of the Japanese
bubble in 1989. We then present some stylized facts on boom-bust dynamics in stock and property prices
in developed economies. We then discuss the case for a pre-emptive monetary policy in the context of
a stylized “Dynamic New Keynesian” framework with collateral constraints in the productive sector. We
find that whether such a policy is warranted depends on the economic conditions in a complex, non-linear
way. The optimal policy cannot be summarized by a simple policy rule of the type considered in the
inflation-targeting literature.




Michael D. Bordo                                                  Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics                                           Research Department
Rutgers University                                                International Monetary Fund
New Jersey Hall                                                   700 19th Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                                           Washington, DC 20431
and NBER                                                          ojeanne@imf.org
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
                                             -3-


          Boom – Busts in Asset Prices, Economic Instability, and Monetary Policy 1

                                 Michael Bordo and Olivier Jeanne

                                            April 2002



                                          1. Introduction

        The link between monetary policy and asset price movements has been of perennial
interest to policy makers. The 1920s stock market boom and 1929 crash and the 1980s
Japanese asset bubble are two salient examples where asset price reversals were followed by
protracted recessions and deflation.2 The key questions that arise from these episodes is
whether the monetary authorities could have been more successful in preventing the
consequences of an asset market bust or whether it was appropriate for the authorities only to
react to these events ex post.

        In this paper we consider the potential cases for proactive versus reactive monetary
policy based on the situation where asset price reversals can have serious effects on real output.
Our analysis is based on a stylized model of the dilemma with which the monetary authorities
are faced in asset price booms. On the one hand, letting the boom go unchecked entails the risk
that it will be followed by a bust, accompanied by a collateral induced credit crunch.
Restricting monetary policy can be thought of as an insurance against the risk of a credit
crunch. On the other hand, this insurance does not come free: restricting monetary policy
implies immediate costs in terms of lower output and inflation. The optimal monetary policy
depends on the relative cost and benefits of the insurance.3

Although the model is quite stylized, we find that the optimal monetary policy depends on the
economic conditions—including the private sector’s beliefs—in a rather complex way.
Broadly speaking, a proactive monetary restriction is the optimal policy when the risk of a bust
is large and the monetary authorities can defuse it at a relatively low cost. One source of
difficulty is that in general, there is a tension between these two conditions. As investors
become more exuberant, the risks associated with a reversal in market sentiment increase. At
the same time, leaning against the wind of investors’ optimism requires more radical and costly
monetary actions. To be optimal, a proactive monetary policy must come into play at a time

1
    For valuable research assistance we thank Priya Joshi.
2
 Other recent episodes of asset price booms and collapses include experiences in the 1980s
and 1990s in the Nordic Countries, Spain, Latin America and East Asia, see e.g. Schinasi and
Hargreaves (1993); Drees and Pazarbasioglu (1998); IMF World Economic Outlook (2000);
and Collyns and Senhadji (2002).
3
 It is important to note that we do not address the case where asset price movements act as
predictors of future inflation. The evidence on this issue is mixed (see Filardo 2000).



                                                   3
                                             -4-


when the risk is perceived as sufficiently large but the authorities’ ability to act is not too
diminished.

Another, more difficult question is whether (and when) the conditions for a proactive monetary
policy are met in the real world. We view this question as very much open and deserving
further empirical research. In the meantime, we present in this paper some stylized facts on
asset booms and busts that have some bearing on the issue. We find that historically, there have
been many booms and busts in asset prices, but that they have different features depending on
the countries and whether one looks at stock or property prices. Boom-bust episodes seem to
be more frequent in real property prices than in stock prices, and in small countries than in
large countries. However, two dramatic episodes (the US in the Great Depression and Japan in
the 1990s) have involved large countries and the stock market. We also present evidence that
busts are associated with disruption in financial and real activity (banking crises, slowdown in
output and decreasing inflation).

This paper is related to growing policy and academic literatures on monetary policy and asset
prices. On the policy side, the dominant view among central bankers is that in response to
movements in asset prices, monetary policy should be reactive, not proactive, e.g.

“[…] the general view nowadays is that central banks should not try to use interest rate policy
to control asset price trends by seeking to burst any bubbles that may form. The normal
strategy is rather to seek, firmly and with the help of a great variety of instruments, to restore
stability on the few occasions when asset markets collapse.”

(Ms Hessius, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Risksbank, BIS Review 128/1999).

This view is vindicated, on the academic side, by the recent work of Bernanke and Gertler
(2000). These authors argue that a central bank dedicated to price stability should pay no
attention to asset prices per se, except insofar as they signal changes in expected inflation.
These results stem from the simulation of different variants of the Taylor rule in the context of
a new keynesian model with sticky wages and a financial accelerator. Bernanke and Gertler
also argue that trying to stabilize asset prices per se is problematic because it is nearly
impossible to know for sure whether a given change in asset values results from fundamental
factors, non-fundamental factors, or both.

         In another study, Cecchetti et al (2000) have argued in favor of a more proactive
response of monetary policy to asset prices. They agree with Bernanke and Gertler that the
monetary authorities would have to make an assessment of the bubble component in asset
prices, but take a more optimistic view of the feasibility of this task.4 They also argue, on the
basis of simulations of the Bernanke-Gertler model, that including an asset price variable (e.g.
stock prices) in the Taylor rule would be desirable. Bernanke and Gertler (2001) attribute the
latter findings to the use of a misleading metric in the comparison between policy rules.
4
  Assessing the bubble component in asset prices should not be qualitatively more difficult,
they argue, than measuring the output gap, an unobservable variable which many central banks
use as an input into policymaking.



                                                   4
                                           -5-




        Our approach differs from these in several respects. First, we view the emphasis on
bubbles in this debate as excessive. In our model the monetary authority needs to ascertain the
risk of an asset price reversal but it is not essential whether the reversal reflects a bursting
bubble or fundamentals. Non-fundamental influences may exacerbate the volatility of asset
prices and thus complicate the monetary authorities’ task, but they are not of the essence of the
question. Even if asset markets were completely efficient, abrupt price reversals could occur,
and pose the same problem for monetary authorities as bursting bubbles.

        Second, we find that the optimal policy rule is unlikely to take the form of a Taylor
rule, even if it is augmented by a linear term in asset prices. If there is scope for proactive
monetary policy, it is highly contingent on a number of factors for which output, inflation and
the current level of asset prices do not provide appropriate summary statistics. It depends on
the risks in the balance sheets of private agents assessed by reference to the risks in asset
markets. The balance of these risks cannot be summarized in two or three macroeconomic
variables, and it is shifting over time.

        More generally, our analysis points to the risks of using simple monetary policy rules
as the guide for monetary policy. These rules are blind to the fact that financial instability is
endogenous—to some extent, and in a complex way—to monetary policy. The linkages
between asset prices, financial instability and monetary policy are complex because they are
inherently non-linear, and involve extreme (tail probability) events. The complexity of these
linkages does not imply, however, that they can be safely ignored. Whether they like it or not,
the monetary authorities need to take a stance that involves some judgment over the probability
of extreme events. As our model illustrates, the optimal stance cannot be characterized by a
simple rule. If anything, our analysis emphasizes the need for some discretionary judgment in
monetary policy.

       The paper is structured as follows. As background to the analysis, Section 2 reviews
some of the salient features of two famous episodes of asset price reversals associated with
extreme economic distress: the Interwar Great Depression experience of the U.S. and the
Japanese asset price boom and bust in the 1980s and 1990s. In section 3 we present stylized
facts on boom and bust cycles in asset prices in the post 1970 experience of 15 OECD
countries. Section 4 presents the model and discusses policy implications. Section 5 concludes.


                 Section 2. Historical Perspectives: Two dramatic episodes


        Asset price reversals have been an important phenomenon since the dawn of capitalism.
Classic examples of a boom-bust cycle were the tulip mania in the early seventeenth century
(Garber 2000) and the South Sea bubble in England in the early eighteenth century
(Kindleberger 1989). In this section, as historical background to our analysis, we document the
two most dramatic episodes of asset price reversals of the twentieth century: the 1929 U.S.
stock market crash and the Japanese “asset price bubble” of the late 1980s and early 1990’s. In
both of these episodes asset price reversals played a major role in precipitating severe
recessions.


                                                 5
                                            -6-


2.1 The U.S. 1929-1933


        The Great Contraction in the U.S 1929-1933 is often associated with a classic boom
and bust episode in the stock market (see figure 1). The boom, focussed on the ‘new economy’
stocks such as GE and RCA, according to legend began in 1926, turned into a bubble in March
1928 which burst on October 24, 1929 (Galbraith 1958, Kindleberger 1987). The bottom was
not reached until 1932. The boom, which some argue was fueled by expansionary Federal
Reserve policy in the spring of 1927, was financed by easy bank credit (see figure 3) and
brokers loans (White 1990). The bust, it is sometimes argued was triggered by tight Federal
Reserve policy in 1929 to prick what they perceived as a stock market bubble (Friedman and
Schwartz 1963).

       Beginning in late 1927 the Federal Reserve Board favored a policy of moral suasion to
discourage member banks from financing stock market speculation, an activity viewed as
anathema to the prevailing ‘real bills’ doctrine. This policy was opposed by Benjamin Strong,
President of the New York Fed and head of the influential Open Market Investment Committee
and after he became seriously ill and died in October 1928, by his successor George Harrison.
They advocated a rise in the discount rate as the method to stem speculation. The stalemate,
which it is argued allowed the stock market boom to continue unchecked, lasted until August
1929, the cyclical peak, when the discount rate was raised from 5 to 6 percent ( Meltzer 2002).

        The ensuing stock market crash in October 1929 in which stock prices declined by
40 percent in two months (see Figure 1) is not generally viewed as the key cause of the severity
of the contraction that followed but as having some impact on household wealth, expenditures
on consumer durables and expectations (Romer 1992). The source of the subsequent
depression in 1930-33 was a series of banking panics, which led to a collapse in money supply,
financial intermediation and aggregate demand (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, Bernanke
1983).

        Asset price deflation however was an important ingredient in the propagation of the
Great Contraction (Bernanke and Gertler 1989) because declining asset prices (both stock
prices and land prices, see Figures 1 and 2) reduced the value of bank loans and collateral (see
Figure 3); weakened banks in turn dumped their loans and securities in fire sales leading to
further asset price deflation. In this environment of massive bank failures, greatly reduced
collateral, and negligible bank lending, financial intermediation seized up, significantly
exacerbating the distress of the real economy. Especially hard hit by the plunge in asset prices
were savings and loan associations whose assets were pummeled by the decline in real estate
prices and delinquent mortgage payments. Life insurance companies were also hard hit. If their
mortgages and bonds had been marked to market, most companies would have been insolvent
(White 2000). 5

5
 Deflation was also an important ingredient in the Great Depression. Its role is well described
by Irving Fisher’s debt deflation story (Fisher 1933) in which collapsing prices led to a rise in
debt burdens in an environment where contracts were not fully indexed. Deflation reduced the
value of firms’ net worth and the collateral for bank loans. This produced widespread


                                                  6
                                            -7-




       The recovery began on March 1933 after the Banking Holiday and massive reflation
following the devaluation of the dollar and Treasury gold and silver purchase programs
(Romer 1990). The real economy however took close to a decade to recover to its pre-
depression level of activity and may have taken longer in the absence of World War II. Asset
prices took two decades to recover as did the value of collateral and private financial
intermediation.


2.2 Japan 1986–1995

        The Japanese boom- bust cycle began in the mid 1980’s with a run-up of real estate prices
(see figure 4) fueled by an increase in bank lending (figure 6) and easy monetary policy. The
property price boom in turn led to a stock market boom (figure 5) as the increased value of
property owned by firms raised future profits and hence stock prices (Iwaisako and Ito 1995). Both
rising land prices and stock prices in turn increased firms’ collateral encouraging further bank
loans and more fuel for the boom. The bust may have been triggered, like the U.S. example
60 years earlier, by the Bank of Japan’s pursuit of a tight monetary policy in 1989 to stem the asset
market boom.

        The subsequent asset price collapse in the next 5 years led to a collapse in bank lending
with a decline in the collateral backing corporate loans (see figure 6). The decline in asset prices
further impinged on the banking system’s capital making many banks insolvent. This occurred
largely because the collapse in asset prices reduced the value of their capital (in Japan commercial
banks could hold their capital in the form of stock market equity, see Kanaya and Woo 2000,
Bayoumi and Collyns 2000).

        Lender of last resort policy prevented a classic banking panic as had occurred in the U.S. in
the 1930’s but regulatory forbearance has propped up insolvent banks. The banking crisis has yet
to be resolved, bank lending remains moribund, and Japan 13 years after the bust is still mired in
stagnation and deflation in the face of tight monetary policy and the slow resolution of bank in
solvencies. Thus in the Japanese case because of tight connections between asset prices, collateral,
bank lending and banking capital, the boom bust episode has been crucially intertwined with
serious macroeconomic instability.




insolvency for both firms and banks. Declining real activity also reduced collateral by
weakening the performance of assets.



                                                  7
                                               -8-


          Section 3. Identifying booms and busts in asset prices: The Post-war OECD

        Many countries have experienced asset price booms and busts since 1973. Although none
were as dramatic as the U.S. and Japan cases, a number were followed by serious recessions. In
this section we develop a methodology to delineate boom and bust cycles in asset prices. We apply
this methodology to real annual stock and residential property price indexes for 15 countries:
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
Norway, Spain, Sweden, the U.K. and the U.S. over the period 1970–2001 for stocks and 1970–98
for property prices.6

3.1 Methodology

        This section presents a criterion to ascertain whether movements in an asset price
represents a boom or bust. A good criterion should be simple, objective and yield plausible results.
In particular, it should select the notorious boom-bust episodes, such as the Great Depression in
the U.S. or Japan 1986-1995, without producing (too many) spurious episodes. We found that the
following criterion broadly satisfied these conditions—although it certainly is not the only one.

Our criterion compares a moving average of the growth rate in asset prices with the long-run
                                           (    )
historical average. Let g i ,t = log Pi,t / Pi ,t −1 − 1 be the growth rate in the real price of the asset
(stock prices or property prices) in year t and in country i. Let g be the average growth rate
over all countries. Let v be the volatility (standard deviation) in the growth rate g, also
measured by aggregating all of the countries together.

Then if the average growth rate between year t-3 and year t is larger than a threshold:

g i ,t + g i,t −1 + g i,t −2
                                > g + xv
             3

we identify a boom in years t-2, t-1 and t.

Conversely we identify a bust in years t-2, t-1 and t if

g i ,t + g i ,t −1 + g i,t −2
                                < g − xv
             3

        Our method detects a boom or a bust when the three-year moving average of the
growth rate in the asset price falls outside a confidence interval defined by reference to the
historical first and second moments of the series. Variable x is a parameter that we calibrate so
as to select the notorious boom-bust episodes without selecting (too many) spurious events.
(We implement some sensitivity analysis with respect to this parameter.) We use the three-year

6
  Some data points are missing for some countries. The source for the stock price data is IFS,
for property prices is BIS.



                                                     8
                                            -9-


moving average so as to eliminate the high frequency variations in the series. (This is
particularly a problem with stock prices, which are more volatile than property prices.)

        For real property prices the average growth rate across the 15 countries is 1.1 percent
with an average volatility of 5.8 percent. For real stock prices the growth rate and the volatility
are both higher, 2.9 percent and 13.6 percent respectively. For both prices we take x= 1.3.7



3.2 Boom – Busts in the OECD 1970-2001

                Figures 7 and 8 show the log of the real prices of stocks and property8, with the
boom and bust periods marked with shaded and clear bars respectively. We define a boom-
bust episode as a boom followed by a bust that starts no later than one-year after the end of the
bust. For example, Sweden (1987-1994) exhibits a boom-bust in real property prices but
Ireland (1977-1984) does not, because the boom and the bust are separated by a two-years
interval (see Figure 7).We also show banking crises marked by an asterisk country by country.9
A few facts stand out.

        First, boom-bust episodes are much more prevalent in property prices than in stock prices.
Out of 24 boom episodes in stock prices only three are followed by busts: Finland (1988), Japan
(1989), Spain (1988) 10. (We give the last year of the boom in parentheses.) Hence the sample
probability of a boom ending up in a bust is 12.5 percent. Of course Japan is a very significant
boom-bust episode. Also there might be more boom-bust episodes in the making since it is too
early to tell whether the recent slides in stock markets in all countries are busts.11

       Out of 19 booms in property prices, 10 were followed by busts: Denmark (1986), Finland
(1989), Italy (1981), Japan (1973, 1990), the Netherlands (1977), Norway (1987), Sweden (1989),


7
  We experimented with different values of x and the number of boom-bust episodes decline as
x increases. Thus for property prices at x=1.0, there are 16 boom-bust and for stock prices
there are 5. We settled on x =1.3 because lowering the threshold below that level produces an
excessively large number of booms and busts.
8
    The logs were normalized to show only positive values.
9
    The data on banking crises come from Eichengreen and Bordo (2002).
10
   If we were to take a lower threshold such as x =1.0, then, two more countries would be listed
as having boom-busts: Italy and Sweden.
11
  Note that the incidence of a boom-bust episode by our criterion is very different from what is
usually referred to as a stock market crash. For the U.S. for example, Mishkin and White
(2002) document 15 crashes 1900–2000 and 4 from 1970–2000. They define a crash as a
20 percent decline in stock prices in a 12-month window.



                                                  9
                                            - 10 -


and the United Kingdom (1973, 1989). 12 The probability of a boom in property prices ending up in
a bust is 52.5 percent. That is, more than one in two property booms end up in a bust, against one
in eight for stock market booms. Only two countries had boom-busts in both stock prices and
property prices, Japan and Finland. In both cases the peaks virtually coincided.

        One explanation for the larger number of boom-bust episodes in property prices than in
stock prices may be that property price episodes are often local phenomenon occurring in the
capital or major cities of a country. This would explain their high incidence in small countries like
Finland or even in countries with relatively large populations like the U.K., where the episode
occurred in London and environs. The fact that no such episodes are found in the U.S. may reflect
the fact that boom-busts in property prices that occurred in New York, California and New
England in the 1990’s washed out in a national average index.

        Second, in a number of cases, banking crises occurred either at the peak of the boom or
after the bust. This is most prominent in the cases of Japan and the Nordic countries.

        Finally, to provide historical perspective to our methodology, we do the same calculations
for two U.S. stock price indexes for the last century: the S and P 500 from 1874 to 1999 and the
Dow Jones Industrial Average from 1900 – 1999. As can be seen in figures 9 and 10, there are
very few boom-bust episodes. The crash of 1929 stands out in both figures. In the S and P we also
identify a boom bust in 1884, the year of a famous Wall Street crash associated with speculation in
railroad stocks and political corruption, and one in 1937, the start of the third most serious
recession of the twentieth century.13 As is well known the bust of 1929 is followed by banking
crises in each of the years from 1930–1933.


3.3 Ancillary Variables

        Associated with the boom bust episodes for property and stock prices that we have isolated
above, we display figures for three macro variables directly related to the asset price reversals: CPI
inflation, the real output gap and domestic private credit. 14 The figures are averages of each
variable across all the boom-bust episodes demarcated above. The 7-year time window shown is
centered on the last year of the boom.

        In figure 11 for property price boom- busts we observe inflation (panel A) rising until the
year after the boom ends and then falling with the bust, while the output gap plateaus the year
before the boom ends and then declines with the bust (panel B). Domestic private credit (panel C)


12
     Again, a lower threshold of x =1.0 would add in Ireland and Spain.
13
     Using a lower threshold of x = 1.0 does not change the outcome.
14
   Private Credit, line 22d of IFS is defined as “claims on the private sector of Deposit Money
Banks (which comprise commercial banks and other financial institutions that accept
transferable deposits, such as demand deposits).”



                                                 10
                                             - 11 -


continues to rise until the year after the boom peaks and then plateaus.15 This pattern is remarkably
consistent with the scenario relating asset price reversals to the incidence of collateral, to the credit
available to liquidity constrained firms and to economic activity that we develop in section
4 below.

        Figure 12 shows the behavior of inflation, the output gap and domestic private credit
averaged across the three boom-bust episodes in stock prices demarcated in figure 8. Inflation rises
to a peak with the end of the boom and then declines, although not as precipitously as with the
property price episodes (panel A). The output gap plateaus the year the boom ends and then
declines in the bust (panel B). Domestic credit slows down its rate of increase the year after the
boom ends and then declines (panel C). Although the pattern displayed for the 3 ancillary variables
for stock price boom-busts is quite similar to that seen in figure 11, we attach more weight to the
property price pattern because it is based on a much larger number of episodes (12 versus 3).

        With this descriptive evidence as background, in section 4 below we develop a model to
help us understand the relationship between boom-busts, the real economy and monetary policy.


                                        Section 4. Theory


A regular feature of boom-bust episodes is that the fall in asset prices is associated with a
slowdown in economic activity (sometimes negative growth), as well as financial and banking
problems. There may be a number of explanations for this pattern, and they do not all give a
central role to asset prices.16 However, there is evidence that the bust in asset prices contributes
to the fall in output by generating a credit crunch. The domestic private sector accumulates a
high level of debt in the boom period; when asset prices fall, the collateral base shrinks, and so
do firms’ ability to finance their operations.17

This section addresses the following question. Assuming that asset market booms involve the
risk of a reversal in which the economy falls prey to a collateral-induced credit crunch, what is
the consequence of this risk for the design of monetary policy?

There are two ways in which monetary policy can respond. First, there is the reactive approach.
The monetary authorities wait and see whether the asset collapse occurs, and if it does, respond
accordingly. This is consistent with standard monetary policy rules, such as the Taylor rule,

15
  The figure shows the nominal level of private domestic credit. Real private domestic credit
declines in the year after the boom peaks.
16
  For example, bad news about future productivity could cause financial and banking
problems at the same time as a slowdown in economic activity, without causality from the
former to the latter.
17
  This meaning of a collateral-induced credit crunch differs from an earlier meaning which
viewed a credit crunch as a restriction on bank lending induced by tightening monetary policy.



                                                  11
                                             - 12 -


which imply an accommodating response ex post. If need be, this monetary relaxation can be
complemented by a lending-in-last-resort injection of liquidity in order to stabilize the financial
system (Bernanke and Gertler 2000).

Second, there is a more pro-active approach to dealing with asset price developments. The
monetary authorities might attempt to contain the rise in asset prices and domestic credit in the
boom phase in the hope of mitigating the consequences of a bust, if it occurs. This may be
consistent with standard monetary policy rules, which also imply a monetary restriction if the
boom is associated with inflation pressures and overheating of the economy. However, the
monetary authorities may want to restrict monetary policy above and beyond what standard
rules prescribe. The question, then, is in which circumstances the authorities should deviate
from standard rules, and on which indicators should they base monetary policy in these cases.

This section presents a stylized model that clarifies the difference between the two views, and
draws some implications for monetary policy. Unlike a number of related papers (Bernanke
and Gertler, 2000; Batini and Nelson, 2000; Cecchetti et al, 2000), the aim is not to compare
the performance of different monetary policy rules in the context of a realistic, calibrated
model of the economy. Rather, it is to highlight the difference between a proactive monetary
policy and a reactive monetary policy in the context of a simple and transparent framework. It
turns out that although the model is quite simple, the optimal monetary policy is not trivial, and
depends on the exogenous economic conditions in a non-linear way. Although this non-
linearity complicates the analysis, we think it is an essential feature of the question we study in
this paper because financial crises are inherently non-linear events. We hope that in a second
step, the approach can be transposed to more realistic models of the economy.

Our analysis is based on a reduced-form model that is very close to the standard undergraduate
text-book macroeconomic model. In the appendix we provide micro-foundations in the spirit of
the “Dynamic New Keynesian” literature. Private agents have utility functions and optimize
intertemporally. The government prints and distributes money, which is used because of a
cash-in-advance constraint. Nominal wages are predetermined, giving rise to a short-run
Phillips Curve. Monetary policy has a credit channel, based on collateral. The collateral is
productive capital; its price is driven by the expected level of productivity in the long run.

The reduced-form model has two periods t = 0,1 . Period 0 is the period in which the problem
“builds up” (debt is accumulated). In period 1, the long-run level of productivity is revealed.
An asset market crash may or not occur, depending on the nature of the news. If the long-run
level of productivity is lower than expected, the price of the asset falls, reducing the collateral
basis for new borrowing. If the price of collateral is excessively low relative to firms’ debt
burden, the asset market crash provokes a credit crunch and a fall in real activity.

Note that these market dynamics are completely driven by the arrival of news on long-run
productivity. The asset market boom is not caused by a monetary expansion or a bubble. Nor is
the crash caused by a monetary restriction, or a self-fulfilling liquidity crisis. Irrational
expectations or multiple equilibria can be introduced into the model, but keeping in line with
our desire to stay close to the textbook framework, we prefer to abstract from these
considerations in the benchmark model. At the end of this section we briefly discuss a variant


                                                  12
                                             - 13 -


of the model in which investors are “irrationally exuberant”. The appendix presents a variant of
the model in which investors are rational but asset market crashes are self-fulfilling.


4.1 The model

The equations of the reduced-form model are as follows.




   y t = mt − pt (1)
  
   y t = αpt + ε t (2)
   y = −σr         (3)
   0

where y t is output at time t, mt is money supply, pt is the price level and r is the real interest
rate between period 0 and period 1. All variables, except the real interest rate, are in logs.

The first two equations characterizes aggregate demand and aggregate supply. Aggregate
supply is increasing with the nominal price level because the nominal wage is sticky. The third
equation says that the first-period output is decreasing with the real interest rate. It is based, in
the micro-founded model, on the Euler equation for consumption.

The key difference between our model and the standard macro model is the “supply shock”, ε .
In the standard model the supply shock is an exogenous technological shock or more generally,
any exogenous event which affects the productivity of firms (e.g., an earthquake). Here the
supply shock is instead a “financial” shock and it is not entirely exogenous, since its
distribution depends on firms’ debt and the price of assets, two variables that monetary policy
may influence. That monetary policy can influence debt accumulation ex ante (in period 0)
plays a central role in our analysis of proactive monetary policy.

The supply shock ε results from the occurrence of a credit crunch in the corporate sector. For
simplicity, we assume that the credit crunch can occur only in period 1:

ε0 = 0
ε 1 = 0 if no credit crunch

 = −v if credit crunch.

In the micro-founded model, the occurrence of a credit crunch depends on two variables: the
debt burden of the corporate sector and the price of collateral. Firms issue a quantity of debt D
in period 0 and must repay (1 + r)D in period 1. (Debt is in real terms.) In addition, some firms
must obtain new credit in period 1 to finance working capital. The firms that need but do not
obtain this intra-period credit simply do not produce, which reduces aggregate supply.




                                                  13
                                              - 14 -


In period 1, the firms’ access to new credit depends on the value of their collateral. Because of
a debt renegotiation problem a la Hart and Moore (1994), firms’ total debt cannot exceed the
value of their collateral. Denoting by Q1 the real value of collateral in period 1, and by γ the
required level of intra-period credit, the firms that require intra-period credit can operate if and
only if (1 + r ) D + γ ≤ Q1 . There is a credit crunch if and only if this condition is not satisfied.

                    Q1 < (1 + r ) D + γ                                           (4)

That is, there is a credit crunch if the value of firms’collateral is low relative to their debt
burden.


4.2 Monetary policy and financial fragility

Monetary policy influences the two key variables that determine the occurrence of a credit
crunch in period 1. First, a monetary expansion ex post (in period 1) should increase the price
of collateral and may, if it is large enough, relax the collateral constraint. This is the ex post
credit channel of monetary policy 18. Second, and more interestingly, a monetary restriction ex
ante (in period 0) can reduce the accumulation of corporate debt D . This is the ex ante credit
channel of monetary policy. Indeed, containing firms’ debt burden is the purpose of a proactive
monetary policy in our framework. For simplicity, we abstract from the ex post channel by
assuming that the ex post real price of collateral is exogenous to monetary policy.19

The probability that the economy falls in a credit crunch is a measure of its financial fragility.
We denote this probability by µ . It is equal to the probability that the price of collateral falls
below the threshold defined in equation (4):

µ = Pr[Q1 < γ + (1 + r ) D ]                                                    (5)

The probability of a credit crunch is increasing with the ex post debt burden, (1 + r)D . In turn,
the level of firms’ borrowing in period 0, D , is a decreasing function of r . For a monetary
restriction in period 0 (a rise in r ) to reduce the probability of a credit crunch, the debt burden
(1 + r)D must be decreasing with r . That is, the semi-elasticity of firms’ borrowing with
respect to the real interest rate should be lower than –1. The model in the appendix satisfies
this property, since it yields the expression:

(1 + r ) D = E0 (Q1 ) − (1 + r ) K                                              (6)


18
   Note that if corporate debt were nominal, the ex post credit channel would involve another
effect. A monetary expansion would contribute to relax the collateral constraint by inflating
away a fraction of the debt.
19
   This result is obtained, in the micro-founded model, by assuming that households’ utility is
linear in period 1.



                                                   14
                                           - 15 -


where K is the level of firms’ equity. The debt burden is linearly increasing with the expected
price of collateral, and linearly decreasing with the real interest rate. Hence we have that the
probability of a credit crunch is decreasing with the ex ante real interest rate:

∂µ
   <0                                                                       (7)
∂r


This result is central to our analysis: a preemptive monetary restriction at period 0 reduces the
risk of a credit crunch at period 1. The monetary restriction reduces the debt accumulated by
firms, and so makes them more resilient to negative shocks in the price of collateral.

4.3 Reactive and proactive monetary policies

As noted earlier, the difference between our model and the standard textbook model is that the
distribution of supply shocks at period 1 is endogenous to monetary policy at period 0. We call
a proactive monetary policy a policy that is geared towards avoiding a credit crunch in period
1. This is by contrast with a reactive policy, that simply responds to a credit crunch if it
occurs—making no difference between a credit crunch and a standard supply shock.

A pro-active monetary policy involves a trade-off between the level of output in period 0 and
the risk of a credit crunch in period 1. The risk of a credit crunch can be reduced by a monetary
restriction, but this restriction also depresses output and prices in period 0, since:


  y 0 = −σr               (8)
  p 0 = −σr / α           (9)

By contrast with a reactive monetary policy, a proactive monetary policy is determined in the
context of a trade-off between period 0 policy objectives in terms of output and prices, and the
risk of a credit crunch in period 1.

In order to investigate this trade-off one has to endow the monetary authorities with an
intertemporal objective function. We assume that the government minimizes the following
quadratic loss function:

L = ∑ ( pt 2 + ωy t 2 )                                                     (10)
    t = 0,1




4.4 A non-conventional, non-linear Taylor rule

We now illustrate the difference between proactive and reactive monetary policies with a
specification of the model that draws on the recent debates on the “New Economy” and the
stock market. Assume that in the second period, the price of collateral can take two values, a



                                                15
                                              - 16 -


high level, Q H , corresponding to the “New Economy” scenario, and a low level, Q L ,
corresponding to the “Old Economy” scenario. Viewed from period 0, the probability of the
“New Economy” scenario is a measure of the optimism of economic agents. We denote it by
PNE , and by POE = 1 − PNE the probability of the Old Economy scenario.

The realization of the “Old Economy” scenario is associated with a fall in asset prices and
possibly, a credit crunch. By equation (4), a credit crunch occurs in the event of the realization
of the “Old Economy” scenario if Q L < (1 + r ) D + γ . Substituting out D with equation (6) and
noting that E0 (Q1 ) = PNE QH + (1 − PNE )Q L , the condition for a credit crunch can be written

K (1 + r ) < γ + PNE ⋅ (Q H − Q L ).                                             (11)

A credit crunch is more likely to occur ex post if private agents are more confident in the “New
Economy” ex ante ( PNE is large), because firms borrow more. It is also more likely if the asset
price differential between the “New Economy” and the “Old Economy” is large.

The authorities can maintain the probability of a credit crunch at its minimum level of 0 by
setting the first period real interest rate at the following level:

         γ + PNE ⋅ (Q H − Q L )
1+ r =                                                                                    (12)
                   K

This rule implies that the monetary authorities should respond to rising confidence in the
“New Economy” (an increase in PNE ) by restricting monetary policy (raising r ).
Note the difference with standard rules, such as the Taylor rule. Standard rules make the
monetary authorities respond to the current or expected levels of macroeconomic variables
such as the output gap or the inflation rate. The rule above suggests that the monetary
policymaker should respond to prospective developments in asset markets, for which
macroeconomic aggregates do not provide appropriate summary statistics.

It is not clear, however, that the authorities always wish to reduce the probability of a credit
crunch to zero. The required level of the real interest rate may be excessively high. There is a
threshold r above which the authorities prefer to take the risk of a credit crunch, and respond
ex post if need be—that is, to be reactive rather than proactive.

By adopting a reactive approach, the government can set its loss to zero in the first period, but
takes the risk of incurring a strictly positive loss in the second period if a credit crunch occurs.
                                                                   2      2
In the latter case the authorities minimize the loss function p 2 + ωy 2 under the constraint
 y 2 = αp 2 − v . The solution is p2 = ωαv /(1 + ωα 2 ), y 2 = −v /(1 + ωα 2 ) and the loss is equal to
ωv 2 /(1 + ωα 2 ) .20 The intertemporal loss is equal to the probability of a credit crunch, POE ,
times the loss conditional on a credit crunch
20
  The credit crunch increases the price level because it reduces supply without changing
demand. If firms used variable production inputs other than labor—or if households were


                                                   16
                                              - 17 -




                    ωv 2
Lreactive = POE            .                                                     (13)
                  1 + ωα 2

By contrast, if the government raises the real interest rate to the level implied by (12) in order
to avoid a credit crunch, ouput and prices are depressed below the target levels in period 1.
One has y1 = −σ r, p1 = −σr / α , so that the authorities have to suffer a loss of

                               2
                      2 σr 
L proactive = (1 + ωα )  .                                                     (14)
                       α 

The government adopts a proactive policy if L proactive < Lreactive. Simple computations show
that this is the case if the real interest rate required by a proactive policy is not too high:

        α     v
r≤r ≡              ωPOE .                                                (15)
        σ 1 + ωα 2

The maximum real interest rate that the government is ready to bear in order to forestall a
credit crunch is increasing with the probability of a credit crunch, POE , and with the output
cost of a credit crunch, v . It is decreasing with the sensitivity of output to the real interest rate,
σ.

Figure 13 illustrates how the optimal monetary policy depends on the optimism of the private
sector. It shows how the real interest rate r , the first-period level of output and prices,
 y 0 and p0 , and the level of domestic credit D , depend on the probability of realization of the
“New Economy” scenario. The figure was constructed for the following values of the
parameters: Q H = 100, Q L = 75, K = 75, γ = 200 / 3, α = 1 / 2, σ = 1 / 4, ω = 1 / 2, v = 10% .
The price of collateral is 25 percent lower in the “Old Economy” scenario than in the “New
Economy” one. A credit crunch is associated with a 10 percent drop in output. The elasticity of
first-period output with respect to the real interest rate is 0.25 (i.e., a 1 percent rise in the real
interest rate depresses first-period output by 0.25 percent).

As the private sector’s optimism increases, the economy goes through three different phases.
First, if PNE is low (lower than 33 percent in the figure), firms’ borrowing is sufficiently low
that the realization of the “Old Economy” scenario is not associated with a credit crunch. In
this case, the government adopts a reactive policy because there is no reason to be proactive. If
 PNE takes intermediate values (between 33 and 60 percent in the figure), the government
restricts monetary policy in a proactive way. Finally, if PNE is high, the government reverts to
a reactive stance, even though there is a risk that the economy falls in a credit crunch. The


credit constrained—the credit crunch would also reduce demand (making the model more
consistent with the evidence that busts are deflationary, see figures 11 and 12) .



                                                   17
                                             - 18 -


reason is that, given the private sector’s high level of optimism, the government would have to
raise the real interest rate to an excessive level in order to insure the economy against a credit
crunch. At the same time, the benefit of the proactive policy is lower since the credit crunch is
less likely to occur. Leaning against the market has higher costs and lower benefits. The
proactive policy dominates for intermediate levels of “market exuberance”.

The model highlights both the potential benefits and the limits of a proactive monetary policy.
It may be optimal, in some circumstances, to sacrifice some output in order to reduce the risk
of a collateral-induced credit crunch. However, there are also circumstances in which the
domestic authorities are better off accepting the risk of a credit crunch (i.e., a reactive policy).
Whether the authorities should in practice engage in a proactive policy at a particular time is
contingent on many factors, and is a matter of judgment. In our model, the optimal monetary
policy depends on the observable macroeconomic variables, and on the private sector’s
expectations, in a highly non-linear way. This suggests to us that the optimal monetary policy
probably does not take the form of a simple mechanical rule such as the Taylor rule, even if it
is augmented by a linear term in asset prices. Which form it should take in practice is difficult
to assess on the basis of our very stylized model. Further theoretical and empirical work is
needed before we can assess with some confidence the scope for proactive monetary policies.

4.5 Irrational exuberance

To conclude this section, let us re-emphasize that our analysis of proactive monetary policy is
not premised on the assumption that asset prices deviate from their fundamental values. The
essential variable, from the point of view of policymaking is the risk of a credit crunch induced
by an asset market reversal. This assessment can be made based on the historical record (as
illustrated in sections 2 and 3), as well as information specific to each episode. In particular,
the suspicion that an asset market boom is a bubble which will have to burst at some point is an
important input in this assessment. However, bubbles are not of the essence of the question
since, as our model shows, the question would arise even in a world without bubbles. Hence,
the debate about proactive versus reactive monetary policies should not be reduced to a debate
over the central bank’s ability to recognize a bubble when it sees one.

Going back to our model, the notion of irrational expectations can be captured by assuming
that private agents base their decisions, in period 0, on an excessively optimistic assessment of
the probability of the “New Economy” scenario. Let us assume that firms borrow in period 0
                                '
on the basis of a probability PNE  which is larger than the true probability PNE . The monetary
authorities base instead their policy on the true probability.

Figure 14 shows the optimal monetary policy as a function of the private sector’s optimism
               '
(measured by PNE  ), assuming that the monetary authorities keep their own estimate at
 PNE = 0.1 . Otherwise, the calibration is the same as in Figure 13. The real interest rate
required by the proactive monetary policy is exactly the same as before, since it is dictated by
the expectations of the market, not those of the central bank. However, the proactive monetary
policy is maintained for higher levels of market optimism than before, because this optimism is




                                                  18
                                           - 19 -


not shared by the monetary authorities. Hence irrational exuberance broadens the scope for
proactive monetary policy.


                       Section 5. Conclusions and Policy Implications

The analysis in this paper suggests that boom-busts in asset prices can be very costly in terms
of declining output. This was clearly the case in the U.S. Great Depression and in the recent
Japanese experience. We also argue that there is a case under certain circumstances to use
monetary policy in a proactive way to restrict private domestic credit and diffuse an asset price
boom to prevent a credit crunch.

The consensus view among policy makers today however, is not to pursue such a course but
rather to follow a reactive policy and deal with the consequences of an asset price bust after it
happens. Our paper we believe suggests that the case for a proactive policy is a real issue—that
the current strategy of following a Taylor rule that focuses the policy instrument exclusively on
deviations from inflation forecasts and the output gap—and then injecting liquidity ex post in
the event of a credit crunch, may in certain circumstances be more costly in terms of lost
output than a proactive policy incorporating asset prices directly into the central bank’s
objective function. In a sense had the Federal Reserve followed the views of Strong and later
Harrison and defused the stock market boom in 1928 rather than following the policies that it
did, the outcome would have been very different. A similar conjecture could be made about the
Bank of Japan’s policy in the late 1980s.

Our analysis in this paper should be interpreted as being mainly suggestive because we do not
provide empirical estimates of the magnitude of the output losses under the alternative policy
strategies. To do this would require either simulating the effects of alternative policy rules in
an econometric model or in a calibrated dynamic general equilibrium model that would involve
the kind of non-linearity we have emphasized in this paper. These are topics for future
research.

        Finally the descriptive evidence that we present shows that stock market boom-busts
are rare events, whereas property boom-busts are quite frequent. This suggests prima facie that
the case for a proactive policy may be more telling to deal with property price credit crunches.
Since these events occur quite regularly in the smaller countries of Europe this issue may pose
a challenge for the ECB which sets its policy based primarily on Europe wide objectives.




                                                19
                                         - 20 -


                                        REFERENCES


Batini, Nicoletta, and Edward Nelson, 2000, “When the Bubble Bursts: Monetary Policy Rules
        and Foreign Exchange Market Behavior,” mimeo, Bank of England, London.

Bayoumi, Tamim, and Charles Collyns, 2000, Post-Bubble Blues: How Japan Responded to
     Asset Price Collapse (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Bernanke, Ben, 1983, “Non-monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
      Great Depression,” American Economic Review Vol. 73, pp. 257–71.

______, and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations,”
      American Economic Review Vol.. 79, pp. 14–31.

______, and Mark Gertler, 2000, “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 7559.

______, and Mark Gertler, 2001, “Should Central Banks Respond To Movements in Asset
      Prices?” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, pp.253-257.

Bordo, Michael D, Takatoshi Ito, and Tokuo Iwaisako, 1997, “Banking Crisis and Monetary
       Policy: Japan in the 1990s and the U.S. in the 1930s,” University of Tsukuba (mimeo).

Cecchetti, Stephen B, Hans Genberg, John Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwami, 2000, Asset Prices
      and Central Bank Policy (London: International Center for Monetary and Banking
      Studies).

Collyns, Charles, and Abdejhak Senhadji, 2002, “Lending Booms, Real Estate, Bubbles and
       the Asian Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 02/20 (Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).

Drees, Buckhard, and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, 1998, The Nordic Banking Crises: Pitfalls in
       Financial Liberalization? IMF Occasional Paper No. 161 (Washington: International
       Monetary Fund).

Eichengreen, Barry, and Michael D. Bordo, 2002, “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from
       the Last Era of Financial Globalization,” NBER Working Paper No. 8716.

Filardo, Andrew J, 2000, “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices,” Federal Reserve Bank of
       Kansas City Review, Vol. 85, No. 3.

Fisher, Irving, 1933, Debt deflation, New York.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United States 1867
      to 1960 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, New Jersey).



                                              20
                                         - 21 -




Galbraith, John, 1958, The Great Crash (Boston, Houghlin Mifflin).

Garber, Peter, 2000, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias (Cambridge:
      MIT Press).

Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1994, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
      Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(4), pp.841–79.

International Monetary Fund, 2000, World Economic Outlook, Chapter III, May 2000: Asset
        Prices and the Business Cycle (Washington).

Iwaisako, Tokuo and Takatisho Ito, 1995, “Explaining Asset Bubbles in Japan,” NBER
      Working Paper No. 5350.

Kanaya, Akihiro and David Woo, 2000, “The Japan Banking Crisis of the 1990s: Sources and
      Lessons,” IMF Working Paper 00/7 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Kindleberger, Charles, 1989, Manias, Panics and Crashes, (Revised Edition New York Basic
       Books).

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
       Vol. 105 (2), pp. 211–48.

Meltzer, Allan, 2002 (forthcoming), A History of the Federal Reserve, (Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press).

Mishkin, Frederick S. and Eugene White, 2002, “U.S. Stock Market Crashes and their
      Aftermath: Implications for Monetary Policy” Rutgers University (mimeo) February.

Romer, Christina, 1990, “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, Vol.105 (August) pp. 597–624.

______, 1992 “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 52,
      pp. 757–84.

Schinasi, Garry and Monica Hargreaves, 1993, “Boom and Bust in Asset Markets in the 1980s:
       Causes and Consequences” in Staff Studies For the World Economic Outlook,
       (Washington)

White, Eugene N., 1990, “The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited,” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives Vol.4 (2), Spring, pp. 67–83.

______, 2000, “Banking and Finance in the Twentieth Century,” in Stanley Engerman and Robert
      Gallman, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Vol. III
      (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp. 743–802.



                                              21
                                                        - 22 -



                                                        APPENDIX

The model has three periods t = 0,1,2 (one period more than the reduced-form model). The last period is added so
as to endogenize the price of the asset. There are two types of private agents: households and entrepreneurs. There
is a continuum of mass 1 of each type. Households supply labor and funds to entrepreneurs, who produce an
homogeneous consumption good. We assume that there is a fixed quantity of productive capital in the economy.
Capital does not depreciate and it cannot be reproduced. Productive capital can be though of as “land”, and the
consumption good as “fruit”.

Households are identical and live for three periods. Their intertemporal utility is given by:

                                       U h = u(C 0 ) + C1 + C 2      ( A1)

where Ct denotes the representative household’s consumption of fruit, and u (⋅) is increasing and concave.

Entrepreneurs live in the first two periods t = 0,1 . They have a native ability to combine land with labor to
produce fruit. We assume that each entrepreneur operates exactly one unit of land. When combined with Lt units
of labor, one unit of land yields:

                                       y t = L1t −η ,    t = 0, 1,           ( A2 )

units of good ( η ∈ (0,1) ).

We assume that in the last period entrepreneurs are no longer required in the production process. The production
process in period 2 is the same as in Lucas’ “tree economy”: each unit of land yields an exogenous quantity of
good, denoted by R. This assumption captures the idea that in the long run the economy reaches a state of
equilibrium where the type of financial disruption that we focus on no longer matters. Variable R may be
interpreted as the long-run productivity of capital. Its value is unknown at time 0 and is revealed at time 1.

At time 0 the productive asset (land) is owned by households. The entrepreneurs must take possession of the asset
in order to produce but they do not have enough cash. We assume that the entrepreneurs finance the purchase of
the asset by issuing debt. Let Q0 be the real price of the asset in period 0. At the beginning of period 0 each
entrepreneur is endowed with K and borrows D = Q0 − K .

Entrepreneurs produce in periods 0 and 1. We assume that in period 1, entrepreneurs must borrow “inside the
period” to finance working capital. This can be justified by the fact that inside the period, production takes time,
and some production inputs that are immobilized in the production process must be financed by credit. The
entrepreneurs that do not manage to obtain the intra-period credit are inactive—they do not produce. In general
the intra-period credit requirement could differ across entrepreneurs, for example because of idiosyncratic shocks
in the production process. The real value of the credit required by entrepreneur j is denoted by γ ( j ) .

We further assume that entrepreneurs’ debt is subject to a re-negotiation problem a la Hart and Moore (1994) and
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). An entrepreneur has the option to walk away with the output after production has
taken place, leaving the asset for his creditors to seize. The entrepreneur walks away after production has taken
place in period 1 if and only if his total debt (the repayment of the period 0 loan contracted to purchase the
productive asset, plus the intra-period credit) exceeds the value of collateral. If creditors anticipate that the
entrepreneur will default they do not provide the intra-period credit and the entrepreneur cannot operate. Hence
the entrepreneur can operate if and only if the required intra-period credit is lower than the net value of the firm,
i.e. if:

γ ( j) < Q1 − (1 + r )D        ( A3)



                                                             22
                                                             - 23 -



At the level of the entrepreneur, this constraint is of the “all-or-nothing” type. If it is not satisfied the entrepreneur
is simply inactive and the asset is sold at the end of the period. If it is satisfied the entrepreneur operates free of
credit constraint. We assume that the proceeds of the sale are always sufficient to repay the period 0 lenders (i.e.,
 Q1 ≥ (1 + r ) D ), so that there is no default risk in equilibrium.

One has to make an assumption on the distribution of the intra-period credit requirement across entrepreneurs. For
simplicity we assume that there are two types of entrepreneurs: some need a level γ of intra-period credit and the
others do not need intra-period credit at all. Denoting by φ the fraction of entrepreneurs of the first type, the
number of active entrepreneurs at period 1, N1 , is given by:

N1 = 1              if Q1 − (1 + r )D ≥ γ
                                              (A 4)
   = 1− φ           if Q1 − (1 + r) D < γ

In periods 0 and 1, after production has taken place there is a financial market in which households exchange
consumption good, money, IOUs, and the productive asset. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that
entrepreneurs do not participate in the financial market. (This is necessarily true in period 1 because entrepreneurs
consume their end-of-life wealth.) Hence in period 0 the real price of the asset results from the first-order
conditions of the inter-temporal optimization problem of households

Q 0u ' (C 0 ) = E 0 (Q1 )           ( A5)
u ' (C 0 ) = 1 + r                  ( A6)

The utility function being linear in periods 1 and 2, the price of the asset at period 1 is simply equal to its final
return:

Q1 = R               ( A7)

Money is used by households in periods 0 and 1. Money demand results from a cash-in-advance constraint:

                                                        Mt
                                                 Ct =           t = 0, 1.   ( A8)
                                                        Pt

The domestic government prints and transfers money to households in a lump-sum way. For simplicity we assume
that the government makes the consumption of households equal to that of entrepreneurs by lump-sum transfers,
so that the consumption of the representative households is proportional to aggregate output:

C t = λYt                    (A9)

(where λ is equal to ½since there is the same number of entrepreneurs and households).

We assume that the nominal wage levels of periods 0 and 1, W0 and W1 , are preset at the beginning of period 0,
before M 0 and M 1 are known. For simplicity, we take the nominal wages as exogenous to the analysis.

The labor market is perfectly competitive. Aggregate supply at time t is equal to the number of active
entrepreneurs times the supply per active entrepreneur. An active entrepreneur produces (W /(1 − η) P ) − (1−η) /η ,
while inactive entrepreneurs produce nothing. Hence aggregate supply can be written

                             −α
             1 Wt 
Yt = N t ⋅           
                                      .    ( A10)
             1 − η Pt 


                                                                  23
                                                       - 24 -



where α ≡ (1 − η ) / η is the elasticity of aggregate supply with respect to the real wage.

Leaving aside unimportant constants, the model can be written in log form like in the text (equation (2)), with
ε t = log N t . We have ε t = 0 , except in period 1 if there is a credit crunch, in which case ε 1 = −v ≡ log(1 − φ ) .

It results from D = Q0 − K and the first-order conditions (A5)-(A6) that the debt burden in period 1 is:

(1 + r ) D = E 0 (Q1 ) − K (1 + r )        ( A11)

(equation (6) in the text.)

We conclude by presenting a variant of the model in which credit crunches can be self-fulfilling, which gives
scope for a form of lending-in-last-resort policy. Assume now that households’ utility is concave in period 1
consumption, that is, equation (A1) is replaced by

U h = u(C 0 ) + u(C1 ) + C 2 .        ( A12)

The period 1 price of the asset must now satisfy

Q1u ' (C1 ) = R.                 ( A13)

Substituting out P1 from (A8) and (A10) and using C1 = λY1 , aggregate supply can be written as a function of
the number of active firms

Y1 = κ N 11/(1+α ) .      ( A14)

                                      α /(1+α )
                      (1 − η )M 1 
where κ ≡ λ1/(1+α )              
                                                 .
                      W1          

An equilibrium without a credit crunch can coexist with an equilibrium with a credit crunch. To see this, let us
denote by Y H and Q H the levels of output and asset price in the equilibrium without a credit crunch and by Y L
and Q L the analogs in the equilibrium with a credit crunch. One has Y H = κ > Y L = κ (1 − φ ) 1/(1+α ) and
Q H = R / u' (λY H ) > Q L = R / u' (λY L ) . Output and the price of the asset are both lower in the equilibrium with
a credit crunch.

For both equilibria to exist one must have Q H ≥ γ + (1 + r ) D > Q L . The price of collateral in the credit-crunch
equilibrium must be sufficiently low so as to provoke a credit crunch, and sufficiently high in the no-credit-crunch
equilibrium so as to avoid a credit crunch. The intuition behind the multiplicity involves the following vicious
circle. A fall in the price of collateral reduces aggregate supply and consumption; households’ attempt to sell the
asset (in order to smooth consumption intertemporally) then depresses the price of the asset in equilibrium.

The bad equilibrium is removed if the monetary authorities peg the price of the asset at the good equilibrium level
Q1H . This requires a promise by the monetary authorities to inject money into the economy would it threaten to
switch to the bad equilibrium, a policy that can be interpreted as a form of lending-in-last-resort.




                                                            24
                                                    The United States
                          Figure 1. Stock Price Index: Standard and Poor's 500, 1922-1941.
 200
 180
 160
 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
    1922          1924          1926         1928          1930             1932          1934      1936          1938           1940
    Source:
    Historical Statistics of the United States: Millenial Edition (2003).


                                 Figure 2. Agricultural Land Prices Per Acre, 1910-1945.
120
                                                                                                                             Nominal
100                                                                                                                          in 1960$


  80

  60

  40

  20

   0
   1910             1915                 1920               1925                   1930           1935             1940                   1945
    Source:
    Lindert (1988).



            Figure 3. Bank Loans: Total, Secured by Securities, and Secured by Real Estate 1921-1941.
20000
                                                                                                                                 Total
                                                                                                                                 On Securities
17500                                                                                                                            Real estate

15000

12500

10000

 7500

 5000

 2500

    0
    1921         1923         1925         1927          1929         1931           1933        1935      1937           1939            1941
   Source:
   Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics (1943).
                                                              Japan
                                             Figure 4. Nominal Land Prices, 1980-1998.
    120

    110

    100

     90

     80

     70

     60

     50
          1980          1982          1984          1986        1988          1990          1992          1994             1996            1998
           Source:
           Bordo, Ito and Iwaisako (1997).



                                        Figure 5. Stock Price Index: Nikkei, 1980-1998.
  35,000

  30,000

  25,000

  20,000

  15,000

  10,000

   5,000
          1978       1980        1982      1984        1986      1988         1990    1992         1994          1996          1998        2000
           Source:
           Bordo, Ito and Iwaisako (1997).



   Figure 6. Bank Loans: Total, Secured by Securities and other Assets and Secured by Real Estate, 1982-
                                                  1998.                            Real Estates and Floating Mortgage
7000000
                                                                                                             Securities and other assets

6000000                                                                                                      Total


5000000

4000000

3000000

2000000

1000000

      0
      1982              1984            1986           1988            1990          1992           1994                1996               1998
           Source:
           Bordo, Ito and Iwaisako (1997).
                             Figure 7. Boom-Bust in Residential Property Prices, 1970-1998 **

                                                               boom                                                                              boom
                             A. Australia                      bust                                               B. Canada                      bust
                                                               property price                                                                    property price
1.3
                                                                                       1.4
1.2
                                                       *89                             1.2
1.1
                                                                                        1
 1
                                                                                       0.8
0.9
                                                                                       0.6
0.8                                                                                    0.4

0.7                                                                                    0.2

0.6                                                                                     0
      1970   1974     1978      1982      1986          1990   1994             1998         1970   1974   1978     1982   1986     1990         1994             1998


                                                               boom                                                                              boom
                             C. Denmark                        bust
                                                                                                                  D. Finland                     bust
                                                               property price                                                                    property price
1.5                                                                                    1.8

1.4
                                                                                       1.6
1.3
                                                                                                                                           *91
                                                                                       1.4
1.2                                              *87
1.1                                                                                    1.2

 1
                                                                                        1
0.9
                                                                                       0.8
0.8

0.7                                                                                    0.6
      1970   1974     1978      1982      1986          1990   1994             1998         1970   1974   1978     1982   1986     1990         1994             1998


  Sources:
  Bank of International Settlements; International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook , International Monetary Fund.
  *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
  ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.


                                                                                              1
                             Figure 7. Boom-Bust in Residential Property Prices,1970-1998**

                                                              boom                                                                              boom
                              E. France                       bust                                                 F. Germany                   bust
                                                              property price                                                                    property price
1.2                                                                                  1.3

                                                              *94                    1.2
 1
                                                                                     1.1
0.8
                                                                                      1                  * 77

0.6                                                                                  0.9

                                                                                     0.8
0.4
                                                                                     0.7
0.2
                                                                                     0.6

 0                                                                                   0.5
      1970   1974     1978      1982      1986     1990      1994             1998         1971   1975      1979      1983      1987     1991     1995

                                                             boom                                                                               boom
                             G. Ireland                      bust                                                   H. Italy                    bust
                                                             property price                                                                     property price
1.5                                                                                  1.3
                                                                                     1.2
1.3                                                                                  1.1
                                                                                      1                                                90*
1.1
                                                                                     0.9
0.9                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                     0.7
0.7
                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                     0.5
0.5
                                                                                     0.4
0.3                                                                                  0.3
      1970   1974     1978      1982      1986     1990      1994             1998         1970   1974     1978      1982      1986     1990    1994         1998


 Sources:
 Bank of International Settlements; International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook , International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average. The data starts in 1971 for Germany due to limited availability.
                             Figure 7. Boom-Bust in Residential Property Prices, 1970-1998**

                                                                boom                                                                                    boom
                              I. Japan                          bust                                                   J. Netherlands                   bust
                                                                property price                                                                          property price
                                                                                    1.3
1.5
                                                                                    1.1
1.3
                                                          *92
1.1                                                                                 0.9

0.9
                                                                                    0.7
0.7
                                                                                    0.5
0.5
                                                                                    0.3
0.3

0.1                                                                                 0.1
      1970   1974     1978     1982      1986      1990         1994         1998         1970         1974     1978           1982      1986    1990   1994         1998


                                                                boom                                                                                    boom
                             K. Norway                          bust                                                          L. Spain                  bust
                                                                property price                                                                          property price
1.5                                                                                 1.4
                                            *87
1.3
                                                                                    1.2
1.1
                                                                                     1
0.9
                                                                                    0.8
0.7
                                                                                                 77*
                                                                                    0.6
0.5
                                                                                    0.4
0.3

0.1                                                                                 0.2
      1970   1974     1978     1982      1986      1990         1994         1998         1975           1979          1983           1987      1991     1995

 Sources:
 Bank of International Settlements; International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook , International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average. The data starts in 1975 for Spain due to limited availability.
                            Figure 7. Boom-Bust in Residential Property Prices, 1970-1998**

                                                            boom                                                                         boom
                            M. Sweden                       bust                                         N. United Kingdom               bust
                                                            property price                                                               property price
1.4                                                                                 1.4
1.3                                                   *91                           1.3
1.2                                                                                 1.2
1.1                                                                                 1.1
 1                                                                                   1
0.9                                                                                 0.9
0.8                                                                                 0.8
0.7                                                                                 0.7
0.6                                                                                 0.6
0.5                                                                                 0.5
0.4                                                                                 0.4
      1970   1974    1978      1982         1986   1990     1994             1998         1970   1974   1978   1982   1986        1990   1994             1998


                                                            boom
                         O. United States                   bust
                                                            property price
1.2

 1
                                      *84
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      1970   1974    1978      1982         1986   1990     1994             1998


 Sources:
 Bank of International Settlements; International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.
                               Figure 8. Boom-Bust in Industrial Share Prices, 1970-2001**

                                                                   boom                                                                          boom
                            A. Australia                           bust                                      B. Canada                           bust
                                                                   stock prices                                                                  stock prices
 3                                                                                 3

2.5                                                                               2.5

 2                                             *89                                 2

1.5                                                                               1.5

 1                                                                                 1

0.5                                                                               0.5

 0                                                                                 0
      1970   1974   1978    1982     1986          1990    1994     1998                1970   1974   1978   1982   1986     1990         1994     1998


                                                                   boom                                                                          boom
                            C. Denmark                             bust                                      D. Finland                          bust
                                                                   stock prices                                                                  stock prices
 3                                                                                 4

                                                                                  3.5
2.5
                                                                                   3
 2
                                                                                  2.5

1.5                                                                                2
                                             *87                                                                                    *91
                                                                                  1.5
 1
                                                                                   1
0.5
                                                                                  0.5

 0                                                                                 0
      1970   1974   1978     1982     1986          1990    1994       1998             1970   1974   1978   1982   1986     1990         1994     1998


 Sources:
 International Financial Statistics, World Economic Outlook and country desks, International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average. The data ends in 2000 for Denmark due to limited availability.
                              Figure 8. Boom-Bust in Industrial Share Prices, 1970-2001**

                                                             boom                                                                       boom
                             E. France                       bust                                       F. Germany                      bust
3.5                                                          stock prices                                                               stock prices
                                                                            3.5

 3                                                                            3

2.5                                                                         2.5
                                                      *94
 2                                                                            2
                                                                                                *77
1.5                                                                         1.5

 1                                                                            1

0.5                                                                         0.5

 0                                                                            0
      1970   1974   1978    1982    1986     1990     1994    1998                1970   1974   1978     1982      1986   1990   1994     1998


                                                             boom                                                                       boom
                            G. Ireland                       bust                                             H. Italy                  bust
                                                             stock prices                                                               stock prices
 3                                                                          3.5

                                                                              3
2.5

                                                                            2.5
 2                                                                                                                         *90
                                                                              2
1.5
                                                                            1.5
 1
                                                                              1

0.5                                                                         0.5

 0                                                                            0
      1970   1974   1978    1982    1986     1990     1994    1998                1970   1974   1978     1982      1986   1990   1994     1998


 Source:
 International Financial Statistics, World Economic Outlook and country desks, International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.
                              Figure 8. Boom-Bust in Industrial Share Prices, 1970-2001**

                                                                boom                                                                     boom
                              I. Japan                          bust                                      J. Netherlands                 bust
                                                                stock prices                                                             stock prices
 3                                                                             3.5

                                                      *92                       3
2.5

                                                                               2.5
 2
                                                                                2
1.5
                                                                               1.5
 1
                                                                                1

0.5                                                                            0.5

 0                                                                              0
      1970   1974   1978    1982    1986       1990     1994      1998               1970   1974   1978    1982   1986     1990   1994    1998


                                                               boom                                                                      boom
                            K. Norway                          bust                                         L. Spain                     bust
                                                               stock prices                                                              stock prices
 3                                                                              4

                                                                               3.5
2.5
                                                                                3
 2
                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                   *77
1.5                                      *87                                    2

                                                                               1.5
 1
                                                                                1
0.5
                                                                               0.5

 0                                                                              0
      1970   1974   1978    1982    1986       1990     1994      1998               1970   1974   1978    1982   1986     1990   1994    1998


 Source:
 International Financial Statistics, World Economic Outlook and country desks, International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.
                               Figure 8. Boom-Bust in Industrial Share Prices, 1970-2001**

                                                                     boom                                                                  boom
                             M. Sweden                               bust                                  N. United Kingdom               bust
                                                                     stock prices                                                          stock prices
3.5                                                                                  3

 3
                                                                                    2.5
2.5
                                                        *91                          2
 2
                                                                                    1.5
1.5
                                                                                     1
 1

0.5                                                                                 0.5

 0                                                                                   0
      1970   1974   1978     1982         1986   1990         1994     1998               1970   1974   1978   1982   1986   1990   1994     1998


                                                                     boom
                           O. United States                          bust
                                                                     stock prices
3.5

 3

2.5

 2

1.5

 1                                  *84

0.5

 0
      1970   1974   1978     1982         1986   1990         1994     1998


 Sources:
 International Financial Statistics, World Economic Outlook and country desks, International Monetary Fund.
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A.
 ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.
                                                                                                                                    boom
                                        Figure 9. U.S. Stock Prices: S&P 500, 1874-1999**                                           bust
                                                                                                                                    S&P 500

3.00

2.50

2.00
                                                                       *1930-1933
1.50           *1884
                             *1893

1.00

0.50
                                               *1907

0.00
       1874   1884        1894          1904       1914         1924       1934       1944          1954     1964   1974   1984      1994

 Source:
 Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition (2003)
 *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A. ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.


                                                                                                                                     boom
                        Figure 10: U.S. Stock Prices: Dow Jones Industrial Average, 1899 - 1999**                                    bust
4.50                                                                                                                                 DOWJ
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50                                               *1930-1933

2.00
1.50
                *1907
1.00
0.50
0.00
       1899      1909            1919          1929             1939           1949          1959          1969     1979     1989           1999


  Source:
  Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition (2003)
  *Banking crisis. See Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) Appendix A. ** Booms and busts are calculated by a three year moving average.
                    Figure 11. Ancillary Variables: Boom-Bust in Property Prices


                                                     A. CPI Inflation
10.0
 9.5
 9.0
 8.5
 8.0
 7.5
 7.0
 6.5
 6.0
 5.5
            t-3              t-2              t-1               t              t+1               t+2   t+3



                                                      B. Output Gap
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0        t-3              t-2             t-1                t              t+1               t+2   t+3

-2.0
-3.0
-4.0
-5.0



                                                    C. Domestic Credit
125.0
115.0
105.0
 95.0
 85.0
 75.0
 65.0
 55.0
 45.0
              t-3             t-2             t-1                   t          t+1               t+2   t+3


  Sources:
  International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook , International Monetary Fund.
                     Figure 12. Ancillary Variables: Boom-Bust in Stock Prices

                                                     A. CPI Inflation
  5.0

  4.5

  4.0

  3.5

  3.0

  2.5

  2.0

  1.5
             t-3             t-2              t-1               t             t+1               t+2   t+3



                                                      B. Output Gap
 4.0
 3.0
 2.0
 1.0
 0.0
-1.0        t-3              t-2             t-1                t             t+1               t+2   t+3

-2.0
-3.0
-4.0
-5.0



                                                    C. Domestic Credit
140.0
130.0
120.0
110.0
100.0
 90.0
 80.0
 70.0
 60.0
 50.0
             t-3             t-2              t-1               t             t+1               t+2   t+3
  Source:
  International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook , International Monetary Fund
                                         Figure 13

 30         Reactive               Proactive                               Reactive
                                                                                                 D
 25


 20


 15


 10
                                                              r(%)
  5
                                                yo(%)
  0
      0   0.1          0.2   0.3   0.4            0.5   0.6          0.7              0.8        0.9         1
                                               po(%)
 -5

                                                                                                       PNE
-10




                                         Figure 14
                                                                                      Reactive
30         Reactive                        Proactive
                                                                                                 D
25


20

                                                              r(%)
15


10


 5
                                                yo(%)
 0
      0   0.1          0.2   0.3   0.4        0.5       0.6          0.7              0.8        0.9         1
                                           po(%)
 -5

                                                                                                       PNE
-10
