                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION, INSTITUTIONS AND FINANCIAL
                  DEVELOPMENT: CROSS COUNTRY EVIDENCE


                                            Menzie D. Chinn
                                               Hiro Ito


                                          Working Paper 8967
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8967


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




Helpful comments were received from Joshua Aizenman, Michael Hutchison, Carl Walsh, Frank Warnock,
participants at the UCSC brown bag, the USC development seminar and, on an earlier version of the paper,
the ANU-IMF East Asia Office conference on “Regional Financial Markets” (Sydney, November 2001). We
also thank Ashok Mody and Dennis Quinn for providing data. Financial support of faculty research funds
of UC Santa Cruz are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions and Financial Development:
Cross Country Evidence
Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 8967
June 2002
JEL No. F36, F43, G28



                                              ABSTRACT

        The empirical relationship between capital controls and the financial development of credit and
equity markets is examined. We extend the literature on this subject along a number of dimensions.
Specifically, we (1) investigate a substantially broader set of proxy measures of financial development;
(2) create and utilize a new index based on the IMF measures of exchange restrictions that incorporates
a measure of the intensity of capital controls; and (3) extend the previous literature by systematically
examining the implications of institutional (legal) factors. The results suggest that the rate of financial
development, as measured by private credit creation and stock market activity, is linked to the existence
of capital controls. However, the strength of this relationship varies with the empirical measure used, and
the level of development. These results also suggest that only in an environment characterized by a
combination of a higher level of legal and institutional development will the link between financial
openness and financial development be readily detectable. A disaggregated analysis indicates that in
emerging markets the most important components of these legal factors are the levels of shareholder
protection and of accounting standards.




Menzie D. Chinn                                                   Hiro Ito
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
Social Sciences I                                                 Social Sciences I
University of California                                          University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                              Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER                                                          Email: hiroito@cats.ucsc.edu
Tel: (831) 459-2079
Fax: (831) 459-5900
Email: chinn@cats.ucsc.edu
1. Introduction
        Recent years have witnessed a resurgence of interest in financial development as a key driver
of economic growth.1 At the same time, the effects of capital controls have taken center stage in a
number of policy debates, especially in the wake of the East Asian currency crises.2 Hence, it appears
appropriate to now direct analytical attention to the question of whether capital controls are
compatible with financial development. The centerpiece of our discussion will be an econometric
analysis, using aggregate data on a large sample of countries over the 1977-1997 period.
        The analysis in this paper departs from that found in much of the extant literature. First, the
analysis skirts the financial development-growth versus capital liberalization-growth debate, and
restricts its attention to the linkage between capital liberalization and financial development. Second,
a larger set of financial development measures is used, including those pertaining to equity markets.
Third, a larger set of measures on restrictions on international financial transactions is used. That
translates into use of all the IMF’s indicators of exchange restrictions with the incorporation of their
intensity. Fourth, cross-country differences in the legal and institutional environment for financial
transactions are also incorporated in our analysis, which will allow us to investigate their impact on
the effectiveness of capital liberalization on financial development.
        Section 2 is reviews the relevant literature, while Section 3 presents the model specification,
data description, and empirical results. In Section 4 the focus is expanded to include the influence of
legal and institutional foundations on financial development. Concluding remarks are in Section 5.



2. A Selective Review of the Literature
        In contrast to the large body of cross-country work investigating the link between finance and
growth, literature examining the link between capital controls and/or financial openness and financial
development is fairly small. One paper of interest is by De Gregorio (1998). He examines the related


1
   See for instance Leahy, et al. (2001) for OECD-specific results. Klein and Olivei (2001) document the linkage for
developed countries, and its absence for less developed countries. Spiegel (2001) examines an APEC sample, while
Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001) document the fragility of many of these group-specific results. IMF
(2001, Chapter 4) surveys both the growth and finance, and finance and liberalization literature. For the most recent
review on finance and growth, refer to Quinn, et al. (2002)
2
  In this study we do not discuss the merits of capital controls in the context of financial crises. For a review, see
Aizenman (2002). Kletzer and Mody (2000) survey the debate in the context of “self-protection policies” for
emerging markets.


                                                          1
question of whether economies exhibiting greater financial integration experience greater financial
development. Instead of relying upon financial restrictions of a regulatory nature, he investigates the
effect of lack of financial integration characterized by deviations from two no arbitrage profits
conditions, the international arbitrage pricing model (IAPM) of Levine and Zervos (1995) and the
international capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) of Levine and Zervos (1998).
        After controlling for inflation rates and trade openness, De Gregorio finds that in a
cross-section of developing and industrialized countries, the no-arbitrage profits conditions have a
positive and statistically significant effect upon the lending, stock market capitalization and volatility
measures of financial deepening. The total value of shares traded per year measure only appears to
depend upon the ICAPM measure.
        In these analyses, one important distinction is that between behavior in developed and
developing countries. In the sample for which De Gregorio has data on the gross capital flows and
composite measures, the observations are restricted to developing countries. In these samples, he
finds only mixed evidence for any of these two measures having an effect. Gross capital flows do
appear to be correlated with the lending measure of financial deepening, an intuitive finding; at the
same time, this is the least convincing measure of the variable of interest.3
        More recently, Klein and Olivei (2001) examine a cross-section of 87 industrialized and less
developed countries over the 1976-1995 period. Their agenda actually includes both the link between
financial development and economic growth, as well as the nexus of liberalization and finance we are
interested. Here, we merely recount the results pertinent to the question at hand. Their regressions
take the form of:


        (1)      FDti − FDti− k = β0 + β1 FDti− k + β2 KALIBti− k ,t + β3 X i + ε ti


where FD is the financial development variable, KALIB is the capital account liberalization variable,
and X is a set of control variables, including regional and time dummies.
       Their measures of financial development include the ratio of liquid liabilities to GDP, the
proportion of financial intermediates’ claims on the private sector to GDP, and the ratio of private
bank to private plus central bank assets. Each of these measures has strengths and weaknesses. The

3
  Unfortunately, De Gregorio (1998) does not report results for the no-arbitrage profits measures broken down by
developing and developed countries. This is probably due to the small number of observations (there are about 24


                                                         2
liquid liabilities measure is the most common measure of financial development; it consists of the
sum of currency outside the banking system, plus demand and interest bearing liabilities of the
banking system. This measure, however, does not distinguish between allocation to private and
public sector entities, and hence could misleadingly indicate that a country with directed lending to
state owned enterprises actually had a advanced financial system, when in fact the banking system
was failing in its role as project monitor. The private claims measure addresses this deficiency, and is
similar to the series used by De Gregorio. Both of these data series are readily available. Finally, the
commercial bank assets ratio is meant to focus on the development of those services that are most
related to financial management.
        For KALIB, Klein and Olivei use the most common measure of capital account liberalization
– the IMF’s indicator variable on capital account restrictions from the Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) – or for a subset of industrialized countries, the
OECD measure of capital account liberalization.
        Comfortingly, Klein and Olivei find a relationship between capital account liberalization and
financial development. However, one marked and notable aspect of their results is that the identified
correlation is driven entirely by the developed countries in their sample. In other words, there is no
detectable relationship between liberalization and development for the less developed countries.
Klein and Olivei conjecture that this result obtains because the less developed countries were
latecomers to the liberalization game; hence it may merely be the case that the effects of
liberalization have not yet been felt, and that time will tell.
        To our knowledge, analyses with a similar cross-country breadth to the Klein and Olivei
study have not been performed for stock or bond market measures, although there have a number of
papers focusing on growth effects of liberalizing access to equity markets. 4 Consequently, it appears
useful to re-examine the issues raised by the previous studies systematically.


3. An Econometric Analysis of Financial Openness and Development
        The analysis that we conduct takes a broad view of financial development – that is it includes
the lending measures typically used, but also incorporates various measures of the equity markets. In


observations per integration measure).
4
  See Bekaert et al. (2000) for growth, and Chari and Henry (2002) for investment, for instance. Henry (2000)
evaluates the liberalization effects on abnormal returns in a short window, which is tangentially related to some of
our measures of equity market development.


                                                         3
some respects, the development of equity markets may be a better measure of the ability of an
economy to mobilize capital in an efficient manner; conventional measures of lending activity are
susceptible to mis-characterizing government directed lending as market driven lending. Hence, a
variety of financial deepening measures are used, although results from only a subset of the measures
analyzed will be reported.


3.1 The Empirical Specification

         In principle, one would like to estimate the long run equilibrium relationship in:


         (2)      FDti = γ 0 + γ 1 KAOPEN ti + X ti Γ + uti


where KAOPEN is a measure of capital openness (or an inverse of a measure of capital controls), and
X is a vector of economic control variables. The capital control variables are described in greater
detail in the data section. Here we focus on the economic rationale underpinning the other right hand
side variables, in the X vector, which could in principle include a very large number of variables. In
this analysis, the set is kept fairly small, so as to retain some interpretability of the correlations. The
economic variables include log per capita income in PPP terms, the inflation rate, and trade openness,
measured as the ratio of the sum of exports and imports to GDP.
         Log per capita income is included as there is a long literature ascribing financial deepening,
aside from the role of regulation, to the increasing complexity of economic structures associated with
rising income. The inflation rate is included because it (or the volatility in the inflation rate)5 may
cause distortions in decision-making regarding nominal magnitudes. In particular, moderate to high
inflation may discourage financial intermediation, and encourage saving in real assets. Finally, trade
openness is included as an ad hoc control; many empirical studies find a correlation of trade openness
with any number of economic variables.
         It turns out that it is difficult to control for secular trends in financial deepening in the context
of the panel regression in levels, as in equation 2.6 This is most likely due to the large cyclical



5
  Since in most cases, the volatility of inflation rises with the inflation rate, the inflation rate could be proxying for
either or both of these effects.
6
  See Chinn (2001) for some representative regression results using individual measures of controls from the IMF.


                                                            4
variations in the financial deepening variables, along with trending behavior of the variables of
interest. Hence, an alternative specification, akin to a panel error-correction model, is estimated:


       (3)      FDti − FDti− 5 = γ 0 + ρFDti− 5 + γ 1 KAOPEN ti− 5 + X ti− 5 Γ + uti


This regression carries with it the following interpretation: The rate of financial development
depends inversely upon the level of financial development, negatively upon the extent of capital
controls (or positively upon the degree of financial openness), and upon a series of economic control
variables.7
       The use of the long horizon of five years (the average annual growth rate over a five year
period) has two advantages. First, it serves to minimize the effect of correlations due to business
cycle fluctuations. Second, relating the growth rate between period t-5 and period t to the level of
variables dated at time t-5 serves to mitigate endogeneity problems. Specifically, in regressions of
either the level or the growth rate of financial development on variables such as per capita income or
more importantly capital controls, one could easily imagine two way causality at the annual
frequency. For instance, increases in the ratio of private credit to GDP might cause more rapid GDP
growth. Or increasing stock market capitalization might induce policymakers to have a less sanguine
view of the effects of capital controls. Analyzing the data at five year horizons mitigates (but does not
completely solve) this problem.
       The drawback, of course, is that one is throwing away some data by using average growth
rates (non-overlapping panel analysis), and sampling the “initial conditions” at every five years. The
ideal solution would be to purge the data of cyclical fluctuations and instrument the right hand side
variables; in a large panel study of this nature, it is difficult to implement such econometric
techniques in a manner that is appropriate, so we resort to simpler and more readily interpretable
methods. In any event, this approach is common to the literature (and in our opinion is preferred to
pure cross section regressions that examine growth over a very long horizon such as 20 years).


3.2 Data
       The data are drawn from a number of sources, primarily the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators, the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, and the databases associated




                                                        5
with Beck, Kunt, and Levine (2000). The analysis is based upon data originally recorded at an annual
frequency, over the 1970-1997 period, covering 105 countries. Details are reported in Appendix 1.


3.2.1 Financial Development Indicators.

        A large number of indicators were examined; only a subset actually used in the analysis, or
discussed in the text, are described below (the remaining are described in Appendix 1). The first set is
the most familiar: LLY is liquid liabilities to GDP ratio, while PCGDP is the ratio of private credit
from deposit money banks to the private sector.8 The second set is slightly less familiar, and applies
to the equity markets. SMKC is the ratio of the stock market capitalization to GDP, SMTV is the ratio
of total value of stocks traded to GDP, and SMTO is the stock market turn over ratio. EQTY is the
equity issues to GDP ratio.
        Finally, there are a series of measures that pertain to the bond markets. Unfortunately, the
number of observations is quite small, and the cross-country coverage quite narrow.9 For instance,
there are only about 140 annual observations on long-term private debt issues, while there are over
1900 on the liquid liabilities measures. When the specification involves five year growth rates, the
number of observations is so small that we are unable to obtain any interesting results for this
particular aspect of financial development, even though long term financing through bonds is likely
to be an important factor in economic development (See for example Herring and Chatusripitak
(2000)).
        Figure 1 shows annual observations on three key measures of financial deepening (liquid
liabilities, private credit, and stock market capitalization). There is a clear correlation between the
two banking sector related measures, while the relationship with capitalization is less obvious. The
top seven rows of Table 1 report summary statistics for financial development indicators including
these variables, while Table 2 reports the correlation coefficients.




7
  We also included time fixed effects to capture possible time-specific exogenous shocks.
8
  Many researchers use the ratio of M2 (the sum of M1 and quasi money) to GDP (M2Y in our data set). However,
since the correlation between liquid liabilities (LLY) and M2 ratios is quite high (see Table 1 for summary statistics
and Table 2 for the correlation coefficients), and the results do not differ substantially when using one or the other
variable, M2 will not be discussed in this paper.
9
  Data are available for the following series: PVBM, the private bond market capitalization to GDP ratio; PBBM,
the public bond market capitalization to GDP ratio; and LTPD is the long term private debt issues to GDP ratio.


                                                          6
3.2.2 Quantifying Capital Controls
        There is no question that it is extremely difficult to measure the extent of capital account
controls. Many measures have been created to describe the extent and intensity of capital account
controls. However, there is a general impression that most extant measures fail to capture the
complexity of real-world capital controls.10 This view prevails because regulatory limitations on
capital flows have a multidimensional character, allowing policy makers many options. Since
different restrictions can have different implications for economic performance, capital restrictions
can differ depending upon the intension of policy makers and the economic state where they are in.
Moreover, it is almost impossible to distinguish between de jure and de facto controls on capital
transactions as seen in the case of multiple exchange rates systems in many developing countries and
the mandatory reserve requirement in Chile in the 1990’s.11
        Most of analyses of either effects of capital controls, or their determinants, rely upon the
IMF’s categorical enumeration, reported in Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions (hereafter AREAER). AREAER provides information on the extent and nature
of the restrictions on external accounts for a wide cross-section of countries. In this set of “on-off”
clarification, k1 is an indicator variable for the existence of multiple exchange rates, while k4 is a
variable indicating the requirement of the surrender of export proceeds. The most relevant capital
controls are k2 and k3. They indicate restrictions on current account and capital account transactions,
respectively.
        The eighth through eleventh rows of Table 1 report summary statistics for these capital
control measures.12 Restrictions on the capital account and the surrender of export proceeds appear
to be the most pervasive. However, all of these capital controls appear to be decreasing in their use
(although one cannot conclude that they are decreasing in terms of how tightly they bind).
        The deficiencies of these dichotomous measures of capital controls are well known. The most
obvious is that they do not measure the intensity of the controls, nor do they speak to their efficacy (in


10
   See Edison and Warnock (2001), Edwards (2001), and Edison et al. (2002) for discussions and comparisons of
various measures on capital restrictions.
11
   Dooley (1996) provides an extensive literature review and Neely (1999) presents a descriptive overview on
capital controls
12
   As we will explain later, we reversed binary variables of the AREAER series in order to focus on the effect of
financial openness, not controls. Therefore, the more pervasive capital controls are, the ki variables tend to be closer
to zero. Also, a positive average growth rate means that capital controls are less and less in use.


                                                           7
this regard, one might prefer the outcome-based measures De Gregorio uses).13 To illustrate this
assertion, note that for instance, capital controls might be as stringent and command-and-control
oriented as those imposed by the Latin American governments in the wake of the 1980's debt crises,
or of a less dirigiste form such as the Chilean controls.14
        A common method used to overcome the deficiencies of the dichotomous measures of capital
controls entails the construction of variables that depend on the proportion of years in the examined
window for which countries had liberalized capital accounts using the AREAER variables (See
Edwards (2001) and Klein and Olivei (2001)15). However, as Edison et al. (2002) admit, a drawback
of this method is that such indicators do not convey any information about whether the country is on
its way to liberalizing or restricting its capital accounts. In concrete terms, a value of 0.5 can indicate
that the capital account was closed the first half of the period, and open the second, or vice versa.
Quinn (1997) has recently compiled a composite measure of financial regulation that ranges from 0
to 14, with 14 representing the least regulated and most open regime. The bulk of the index is based
upon Quinn’s coding of the qualitative information contained in the various issues of AREAER
pertaining to k2 and k3, augmented by information regarding whether the country in question has
entered into international agreements with international organizations such as the OECD and
European Union.
        Considering the deficiencies of the AREAER variables, it might be preferable to implement
the empirical analysis using this set of Quinn variables. However, while a complete tabulation for the
OECD members exists, the coverage for the less developed countries is much less extensive; values
are reported only for certain years (1958, 1973, 1982, and 1988).
        Hence, an index based on the AREAER binary series is constructed with the goal of
incorporating the intensity of capital controls. Our index on capital controls is the first standardized
principal component of the aforementioned k1 through k4 binary variables. Also, in order to focus on
the effect of financial openness – rather than controls – we reverse the values of the binary variables


13
   There had also been criticism that the dichotomous measures based on the AREAER fail to distinguish between
the types of flow that are being restricted. In 1997, AREAER started publishing the data on disaggregated
components of capital controls, with the specification of thirteen categories including, for the first time, a
distinction between restrictions on inflows and outflows as well as between different types of capital transactions.
See Johnston and Tamirisa (1998) for a descriptive overview and statistical analysis on the disaggregated data of
AREAER.
14
   Specifically the unrenumerated reserve requirements (URR), that sought to discourage short term capital inflows
and hence outflows. See Edwards (1998, 1999)
15
   Edison et al. (2002) articulately reviews and compares different methods of quantifying capital controls.


                                                         8
of the AREAER series, such that the variable takes a value of unity when the restrictions are
non-existent. Moreover, for controls on capital transactions (k3), we use the share of a five year
window that controls were not in effect (SHAREk3). Specifically, the financial openness variable for
year t is proportion of five years encompassing year t and the preceding four years that the capital
account was open:


                      k +k +k           +k     +k       
        SHAREk 3,t =  3,t 3,t −1 3,t −2 3,t −3 3,t −4 
                                     5                  


         Hence, our index for capital “openness” is,


     KAOPENt = the first standardized principal component of k1,t, k2,t, SHAREk3,t, and k4,t,


which takes on higher values the more open the country is to cross-border capital transactions.
         The thirteenth row of Table 1 reports the summary statistics of KAOPEN. By construction,
the KAOPEN series are mean of zero. The table shows that the average of KAOPEN among the
countries is growing at 3.8% annually. The first eigenvector for KAOPEN was found to be
(SHAREk3, k1, k2, k4)’ = (0.563, 0.280, 0.516, 0.582)’, indicating that the variability of KAOPEN is
not merely driven by the SHAREk3 series.
         The incorporation of the k1,t, k2,t, and k4,t variables merits some discussion. We interpret these
variables as indicators of the intensity of the capital controls. This point can be made more concrete
by considering a country with an open capital account. It may still restrict the flow of capital by
limiting transactions on the current account restrictions or other systems such as multiple exchange
rates and requirements to surrender export proceeds. Alternatively, countries that already have closed
capital accounts might try to increase the stringency of those controls by imposing k1, k2, and k4 types
of restrictions so that the private sector cannot circumvent the capital account restrictions.16 Since
our indicator incorporates these other controls, one could interpret our measure as a variant of the
ones used by Edwards (2001) and Klein and Olivei (2001).



16
   Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti also tried to overcome the issue of intensity of the AREAER variables by employing the
binary variables for current account restrictions and multiple exchange rate practices, but not the one for export
proceeds surrender), though they used these variables individually in their regression models.


                                                         9
       An alternative principal components-based measure, incorporating black market foreign
exchange premia, was also considered. However, the empirical results obtained using this alternative
measure were very similar to those obtained using our basic index. Consequently, we opted to report
results using only the first principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4 alone.
       To check the robustness of our analysis based on the KAOPEN index, we also use a Quinn
measure of financial regulation. However, since the measure is not complete for the developing
countries, a linear imputation method is employed to fill the missing variables of those countries
based on the regression of the actual Quinn series on the AREAER ki variables. For more detailed
explanations on this imputation method, refer to Appendix 2.


3.3 Results

       Figure 2 illustrates the correlation between private credit (PCGDP) and stock market
capitalization (SMKC) on one hand, and the first principal component of financial openness
(KAOPEN). The PCGDP series appears to vary in the expected manner with the capital openness
proxy (positively), while the association between SMKC and the capital openness variable is
indecisive. However, one has to recall that financial development and the absence of capital controls
can be both positively correlated with other economic variables such as per capita income. Hence, the
positive association visible in Figure 3, even if it exists, may not survive regression analysis.
       Table 3 reports the results estimating equation (3) over the entire sample. Columns 1 and 2
show the regression results on the relationship between financial openness and the development of
bank credit markets, whereas Columns 3 through 6 on the relationship between financial openness
and equity market development. The change in private credit (column 2) appears to be closely linked
to financial openness, and that in liquid liabilities (column 1) appears to be weakly linked. Per capita
income and trade openness enter in with the expected positive sign in almost all cases, as does
inflation with the negative sign. In the results using the equity market measures, only the growth rate
of stock market value traded – a more representative indicator of equity market activity than stock
market capitalization – is significantly affected by financial openness (column 4). In general,
however, the proportion of variation explained in the equity market development indicators is higher
than in the cases using the bank credit measures.
       It is possible that these observed patterns are being driven by the decision to pool both
industrialized and less developed economies into one sample. This applies to both the apparent


                                                    10
sensitivity of equity market indicators to financial openness, and the absence of any relationship of
bank credit measures to financial openness. Hence, Table 4 presents the results for two different
developing country samples.
        The first six columns of Table 4 show the results for a subsample of less developed countries
(under the LDC heading). Unlike the full sample case, bank credit indicators (columns 1 and 2) do
not appear to be affected by financial openness. Among the equity market indicators, again, the
measure of equity market activity (value traded, column 4) appears to be significantly influenced by
financial openness (with the p-value of 9%). This result illustrates that in the less developed countries
one unit of increase in financial openness can lead to a 0.5% acceleration in the growth rate of the
stock market value traded ratio.
        Another subset of countries yields more interesting results. The last six columns of Table 4
display the results of the same study conducted on the emerging market countries (EMG).17 While
financial openness previously did not appear to significantly affect bank credit creation in the LDC
subsample, it does appear to have a significant impact among the EMG countries on bank credit
development in terms of private credit creation (column 8). Interestingly, the measures of equity
market development (columns 10 through 12) except for stock market capitalization appear to be
statistically significant upon financial openness (the p-value for the equity issued variable is 16%),
out of which only the measure of stock market value traded was significantly linked to financial
openness in the full sample and developing countries subsample cases.
        The magnitude of the effect of financial openness is quite different between the LDC and
EMG subsamples. For example, between 1992 and 1997, Argentina, an EMG country, increased its
openness in terms of KAOPEN from –1.09 to 2.09. The results shown in Column 10 of Table 4 show
that this 3.18 unit increase in KAOPEN , other things being equal, implies an acceleration of the
annual growth rate of Argentina’s stock market value traded by 2.1%, whereas the same amount of
increase in financial openness implies only a 1.6% annual growth for a typical non-emerging market
LDC.18 Moreover, while financial openness has a nil effect on stock market turnover among LDCs,
the magnitude of its effect is significantly high among the EMG countries (for Argentina, the same

17
   See the Country List for a full list of the emerging market countries. The definition of the emerging market
countries is based on Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2000) where they define as emerging market countries the
thirty countries which are classified by the IFC (World Bank) as either emerging or frontier during the period of
1980-1997.
18
   In fact, KAOPEN for Uruguay, categorized as an LDC, increased by 0.46 between 1992 and 1997, implying an
acceleration of merely 0.2%.


                                                       11
change in KAOPEN as in the previous case could have led to an annual growth of 4.3%). A one unit
increase in financial openness can raise private credit growth in the EMG by 0.5%, an effect that is
not only higher than that exhibited in the LDC sample, but also in the full sample. Clearly, there is a
sharp difference in the effect of financial openness on financial development, in terms of both bank
credit creation and equity market development, between the LDC and EMG categories, with the
latter group of countries possibly reaping more from financial openness.
         The econometric analysis thus confirms what other studies have found – namely that the
relationship between the removal of capital controls and bank credit measures of financial
development does not hold for developing countries. On the other hand, among the emerging market
countries, both bank credit and equity market development do appear to be linked to financial
openness in a significant manner, thus yielding a perspective on the relationship between capital
controls and financial development that is more nuanced than that in the extant literature.


3.4 Robustness Checks19

3.4.1 Analysis with Imputed Quinn Measures

         The above tests were repeated using the aforementioned Quinn measures. Table A-1 shows
the results for the regressions using the linearly interpolated Quinn measures (“pseudo-Quinn”).
Some similarities between this set of results and the previous one with the full sample are apparent;
financial openness appears to have an effect on private credit development (column 2) and the
development of equity market activity (column 4). As indicated by the results of the basic regressions
with LDC and EMG subsamples in Table A-2, the similarity still holds for the subsamples of LDC
and EMG, though the difference is not as marked as it was using the basic model. The link between
financial openness and financial development exists for private credit only with the EMG subsample,
and the link is somewhat stronger for equity market development with the EMG subsample.



19
   Following the debates in the finance-growth literature that regression results in this type of analysis can be highly
sensitive to model specifications (Klein and Olivei (2001)), we also implemented fixed effects regressions (results
not reported). In these estimates, the statistical significance of the financial openness variable remained for private
credit (as it did for LDC and EMG subsamples). However, it largely disappears in the specifications for equity
market development indicators. This outcome is unsurprising, as the country fixed effects are highly correlated with
the financial openness of an individual country. While it has been argued that fixed effects regressions allow for
heterogeneity among countries, some claim it is not reasonable to employ such regressions because they carry a risk
of treating heterogeneity among the countries constant over the sample time period.


                                                          12
Interestingly, the fit of the model (as measured by R2) is roughly the same regardless whether the
KAOPEN or the pseudo-Quinn variable is used.
         The regression results based on the two indicators of financial openness are not directly
comparable, as the KAOPEN results pertain to a sample encompassing 105 countries, while the
pseudo-Quinn results are for a sample of 59 countries (for which actual Quinn data exist so that linear
extrapolation is feasible).20 However, if we restrict the samples to be the same, one finds that the
previously identified pattern of results remains in place.


3.4.2 Analysis with Instrumental Variables

         In order to investigate whether simultaneity is a problem, two stage least squares is
implemented, using the government budget balance and current account balance as instrumental
variables. The rationale for using these two variables follows from the findings of Grilli and
Milesi-Ferretti (1995). Using AREAER’s k1, k2, and k3 variables as the proxy for the intensity of
capital controls, they showed that multiple exchange rate practices (k1), capital controls in the narrow
sense (i.e., k3), and current account (k2) are empirically linked to higher rates of inflation, a higher
share of seigniorage in total taxes, and lower real interest rates. Furthermore, capital controls tend to
be implemented in countries where government consumption as a share of GDP is relatively large
and the economy is more closed to trade. They conjecture the statistical relationship between capital
controls and lower real interest rates is capturing other forms of government-imposed distortions
such as financial repression.21 Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti’s finding implies that capital controls appear
to have strong fiscal implications, i.e., countries with a less developed tax system tend to implement
capital controls as the source of government revenue as well as the remedy to capital flows caused by
the inflation-driven distortions in the financial markets.
         More recently, Johnson and Tamirisa (1998) investigated the empirical determinants of
capital controls. Their analysis is innovative in that they used the newly created disaggregate
components of capital controls publicized in the AREAER. They tested their theoretical prediction
that capital controls may be motivated by (1) balance of payments concerns, (2) macroeconomic

20
   See Appendix 2 for an explanation of the linear extrapolation methodology employed to obtain the
pseudo-Quinn variable. The countries for which Quinn reports figures for are indicated in the country list (with a
superscript c).
21
   Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti also found that the less independent the central bank is, the more likely capital controls
are to be imposed. This result is also in line with higher real interest rates and the government’s tendency to rely



                                                          13
management, (3) infant industry policy toward underdeveloped financial markets and regulatory
systems (the stage of development of the financial system), (4) prudential policy by the government
to avoid financial (banking) crisis, and (5) other reasons. Broadly speaking, their finding suggested
that countries tend to implement capital controls, the more prevalent the balance of payments
concerns are,22 the higher real interest rates and real exchange rates,23 and the larger the size of the
government deficit as a share of GDP.
        Following these findings, we use the government budget surplus to GDP ratio (GSUR) and
current account balance ratio (CURRENT) as instruments. Regional dummies are also included in
order to capture regional differences. In order to minimize the possibility of two-way causality, both
variables are lagged.
        As a preliminary analysis, the following regression is estimated using the annual data


        (4) KAOPEN ti = ϕ 0 + ϕ1GSURti−1 + ϕ 2 CURRENTt i−1 + region + ηti


The resulting estimates of both φ1 and φ2 are statistically significant with theoretically predicted
signs, i.e., φ1 , φ2 > 0.24
        Tables 5 and 6 report the results of the regressions instrumented with the one period lagged
variables for government budget balance and current account balance (GSURt-6 and CURRENTt-6,
respectively). In general, the estimated magnitude and statistical significance of the capital openness
effect are larger for both the full and sub- sample sets. The most interesting difference from the OLS
estimates is that the IV-estimated coefficient for stock market turnover is now quite strong and
statistically significant. The subsample of less developing countries presents the strongest results.
The coefficient for stock market value traded is much stronger. In contrast to the OLS estimates, the


upon seigniorage revenues, i.e., higher inflation.
22
   They mainly used gross international reserves in months of imports as an indicator to capture the balance of
payments situation of countries. The lower gross reserves in months of imports, the higher prevalence of balance of
payments concerns are.
23
   This result contrasts with that of Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti. Their theoretical prediction is that countries use
capital controls to pursue inconsistent internal and external balances simultaneously such as the case where outflow
controls are implemented to avoid nominal currency deprecation pressures without tightening of monetary
conditions. When such a threat of currency crisis arises, the real interest rates or real exchange rates tends to be
higher.
24
   Among the regional dummies, the estimated coefficients for AFRICA and EUROPE were significantly negative
and positive, respectively, suggesting that African countries tend to have higher capital controls, whereas European
countries tend to have lower ones.


                                                        14
coefficients for private credit and stock market turnover are now larger in both magnitude and
(typically) statistical significance.


3.4.3 Outliers, Measurement Errors, and the Financial Bubbles

        Lastly, we examine whether our baseline results are sensitive to outliers. Concerns about the
impact of outliers flows from two issues. First, in addition to the usual measurement error present in
macroeconomic data, it is likely that the data for financial development is subject to even greater
measurement errors. Second, these financial development indicators may unintentionally capture
financial bubbles. The use of five year changes may serve to mitigate this concern, although it cannot
completely address it. As a point of reference, it is useful to note that in many studies of lending
booms as financial crises indicators, changes in lending over a shorter window, of between 2 to 4
years are, often used (Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (1998); Chinn, Dooley and Shrestha (1999);
Kaminsky, Linzodo and Reihart (1998); Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996)). Nonetheless, we
investigate whether the regression results are being distorted by data outliers. In order to conserve
space, we merely summarize the results and our observation below.
        First, using the original annual data, we exclude the observations of financial development
variables if their annual growth rates are larger than two standard deviations away from the mean,
and re-estimate the same sets of regressions.25 The exclusion of outliers shrank the observation size
by a relatively small degree, about 3 – 11%, and hardly affects the regression results from the
baseline cases. The same exercise is then repeated, but increasing the range of outlier exclusion by
dropping the observations if their annual growth rates are larger than one standard deviation away
from the mean. This exclusion shrinks the sample size of the full or sub- sample five year panel sets
by about 13-19%. Interestingly, in most cases, the estimated coefficients became slightly larger
compared to the baseline cases, but their standard errors remained about the same or increased
slightly. The estimates using the liquid liabilities measure of financial development in the full sample
are now statistically significant at the 2% of significance level, whereas in the baseline regressions
they were only marginally significant. Except for that of stock market capitalization, estimates of the
effect of financial openness rose slightly in both magnitude and statistical significance. Hence, one
may safely conclude that outliers do not drive the results we have obtained.

25
  Since we are dealing with a set of non-overlapping five year panels, in essence the only data for 1977, 1982,
1987, 1992, and 1997 are affected by the removal of outliers.


                                                       15
4. The Interaction of Financial Development and Legal Factors
4.1 Overview

        The previous analysis carries a risk of treating the behavior of countries at different stages of
institutional development as the same when doing so is inappropriate. In this section, we relax this
assumption and examine the implications of conditioning on legal and institutional features.
        Legal foundations and institutions governing financial transactions are especially important
for the development of the financial system. In the economies where the legal system does not clearly
define property rights or guarantee the enforcement of contracts, the incentives for loan activities can
be limited. Legal protections for creditors and the level of credibility and transparency of accounting
rules are also likely to affect economic agents’ financial decisions.26
        La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (hereafter LLSV, 1998) demonstrate that
the national legal origin (whether English, French, German, or Scandinavian) strongly affects the
legal and regulatory environment in financial transactions and explains cross-country differences in
financial development. Basing their dataset partly on the data presented in LLSV, Levine, Loayza,
and Beck (2000) investigate whether the level of legal and regulatory determinants of financial
development influences the development financial intermediary sector.27 They find a positive link
between cross-country differences in the legal and regulatory environment and those in the level of
financial intermediary development.
        In their investigation on the correlation between capital account liberalization and growth,
Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001) also examine whether legal/institutional development
influences the effectiveness of capital account liberalization on growth.28 Their cross-country
investigation reports some evidence that the effect of capital account liberalization on economic
growth varies with the degree of legal/institutional development.
        In this section, our capital openness index is interacted with variables of legal/institutional
development to determine whether the level of legal/institutional development influences the impact
of financial openness.

26
   For a general discussion on the importance of legal and institutional foundations for financial development, see
Beim and Calomiris (2001).
27
   The main focus in their study is to investigate whether financial intermediary development leads to economic
growth. They find a positive link between the two.
28
   They use the (unprocessed) Quinn index for the measurement of capital account openness.


                                                        16
4.2 Data on Legal/Institutional Development

        For the variables depicting legal/institutional development, we directly use the variables from
LLSV. Specifically, the variables CREDITOR, ENFORCE, SHRIGHTS, ACCOUNT, and LEGAL are
employed. CREDITOR refers to the level of creditor protection; a higher CREDITOR indicates more
legal protections for creditors. ENFORCE is the index of the effectiveness of the legal system in
enforcing contracts, whereas SHRIGHTS is the index of the extent of shareholder protection, and
ACCOUNT of the comprehensiveness of company reports. LEGAL is the first standardized principal
component of CREDITOR, ENFORCE, SHRIGHTS, and ACCOUNT, and, therefore, depicts the
overall development of the legal system governing financial transactions. See the Appendix 1 for
more details.
        Before discussing the results incorporating these institutional variables, the following two
observations must be made. The first pertains to the temporal nature of these institutional variables.
Although we have used the panel data on financial development and financial openness measures in
the previous section, the data on legal/institutional development are cross-sectional in nature, i.e.,
they are time-invariant. However, the inclusion of these time-invariant factors should not pose a
substantial problem for our analysis, since these characteristics, such as creditor protection, contract
enforcement, shareholder protection, and accounting standards, are likely to change only very
slowly. Our focus is mainly on the effect of financial openness on financial development, but not the
effect of legal/institutional development per se. In other words, rather than shedding light on how the
development of institutions and legal systems affects financial development, we examine how the
effect of financial openness changes depending upon the “environment” of institutions and legal
systems. Therefore, time-variance of legal/institutional variables is not crucial to our study.
        The second issue is sample size. In section 2, the panel encompassed 105 countries. In
contrast, the data set based on LLSV spans less than 50 countries.29 While there is minimal impact
regarding coverage of the industrialized countries, the size of the LDC sample is substantially
reduced. Consequently, our LDC sample in this portion of the analysis becomes essentially the




29
   More specifically, the data set contains LEGAL data for 37 countries, CREDITOR for 44 countries, ENFORCE
for 46 countries, SHRIGHTS for 46 countries, and ACCOUNT for 38 countries.


                                                    17
emerging market group previously defined.30 Hence, we create a new subset titled the “LDC/EMG”
category.


4.3 Empirical Results

        At this point, regressions of financial development measures on financial openness,
augmented with the legal/institutional variables are estimated. The specification is:


(5) FDti − FDti− 5 = γ 0 + ρFDti− 5 + γ 1 KAOPEN ti− 5 + γ 2 Li + γ 3 ( Li × KAOPEN ti− 5 ) + X ti− 5 Γ + uti


where Li denotes a legal/institutional variable.
        Table 7 reports the results of these regressions for the full sample (columns 1 through 5) and
the LDC/EMG subsample (columns 6 through 10). There are two differences compared to the
previous tables: the level term for legal/institutional development (LEGAL) and the interaction term
between legal/institutional development and financial openness were added to the right hand side of
the regression equation (rows 2 and 3, respectively), and the measure of new equity issued is dropped
in the table because of the lack of observations.
            While private credit and stock market value traded, both of which were strongly significant
in the baseline test, preserved statistical significance with the 10% level, Table 7 shows that the
development of legal/institutional environment individually (i.e., not interacted with financial
openness) is associated with the development of private credit, stock market capitalization, and stock
market value traded in the full sample. The result for stock market value traded shows that the
coefficient for the interactive term between legal environment and financial openness, that is, if it is
coupled with a highly developed legal environment, capital liberalization can lead to a further
development of stock market activities. These characteristics are not apparent in the LDC/EMG
sample, except perhaps for the relationship between legal development and stock market
capitalization and stock market value traded (row 2 in columns 8 and 9). Given these results, one
might reasonably conclude that in countries with a relatively strong legal institutions, private credit
can develop and the size of stock markets tend to be larger in terms of both size and activeness, and
also that both private credit and stock market value traded can grow with capital liberalization, but

30
   The LLSV cross-sectional data set used for this paper includes only three countries which are not either
industrialized or emerging market countries by our definition.


                                                         18
with the latter developing even further if capital liberalization is coupled with a highly developed
legal environment. However, there is weak evidence for less developed/emerging market countries.
        Table 8 reports results disaggregating the LEGAL index into its components. LEGAL is the
first standardized principle component of CREDIT, ENFORCE, SHRIGHTS, and ACCOUNT, so
using these variables individually as the institutional variables interacted with the financial openness
index allows one to isolate the component-specific effects. For brevity, Table 8 reports only the
coefficients for the financial openness variable, the level term for legal/institutional development
(LEGAL), and the interaction term between financial openness and legal/institutional development.
        While creditor protection and the level of enforcement do not seem to have any noticeable
effect on financial development individually or interactively in both full and LDC/EMG samples
(except for stock market value traded), shareholder protection and accounting standards do seem to
have an effect on both bank credit and equity market development. The level of SHRIGHTS appears
to contribute to growth in stock market capitalization in both full and LDC/EMG samples. Although
financial openness alone does not seem to affect stock market capitalization, if it is coupled with a
higher level of shareholder protection, it has a marginal effect on the growth rate of stock market
capitalization in emerging market countries. The results for stock market value traded are more
positive. For both full and LDC/EMG samples, financial openness alone appears to have a negative
effect, if any, on equity market development, but if it is implemented in countries where more
shareholder protection is guaranteed, it significantly contributes to the development of the market.
This effect of the interaction between shareholder protection and financial openness appears for stock
market turnover in the LDC/EMG subsample as well. The marginal effect of interaction between
capital openness and legal development is also found for stock market capitalization in LDC/EMG
countries. Interestingly, the coefficient for capital openness is negative, if not insignificant, in all
emerging market indicators. These results are in line with conventional wisdom that shareholder
protection is essential for equity market development, and especially important for LDC/EMG
countries.
        The results with ACCOUNT are stronger, especially for less developed countries. Among the
LDC/EMG countries, the coefficient for the interactive term is significant for both bank credit
indicators ([6] and [7]) and for stock market capitalization (and marginally for stock market value
traded). For all of these indicators of financial development, the estimate for financial openness is
negative, and statistically significant (except for stock market turnover), suggesting that financial



                                                    19
liberalization alone may cause a negative, or null at best, effect on financial development. The level
itself of accounting standards is of course crucial for financial development (the level term has a
significantly positive coefficient in columns 7 through 10), and it can also compensate the possible
negative impact of financial liberalization.
       The results with a statistically significant coefficient on the interaction term suggest that
while financial liberalization alone may have a zero, or even negative, impact on the development of
the financial system, when combined with a well-developed legal system or institutions, it may well
serve to stimulate financial development.


5. Concluding Remarks
       This study has reported the results of an exhaustive analysis of the empirical evidence
regarding the relationship between financial openness and financial development. Our first key
finding is that if one measures the level of financial development in terms of private credit creation
and stock market value traded, there appears to be a strong relationship between the extent of capital
controls and financial development. This finding holds for less developed countries in terms of stock
market value traded, and even more so for emerging market countries. In this latter group, the linkage
is particularly strong for private credit creation, stock market value traded, and stock market
turnover.
       These results are robust to the presence of outliers in the data, and simultaneity. Indeed, if
financial openness is instrumented with the level of government surplus and current account balance,
the above findings appear to be even stronger.
       Perhaps most importantly, we econometrically verify the widely held belief that financial
systems with a higher degree of legal/institutional development on average benefit more from
financial liberalization than those with a lower one. In this sense, our results are in line with
conventional wisdom. However, the positive effect of legal/institutional development seems to flow
primarily from the degree of shareholder protection and accounting standards. That is, the
liberalization of capital controls appears to have the largest effect on financial development when
these indices are higher. Hence, we add to this perspective by identifying the dimensions of legal
protections that are most strongly associated with rapid financial development in the wake of
financial opening.




                                                   20
References

Aizenman, Joshua (2002), “Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options,” NBER Working
    Paper No. 8900 (April).

Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz (2001), “When does capital account
    liberalization help more than it hurts?” NBER Working Paper No. 8414 (August).

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2000), “A new database on financial
    development and structure,” Policy Research Paper No. 2147 (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).

Beim, David, and Charles W. Calomiris (2001), Emerging Financial Markets, (New York: McGraw
    Hill).

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad (2000), “Emerging Equity Market and
    Economic Development,” NBER Working Paper No. 7763 (April).

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry (2002), “Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative Efficiency
    or Animal Spirits,” NBER Working Paper No. 8908 (April).

Chinn, Menzie (2001), “The Compatibility of Capital Controls and Financial Development: A
       Selective Survey and Empirical Evidence,” forthcoming in P. Drysdale and G. DeBrouwer
       (editors), Future Financial Arrangements in East Asia (Routledge).

Chinn, Menzie, Michael P. Dooley and Sona Shrestha (1999), “Latin America and East Asia in the
    Context of an Insurance Model of Currency Crises,” Journal of International Money and
    Finance 18(4) (August): 659-681.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1998), “Paper Tigers? A Preliminary
    Assessment of the Asian Crisis. NBER Working Paper No. 6783 (November).

De Gregorio, José (1998), “Financial Integration, Financial Development and Economic Growth,”
    mimeo (Department of Industrial Engineering, Universidad de Chile, July).

Dooley, Michael (1996), “A Survey of Literature on Controls of International Capital Transactions,”
    IMF Staff Papers 43(4) (December): 639 – 87.

Edison, Hali J., Michael W. Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, (2002), “Capital Account
       Liberalization and Economic Performance: A Review of the Literature,” mimeo
       (Washington, D.C.: IMF, May).

Edison, Hali J. and Francis E. Warnock (2001), “A simple measure of the intensity of capital
    controls,” International Finance Discussion Paper #708 (Washington, D.C.: Board of
    Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).




                                                21
Edwards, Sebastian (2001), “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging
   Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (January).

__________ (1999), “How Effective are Capital Controls?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(4)
    (Fall): 65-84.

__________ (1998), “Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates, and Capital Controls: Some Latin
    American Experiences,” NBER Working Paper No. 6800 (November).

Grilli, Vittorio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1995), “Economic Effects and Structural
     Determinants of Capital Controls,” IMF Staff Papers 42(3) (September): 517 – 51.

Henry, Peter Blair (2000), “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform and Emerging Market
    Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance 55(2): 529-564.

Herring, Richard J. and Nathporn Chatusripitak (2000), “The Case of the Missing Market: The Bond
    Market and Why It Matters for Financial Development,” paper prepared for the ADB/Wharton
    seminar on “Financial Structure for Sustainable Development in Post-Crisis Asia,” Tokyo, May
    26, 2000.

International Monetary Fund (2001), World Economic Outlook (Washington, D.C.: IMF,
     September).

Johnston, R. Barry and Natalia T. Tamirisa (1998), “Why Do Countries Use Capital Controls?” IMF
    Working Paper WP/98/181 (Washington, D.C.: IMF, December).

Kaminsky, Graciela, Saul Lizondo, Carmen M. Reinhart (1998), “Leading Indicators of Currency
   Crises,” IMF Staff Papers 45(1): 1-48.

Klein, Michael and Giovanni Olivei (2001), “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth and
    Economic Growth,” mimeo (Medford, MA: Tufts).

Kletzer, Kenneth and Ashoka Mody (2000), “Will Self-Protection Policies Safeguard Emerging
    Markets from Crises?” Managing Financial and Corporate Distress : Lessons from Asia, in
    Charles Adams, Robert E. Litan, and Michael Pomerleano (editors) (Washington, D.C. :
    Brookings Institution).

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1998), “Law
    and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6): 1113 – 1155.

Leahy, Michael, S. Schich, G. Wehinger, F. Pelgrin, and T. Thorgeirsson (2001), “Contributions of
    financial systems to growth in OECD countries,” OECD Economic Department Working Papers
    No. 280.

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza and Thorsten Beck (2000), “Financial intermediation and growth:
    Causality and causes”, Journal of Monetary Economics 46: 31-77.



                                                22
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998), “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American
    Economic Review 88(3): 537-558.

Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1995), “Capital control liberalization and stock market development,”
    mimeo (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).

Neely, Christopher (1999), “An Introduction to Capital Controls,” Review, Federal Bank of St. Louis,
    November/December.

Quinn, Dennis (1997), “The correlates of change in international financial regulation," American
    Political Science Review 91(3): 531-551.

Quinn, Dennis, A. Maria Toyoda and Carla Inclan (2002), “Does Capital Account Liberalization
    Lead to Economic Growth?: An Empirical Investigation” mimeo (Washington, D.C.:
    Georgetown University).

Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell, and Andres Velasco (1996), “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets:
    The Lessons from 1995” NBER Working Paper No. 5576 (May).

Spiegel, Mark (2001), “Financial development and growth: Are the APEC nations unique?” Pacific
    Basin Working Papers PB01-04 (Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June).




                                                23
Appendix 1: Data Definition and Sources
Key to abbreviations:
BKL: Beck, Kunt, and Levine (2000).
IFS: IMF, International Financial Statistics.
LLSV: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998)
Mody: Personal communication from Ashok Mody, data based on AREAER
Quinn: Personal communication from Dennis Quinn.
WDI: World Bank, World Development Indicators.

Macroeconomic Indicators                                 africa – dummy for African countries
                                                         westhem – dummy for the countries in the west
ry – GDP, real, local currency, units (line 99b),        hemisphere
IFS                                                      europe – dummy for European countries
ny – GDP, nominal, local currency, units (99b),          mideast – dummy for Middle East countries
IFS
m1 – M1, Stock End of Period, units (34), IFS            Financial Development Indicators
qm – Quasi-money; M2, units (35), IFS
mqm – Money plus Quasi-money, units (M1 +                lly – Liquid Liability to GDP (LLY), currency
M2), IFS                                                 demand and interest-bearing liabilities of banks
sprdl – Spread between average deposit and               and other financial intermediaries divided by
lending rates, %, (60p – 60l), IFS                       GDP, BKL, 1970-97.
current – Current account balance as a ratio to          smkc – stock market capitalization ratio to
GDP, WDI                                                 GDP, BKL, 1970-97
opn – openness to trade, (nominal exports plus           smtv – stock market total value traded to GDP,
imports)/nominal GDP                                     BKL, 1975-97
exports = national currency (from national               smto – stock market turn over ratio, BKL,
account, 90c), IFS                                       1975-97
imports = national currency (from national               pvbm – private bond market capitalization to
account, 98c), IFS                                       GDP, BKL, 1975-97
rypc = per capital real income in international          pbbm – public bond market capitalization to
PPP, WDI                                                 GDP ratio, BKL, 1975-97
cpi – Consumer price index (64), IFS                     eqty – equity issues to GDP, BKL, 1975-97
infl – Inflation rate calculated using log               ltpd – long-term private debt issues to GDP,
differences of CPIs (64), IFS                            BKL, 1975-97
gsur – government budget surplus (+) or deficit          bts – Deposit Money Bank Assets to Total
(-) as a ratio to GDP, WDI                               Financial Assets, BKL, 1970 – 1997
pop – population, 99z, IFS                               dmcb – Deposit Money vs. Central Bank
                                                         Assets, BKL, 1970 – 97
                                                         dmgdp – Deposit Money Bank Assets to GDP,
Regional Dummies                                         BKL, 1970 – 97
                                                         pcgdp – Private Credit by Deposit Money
idc – idc = 1 if industrialized country, and 0,          Banks to GDP, BKL, 1970 – 97
otherwise (See the list of countries)                    m2y – Ratio of M2 to nominal GDP,
emg – emg = 1 if emerging market country, and            IFS,1970–99)
0, otherwise (See the list of countries)
asia – dummy for Asian countries


                                                    24
Capital Controls Indicators                                emergency shareholder meeting < 10%),
                                                           cross-sectional for 46 countries, LLSV
k1 – multiple exchange rates, Mody                         account – index of transparency and
k2 – restrictions on CA trans, Mody                        comprehensiveness of companies’ (accounting)
k3 – restrictions on KA trans, Mody                        reports, based on data in 1990, cross-sectional
k4 – surrender of exports proceeds, Mody                   for 38 countries, LLSV
SHAREk3 – Share of a five-year period, the                 corrupt – corruption index, average over period
observed year and the last four years, when the            1982 – 1997, (International Country Risk
capital account was open. Authors’ calculations            Guide)
KAOPEN – index for openness to capital
account transactions. The first standardized               cn – country code (1-105), see the country list
principal components of k1, k2, SHAREk3, and
k4 . Authors’ calculations.
blmkpr – black market premium, World Bank
openn – Quinn financial liberalization
indicator, Quinn.


Legal Institutional Variables

legal – legal index, the first component of credit,
enforce, shrights, and account, cross-sectional
for 37 countries, LLSV
credit – index of creditor protection, composed
of the variables which incorporate the automatic
stay proposition on the assets of a failing firm
(“noauto”); the continuation of the old
managers in a reorganization process
(“manages”); restrictions for going into
reorganization (“restorg”); and the seniority
system of secured creditors (“secured1”),
cross-sectional for 44countries, LLSV
enforce – index of the degree of law
enforcement. Specifically, it is the average of
“judsys” (efficiency of the judicial system),
“rulelaw” (rule of law), “riskEx” (risk of
expropriation), and “contrepu” (risk of contract
repudiation), average over period 1982 – 1995,
cross-sectional for 46 countries, LLSV
shrights – the sum of “oneshvt” (one share-one
vote), “bymail” (proxy by mail allowed),
“noblock” (shares not blocked before meeting),
“comulvt” (cumulative voting/proportional
representation), “oppdmnty” (oppressed
minority), “premprt” (preemptive right to new
issues), and “esm” (% of share capital to call an



                                                      25
Country list (105 countries)

1       ARG      Argentina b, c                  56      LKA      Sri Lanka b, c
2       AUS      Australia a, c                  57      LSO      Lesotho
3       AUT      Austria a, c                    58      MAR      Morocco b, c
4       BDI      Burundi                         59      MDG      Madagascar
5       BEL      Belgium a, c                    60      MEX      Mexico b, c
6       BEN      Benin                           61      MLI      Mali
7       BFA      Burkina Faso                    62      MLT      Malta
8       BGD      Bangladesh b                    63      MRT      Mauritania
9       BHR      Bahrain                         64      MUS      Mauritius
10      BHS      Bahamas, The                    65      MWI      Malawi
11      BLZ      Belize                          66      MYS      Malaysia b, c
12      BOL      Bolivia c                       67      NER      Niger
13      BRA      Brazil b, c                     68      NGA      Nigeria b, c
14      BRB      Barbados                        69      NIC      Nicaragua c
15      BWA      Botswana                        70      NLD      Netherlands a, c
16      CAF      Central African Republic        71      NOR      Norway a, c
17      CAN      Canada a, c                     72      NPL      Nepal
18      CHE      Switzerland a, c                73      NZL      New Zealand a, c
19      CHL      Chile b, c                      74      OMN      Oman
20      CIV      Cote d'Ivoire b                 75      PAK      Pakistan b, c
21      CMR      Cameroon                        76      PAN      Panama c
22      COG      Congo, Rep.                     77      PER      Peru c
23      COL      Colombia b, c                   78      PHL      Philippines b, c
24      CRI      Costa Rica c                    79      PNG      Papua New Guinea
25      CYP      Cyprus                          80      PRT      Portugal a, b, c
26      DNK      Denmark a, c                    81      PRY      Paraguay c
27      DOM      Dominican Republic c            82      RWA      Rwanda
28      DZA      Algeria                         83      SAU      Saudi Arabia
29      ECU      Ecuador c                       84      SEN      Senegal
30      EGY      Egypt, Arab Rep. b, c           85      SGP      Singapore c
31      ESP      Spain a, c                      86      SLE      Sierra Leone
32      FIN      Finland a, c                    87      SLV      El Salvador c
33      FJI      Fiji                            88      SWE      Sweden a, c
34      FRA      France a, c                     89      SWZ      Swaziland
35      GAB      Gabon                           90      SYC      Seychelles
36      GBR      United Kingdom a, c             91      SYR      Syrian Arab Republic c
37      GHA      Ghana c                         92      TCD      Chad
38      GMB      Gambia, The                     93      TGO      Togo
39      GRC      Greece a, b, c                  94      THA      Thailand b, c
40      GTM      Guatemala c                     95      TTO      Trinidad and Tobago b
41      HND      Honduras c                      96      TUN      Tunisia b, c
42      HTI      Haiti c                         97      TUR      Turkey b, c
43      IDN      Indonesia b, c                  98      TZA      Tanzania
44      IND      India b, c                      99      UGA      Uganda
45      IRL      Ireland a, c                    100     URY      Uruguay c
46      IRN      Iran, Islamic Rep. c            101     USA      United States a, c
47      ISL      Iceland                         102     VEN      Venezuela b, c
48      ISR      Israel b, c                     103     ZAF      South Africa b, c
49      ITA      Italy a, c                      104     ZMB      Zambia
50      JAM      Jamaica b                       105     ZWE      Zimbabwe b
51      JOR      Jordan b, c
52      JPN      Japan a, c                      a – industrialized countries (IDC), 20 countries
53      KEN      Kenya b                         b – emerging market countries (EMG), 30 countries
54      KOR      Korea, Rep. b, c                (Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2000))
55      KWT      Kuwait                          c – countries for which Quinn (1997) variables exist

                                            26
Appendix 2: The “Pseudo-Quinn” Variable
           Quinn (1997) calculates a composite measure of financial regulation that ranges from 0 to
14, with 14 representing the least regulated and most open regime. The bulk of the index is based
upon Quinn’s coding of the qualitative information contained in the various issues of Annual
Report on Exchange Restrictions and Exchange Arrangements (AREAER) pertaining to k2 and k3,
augmented by information regarding whether the country in question has entered into international
agreements with international organizations such as the OECD and EU.
           A complete tabulation for the OECD members exists, but the coverage for the less
developed countries is much less extensive; values are reported only for certain years (1958, 1973,
1982, and 1988). Figure A-1 illustrates the index’s behavior for Argentina and for the United
States. The lack of observations relating to the developing countries is frustrating as one would be
particularly interested in the role of financial liberalization in emerging economies.
           As an expedient, we estimate a Quinn measure of financial regulation for the developing
countries. The estimation of this “pseudo-Quinn” measure proceeds in the following manner. As a
preliminary analysis, we used the entire sample to estimate the following relationship between the
Quinn measure and the variables k1 through k4.



                                      ∑
                                          4
       (A-1)        Quinnti = θ 0 +       j =1
                                                 θ j k ij ,t + ν ti


           When this regression is implemented over the entire sample of industrialized and less
developed countries, all the coefficients entering with the expected positive sign, and with
statistical significant (the kj variables take a value of one when a control is not in effect, and the
Quinn measure takes on a higher value the weaker the restriction31). This regression is a very blunt
instrument to use to estimate the Quinn variable, but remarkably these four variables explain a
majority of the variation in the index; the adjusted R2 is 0.71.
           One might think that the relationship linking the Quinn measure and capital controls
dummy variables differs over groups. One obvious distinction to examine is that between the
industrialized and less developed countries. Equation (A-2) was estimated allowing for an
intercept shift and differential slope coefficients. The intercept shift is statistically significant, but

31
     Recall that the original kj variables took a value of unity when a control is in effect. We reverse the signs of

                                                                      27
this may represent the fact that there are no observations on emerging market Quinn indices during
the entire 1990's. The only differential slope coefficient that is significant is the capital account (k3)
one, at the 7% marginal significance level. In order to further improve the performance of this
linear imputation, we also included time trend for each country.


                                 ∑
                                     4
        (A-2) Quinnti = θ 0 +        j =1
                                            θ j k ij ,t + λ1 IDCti + λ2 IDCti × k 3i + λi3 time + ν ti

where IDCi = 1 for developed countries, and = 0, otherwise


This estimation method increases the adjusted R2 up to 0.92. Using this method, we estimate the
pseudo-Quinn variable. The correlation between the pseudo-Quinn variable and KAOPEN is
estimated to be 0.94. Figure A-2 displays the pseudo-Quinn and KAOPEN series for Argentina;
clearly the movement of the former is a good proxy for the latter.




these binary variables to make the interpretation of KAOPEN more intuitive.
                                                            28
                                                Table 1
                                         Descriptive Statistics
                                        Full Sample, 1977 – 1997

                                                                           S.D. of Avg.
                                                            Average Growth
                                               Mean                        Growth Rate             n=
                                                               Rate (%)
                                                                               (%)
              Liquid Liabilities
  1                                           0.4514            0.0163          0.0205            1976
            to GDP Ratio (LLY)
             Private Credit to
  2                                           0.3178            0.0285          0.0396            1973
            GDP Ratio (PCGDP)
              M2 to GDP Ratio
  3                                           0.4252            0.0133          0.0226            2144
                   (M2Y)
        Stock Market Capitalization
  4                                           0.2882            0.0587          0.1096            1015
          To GDP Ratio (SMKC)
         Stock Market Total Value
  5                                           0.1077            0.1530          0.4242            1063
       Traded to GDP Ratio (SMTV)
      Stock Market Turn Over to GDP
  6                                           0.2968            0.0293          0.2132            1000
              Ratio (SMTO)
      New Equity Issued to GDP Ratio
  7                                           0.0131            0.0685          0.1782             522
                 (EQTY)

  8     k1: Multiple Exchange Rates           0.7897            0.0076          0.0224            2183


  9         k2: Current Account               0.5190            0.0028          0.1313            2183


 10          k3: Capital Account              0.2461            0.0388          0.0600            2178

          k4: Surrender of Export
 11                                           0.2525            0.0542          0.1135            2182
                 Proceeds

 12              SHAREk3                      0.2402            0.0370          0.0450            2358


 13    Capital Openness (KAOPEN)               0.000            0.0379          0.0917            2357

        Per Capita Income (in PPP)
 14                                           5957.99           0.0551          0.0442            2115
                 (RYPC)

 15        Trade Openness (OPN)               0.6966            0.0042          0.0307            2187


 16            Inflation(INFL)                0.1303           -0.0171          0.1691            2022

Notes: Samples periods differ. Mean pertains to the untransformed variable. Growth rates calculated using log
differences. Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. KAOPEN is the first
standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the share of the last five years
(including the observed year) when the capital account was open; the non-existence of multiple exchange rates;
the openness of the current account; and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. Since KAOPEN is a
series of first principal components, its average is zero.
                                                       29
                                              Table 2
                      Correlations of Selected Financial Deepening Measures
                                            Full Sample


                          LLY           PCGDP         M2Y          SMKC       SMTV
 Liquid Liabilities
  To GDP Ratio
                           1

  Private Credit
  To GDP Ratio
                         0.812             1

 M2 to GDP Ratio         0.849          0.774          1
  Stock Market
 Capitalization to       0.445          0.509         0.352           1
    GDP Ratio
  Stock Market
Total Value Traded       0.475          0.538         0.380         0.690      1
  To GDP Ratio

Notes: Correlation coefficients for common samples.




                                                 30
                                        Table 3
                    Financial Development and Financial Openness
                         Full Sample, Five year panels, 1982-97


                               Liquid      Private   Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt    Equity
                        Pred Liabilities   Credit    Capital'n Total Value Turnover   Issued
                        sign     [1]         [2]        [3]        [4]        [5]       [6]
Financial                (+)   0.0021¶ 0.0034*** 0.0028        0.0063***    0.0003     0.0002
Openness [t-5]                 (0.0013) (0.0012) (0.0033)      (0.0021)    (0.0035)   (0.0003)
Financial                (-)   -0.0079 -0.0181¶ -0.0136         -0.0931* -0.1126*** -0.0481**
Deepening [t-5]                (0.0095) (0.0112) (0.0338)       (0.0560) (0.0303) (0.0233)

Per Capita               (+)    0. 0018 0.0040*** 0.0053        0.0062*    0.0170** -0.0003
 Income [t-5]                  (0.0017) (0.0016) (0.0044)       (0.0035)   (0.0072) (0.0004)
Inflation [t-5]          (-)    -0.0075  0.0074 -0.0531***      -0.0248*    0.0063 -0.0018¶
                               (0.0084) (0.0121) (0.0187)       (0.0138)   (0.0519) (0.0012)
Trade                    (+)    0.0039 0.0059** -0.0199          0.0030     -0.0087 -0.0004
Openness [t-5]                 (0.0036) (0.0029) (0.0173)       (0.0071)   (0.0105) (0.0006)

R-squared                        0.05       0.12       0.20       0.26       0.33       0.12
N                                300        298        148        156        150         55
RMSE                            0.022      0.022      0.044      0.036      0.066      0.003

Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.
Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year period. Financial
openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4,
each of which is the share of the last five years (including the observed year) when the capital
account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange rates, the openness of the current
account, and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of observations.
RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression. Regressions include fixed time effects
(estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the
sample. ¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.




                                               31
                                                                             Table 4
                                                           Financial Development and Financial Openness
                                                              LDC and EMG, Five year panels, 1982-97

                                                                       LDC                                                                EMG

                                    Liquid      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt       Equity       Liquid       Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt    Equity
                                  Liabilities   Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover      Issued     Liabilities    Credit     Capital'n   Total   Turnover     Issued
                           Pred                                                                                                                 Value
                           sign       [1]         [2]         [3]            [4]      [5]        [6]          [7]          [8]         [9]       [10]      [11]        [12]

Financial Openness [t-5]   (+)     0.0008        0.0016      0.0030     0.0050*     0.0024      0.0008     0.0021       0.0046***    0.0042    0.0066** 0.0135**     0.0007¶
                                  (0.0018)      (0.0012)    (0.0049)    (0.0029)   (0.0047)    (0.0005)   (0.0033)      (0.0018)    (0.0044)   (0.0033) (0.0065)     (0.0005)
Financial Deepening [t-5] (-)     -0.0194¶ -0.0152          -0.0101     -0.0391    -0.0905**   -0.0452*   -0.0350*       0.0015      0.0433     -0.0566 -0.0922** -0.0444*
                                  (0.0135) (0.0173)         (0.0435)    (0.1128)    (0.0406)   (0.0237)   (0.0203)      (0.0295)    (0.0400)   (0.1114) (0.0401) (0.0226)


Per Capita Income [t-5]    (+) 0.0052*** 0.0028*             0.0111      0.0024     0.0141      0.0005     0.0027       -0.0026     -0.0013     0.0032    0.0222**   0.0013¶
                               (0.0019) (0.0015)            (0.0092)    (0.0046)   (0.0119)    (0.0009)   (0.0032)      (0.0030)    (0.0038)   (0.0042)   (0.0107)   (0.0009)

Inflation [t-5]             (-)   -0.0126¶ 0.0097           -0.0561*    -0.0071     0.0250     -0.0038*   -0.0332¶       0.0171     -0.0062     0.0115     0.1170 -0.0063¶
                                  (0.0088) (0.0124)         (0.0294)    (0.0120)   (0.0546)    (0.0022)   (0.0249)      (0.0343)    (0.0220)   (0.0181)   (0.0958) (0.0041)
Trade Openness [t-5]       (+)     0.0061       0.0088**    -0.0275     0.0097¶     -0.0018    -0.0019¶   0.0189¶       0.0177**     0.0146     0.0286    -0.0573*   -0.0031
                                  (0.0052)      (0.0039)    (0.0241)    (0.0072)   (0.0167)    (0.0012)   (0.0131)      (0.0081)    (0.0247)   (0.0264)   (0.0336)   (0.0027)


R-squared                            0.09         0.16        0.17        0.14       0.24        0.30       0.15         0.24        0.25       0.18       0.34       0.26
N                                    233          231          89          94         89          34          94          90           79         83        80         33
RMSE                                0.021        0.019       0.046       0.031      0.074       0.003       0.025        0.020       0.035      0.031      0.071      0.004


Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over
a five year period. Financial openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the share of
the last five years (including the observed year) when the capital account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange rates, the openness of the
current account, and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression.
Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample.
¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.




                                                                                       32
                                         Table 5
                     Financial Development and Financial Openness
                           Instrumental Variables Estimation
                          Full Sample, Five year panels, 1982-97


                                Liquid      Private   Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt       Equity
                         Pred Liabilities   Credit    Capital'n Total Value Turnover      Issued
                         sign     [1]         [2]        [3]        [4]        [5]          [6]
Financial                 (+) 0.0099*** 0.0109*** 0.0031         0.0170***    0.0193**    0.0005
Openness [t-5]                (0.0046) (0.0040) (0.0069)         (0.0051)     (0.0081)   (0.0011)
Financial                 (-)   -0.0092 -0.0359** -0.0133 -0.1343*** -0.1211*** -0.0484**
Deepening [t-5]                 (0.0097) (0.0148) (0.0333) (0.0518) (0.0321) (0.0228)

Per Capita                (+)    -0.0041     0.0013   0.0042   -0.0010         -0.0017 -0.0006
 Income [t-5]                   (0.0035)    (0.0026) (0.0066) (0.0054)        (0.0105) (0.0010)
Inflation [t-5]           (-)    -0.0026     0.0016 -0.0571*** -0.0230          0.0378  -0.0010
                                (0.0101)    (0.0145) (0.0209) (0.0183)        (0.0675) (0.0026)
Trade                     (+)     0.0022     0.0038   -0.0219  -0.0008        -0.0168¶ -0.0006
Openness [t-5]                  (0.0038)    (0.0041) (0.0173) (0.0076)        (0.0124) (0.0010)

                                     2          2
R-squared                         NR          NR        0.23       0.19        0.25        0.10
N                                 236         234        138        141         137         54
RMSE                             0.024       0.024      0.044      0.040       0.073       0.003

Notes: Point estimates from 2SLS, with instrumental variables of regional dummies, lagged
government budget surplus and current account balance. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year
period. Financial openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3,
k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the share of the last five years (including the observed year) when
the capital account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange rates, the openness of the
current account, and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of
observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression. Regressions include fixed time
effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped
from the sample. ¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.
    2
“NR ” means the R-squared is negative.




                                                33
                                                                              Table 6
                                                           Financial Development and Financial Openness
                                                                 Instrumental Variables Estimation
                                                              LDC and EMG, Five year panels, 1982-97

                                                                       LDC                                                                 EMG

                                    Liquid      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt        Equity       Liquid       Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt    Equity
                                  Liabilities   Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover       Issued     Liabilities    Credit     Capital'n   Total   Turnover     Issued
                           Pred                                                                                                                  Value
                           sign       [1]         [2]         [3]            [4]       [5]        [6]          [7]          [8]         [9]       [10]      [11]        [12]

Financial Openness [t-5]   (+)     0.0044       0.0057*      0.0070     0.0147***   0.0388***    0.0009     0.0005       0.0088***   0.0105¶    0.0170*** 0.0421*** 0.0003
                                  (0.0047)      (0.0032)    (0.0083)    (0.0051)    (0.0152)    (0.0011)   (0.0070)      (0.0033)    (0.0072)   (0.0065) (0.0140) (0.0010)
Financial Deepening [t-5] (-)     -0.0126        -0.0219    -0.0102     -0.0672     -0.1110**   -0.0445    -0.0428**      0.0049      0.0450     -0.0670 -0.1009** -0.0486**
                                  (0.0154)      (0.0204)    (0.0424)    (0.1103)     (0.0450)   (0.0240)    (0.0216)     (0.0310)    (0.0404)   (0.1080) (0.0431) (0.0233)


Per Capita Income [t-5]    (+)    0.0044*       0.0028¶     0.0154¶      0.0055      0.0180      0.0005     0.0009       -0.0051¶     0.0001     0.0065    0.0215*     0.0012
                                  (0.0024)      (0.0021)    (0.0107)    (0.0067)    (0.0168)    (0.0009)   (0.0034)      (0.0034)    (0.0046)   (0.0054)   (0.0131)   (0.0009)

Inflation [t-5]             (-)   -0.0183*       -0.0014 -0.0723**      -0.0232      -0.0083    -0.0038     -0.0310       0.0246      0.0017     0.0159    0.2331** -0.0069*
                                  (0.0096)      (0.0152) (0.0342)       (0.0190)    (0.0846)    (0.0022)   (0.0261)      (0.0336)    (0.0247)   (0.0202)   (0.0957) (0.0041)
Trade Openness [t-5]       (+)    -0.0005        0.0044 -0.0377¶        -0.0013      -0.0510    -0.0021    0.0263¶       0.0132¶     -0.0020     0.0103    -0.0770*   -0.0023
                                  (0.0071)      (0.0054) (0.0246)       (0.0086)    (0.0330)    (0.0018)   (0.0167)      (0.0098)    (0.0259)   (0.0264)   (0.0396)   (0.0034)

                                                                                         2
R-squared                            0.04         0.10       0.20        0.05         NR         0.30        0.17         0.25        0.22       0.08       0.24       0.25
N                                    170          168         80          80           77         33           82          78           71         71         70        32
RMSE                                0.023        0.020       0.046       0.035       0.092       0.00        0.025        0.021       0.036      0.036      0.081      0.004
Notes: Point estimates from 2SLS, with instrumental variables of regional dummies, lagged government budget surplus and current account balance.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year period. Financial
openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the share of the last five years (including
the observed year) when the capital account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange rates, the openness of the current account, and no
obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression. Regressions include
fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. ¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal
                                                   2
significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level. “NR ” means the R-squared is negative.



                                                                                        34
                                                             Table 7
                                       The Role of Institutional Development: “LEGAL”
                                      Five year panels, 1982-97, Full Sample and LDC/EMG

                                                        FULL                                           LDC/EMG
                                   Liquid    Private Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Liquid      Private Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                            Pred Liabilities Credit Capital'n Total Value Turnover Liabilities Credit Capital'n Total Value Turnover
                            sign     [1]       [2]      [3]       [4]        [5]      [6]        [7]      [8]       [9]       [10]

  Financial Openness        (+) 0.0034¶11% 0.0035* 0.0012       0.0051**    -0.0029    0.0057   0.0012 0.0133¶     0.0110*     0.0054
  [t-5]                          (0.0021) (0.0019) (0.0043)     (0.0026)   (0.0054)   (0.0051) (0.0022) (0.0093)   (0.0066)   (0.0086)
                                                  6%
  Level: LEGAL              (+)     0.0003 0.0061* 0.0141*** 0.0070***      0.0035     0.0020   0.0085 0.0284**    0.0100*     0.0090
                                   (0.0025) (0.0032) (0.0056) (0.0026)     (0.0059)   (0.0051) (0.0051) (0.0120)   (0.0057)   (0.0118)
  Interaction: LEGAL x     (+) 0.0018 0.0005 0.0016 0.0037*** 0.0002 0.0042¶ 0.0013 0.0078¶                        0.0052¶     0.0059
  Financial Openness [t-5]     (0.0012) (0.0012) (0.0019) (0.0015) (0.0031) (0.0028) (0.0014) (0.0050)             (0.0036)   (0.0072)
  Financial Deepening      (-) -0.0076 -0.0312** -0.0421¶ -0.1412*** -0.1197*** -0.0641** -0.0124 -0.0478           -0.1245   -0.1019
  [t-5]                        (0.0144) (0.0166) (0.0375) (0.0478) (0.0365) (0.0273) (0.0513) (0.0469)             (0.1008)   (0.0538)


  Per Capita Income [t-5]   (+)     -0.0049 -0.0030 -0.0057      -0.0008   0.0176*     0.0026 -0.0032 0.0159¶       0.0057     0.0271
                                   (0.0046) (0.0036) (0.0067)   (0.0047)   (0.0097)   (0.0052) (0.0070) (0.0122)   (0.0055)   (0.0190)
  Inflation [t-5]            (-)    -0.0052 0.0114 -0.0173       -0.0158    0.0365 -0.0304¶ 0.0200 -0.0203         -0.0163     0.0608
                                   (0.0160) (0.0236) (0.0236)   (0.0162)   (0.0775) (0.0227) (0.0330) (0.0305)     (0.0172)   (0.1088)
  Trade Openness [t-5]      (+)     0.0038 0.0047 -0.0155        0.0024     -0.0008    0.0042 -0.0010 -0.0797** -0.0128       -0.0259
                                   (0.0051) (0.0045) (0.0172)   (0.0070)   (0.0082)   (0.0144) (0.0077) (0.0381) (0.0160)     (0.0370)


  R-squared                          0.09     0.14      0.31      0.38       0.34       0.34    0.25      0.39       0.30      0.29
  N                                  121      119       111       119        113         57       55        52         57       52
  RMSE                              0.025    0.027     0.047     0.037      0.073      0.028    0.025     0.051      0.036     0.090

Notes: LEGAL is the first standardized principal component of CREDITOR, ENFORCE, ACCOUNT, and SHRIGHTS. Point estimates
from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five
year period. Financial openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the
share of the last five years (including the observed year) when the capital account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange
rates, the openness of the current account, and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of observations. RMSE
is root mean squared error of the regression. Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation
rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. ¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.


                                                                    35
                                                             Table 8-1
                                 The Role of Institutional Development: Disaggregate Components
                                       CREDITOR and ENFORCE, Five year panels, 1982-97

                                                       FULL                                                       LDC/EMG
                              Liquid      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt       Liquid       Private     Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                            Liabilities   Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover    Liabilities    Credit       Capital'n Total Value Turnover
                                [1]         [2]         [3]        [4]        [5]          [6]          [7]          [8]         [9]       [10]

 CREDITOR
 Financial Openness [t-5]    -0.0001       0.0019     0.0011     0.0047    -0.0037       -0.0013     -0.0008       -0.0038       -0.0020        -0.0002
                            (0.0023)      (0.0027)   (0.0052)   (0.0040)   (0.0064)     (0.0032)     (0.0036)      (0.0099)     (0.0035)       (0.0143)
 Level: CREDITOR            0.0032¶       0.0041¶     0.0010     0.0002     0.0055       0.0032       0.0036        0.0040       0.0030         0.0062
                            (0.0020)      (0.0028)   (0.0039)   (0.0023)   (0.0051)     (0.0026)     (0.0031)      (0.0067)     (0.0027)       (0.0065)
 Interaction: CREDITORx 0.0016¶            0.0013     0.0009     0.0005     0.0011       0.0011       0.0010        0.0029       0.0025         0.0012
  Financial Openness [t-5] (0.0012)       (0.0010)   (0.0020)   (0.0016)   (0.0022)     (0.0016)     (0.0011)      (0.0034)     (0.0020)       (0.0040)

               R-squared      0.10         0.13        0.25       0.31       0.33         0.16         0.18          0.24         0.20          0.26
                      N=       145          143        123        129         123          78           76            64           67            62


 ENFORCE
 Financial Openness [t-5]    -0.0009       0.0050    -0.0083     -0.0109    0.0126       0.051       0.0192**      -0.0224      -0.0202¶        0.0085
                            (0.0060)      (0.0053)   (0.0107)   (0.0090)   (0.0147)     (0.0125)     (0.0110)      (0.0220)     (0.0129)       (0.0298)
 Level: ENFORCE              -0.0003      0.0045*    -0.0007     -0.0004   -0.0023       0.0033       0.0042        0.0047      0.0061¶         0.0060
                            (0.0019)      (0.0027)   (0.0040)   (0.0020)   (0.0060)     (0.0042)     (0.0038)      (0.0067)     (0.0039)       (0.0100)
                                                                                                                                         11%
 Interaction: ENFORCEx      0.0006         -0.0001    0.0015    0.0023*    -0.0016      -0.0006      -0.0028**      0.0045     0.0041¶         -0.0008
  Financial Openness [t-5] (0.0007)       (0.0008)   (0.0014)   (0.0013)   (0.0019)     (0.0023)      (0.0012)     (0.0041)     (0.0025)       (0.0049)

               R-squared      0.07         0.16        0.24       0.31       0.33         0.13         0.22          0.24         0.20          0.25
                      N=       153          151        129        136         129          86           84            70           74            68


Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a
five year period. Financial openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the share of the
last five years (including the observed year) when the capital account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange rates, the openness of the current
account, and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression.
Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample.
¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.

                                                                           36
                                                               Table 8-2
                                   The Role of Institutional Development: Disaggregate Components
                                         SHRIGHTS and ACCOUNT, Five year panels, 1982-97

                                                         FULL                                                            LDC/EMG
                                Liquid      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt        Liquid         Private       Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt
                              Liabilities   Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover     Liabilities      Credit         Capital'n Total Value Turnover
                                  [1]         [2]         [3]        [4]        [5]           [6]            [7]            [8]         [9]       [10]

  SHRIGHTS
  Financial Openness [t-5]     0.0005        0.0023     0.0033    -0.0060¶    -0.0096      -0.0096¶       -0.0039         -0.0179    -0.0120*    -0.0223¶
                              (0.0036)      (0.0030)   (0.0052)   (0.0045)    (0.0088)     (0.0064)       (0.0041)        (0.0131)   (0.0069)    (0.0165)
  Level: SHRIGHTS              0.0009        0.0022 0.0087*** 0.0059***       -0.0023       0.0028         0.0025        0.0179***   0.0083*     -0.0027
                              (0.0014)      (0.0016) (0.0032) (0.0019)        (0.0049)     (0.0038)       (0.0025)       (0.0071)    (0.0048)    (0.0071)
                                                                                                                   11%
  Interaction: SHRIGHTS x 0.0010             0.0007    -0.0002    0.0037**     0.0028      0.0043¶       0.0023¶          0.0089¶    0.0069*     0.0090*
   Financial Openness [t-5] (0.0010)        (0.0009)   (0.0020)   (0.0015)    (0.0023)     (0.0031)       (0.0014)        (0.0060)   (0.0037)    (0.0053)

                 R-squared      0.08         0.10        0.27       0.36        0.33         0.17           0.18           0.33        0.26        0.28
                        N=       153          151        129        136         129           86             84             70          74          68

  ACCOUNT
                                                                                                                   11%
  Financial Openness [t-5]     -0.0058       -0.0022   -0.0172*   -0.0163**   -0.0049     -0.0217**      -0.0109¶        -0.0305*    -0.0173¶    -0.0373
                              (0.0071)      (0.0070)   (0.0100)    (0.0075)   (0.0154)     (0.0109)        (0.0067)      (0.0173)    (0.0115)    (0.0294)
  Level: ACCOUNT               0.0000       0.0004¶ 0.0010*** 0.0006***        0.0007       0.0000        0.0006**       0.0017**    0.0010***   0.0021*
                              (0.0002)      (0.0002) (0.0004) (0.0002)        (0.0006)     (0.0004)       (0.0003)       (0.0007)    (0.0004)    (0.0012)
                                                                                                    6%
  Interaction: ACCOUNTx 0.0002¶              0.0001    0.0003*    0.0004***    0.0000     0.0005*         0.0002*         0.0007*    0.0004¶      0.0007
   Financial Openness [t-5] (0.0001)        (0.0001)   (0.0002)   (0.0001)    (0.0002)     (0.0002)       (0.0001)        (0.0004)   (0.0003)    (0.0006)

                 R-squared      0.08         0.11        0.31       0.37        0.35         0.24           0.25           0.36        0.29        0.33
                         N=      125          123        114        123         116           61             59             55          61          55


Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a
five year period. Financial openness variable is the first standardized principal component of SHAREk3, k1, k2, and k4, each of which is the share of the last
five years (including the observed year) when the capital account was open, the non-existence of multiple exchange rates, the openness of the current
account, and no obligation of surrender of export proceeds. N is the number of observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression.
Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. ¶(*)[**]{***}
indicates marginal significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.


                                                                              37
                                   Figure 1
                Selected Measures of Financial Deepening


                           .008628            1.67556
                                                                           2.06591



                   lly


                                                                           .020298
1.67556



                                      pcgdp


.008628
                                                                           2.88054



                                                          smkc


                                                                           .000152
      .020298            2.06591                .000152          2.88054




                                     38
                                     Figure 2
                Selected Measures of Financial Deepening
                  and of Financial Openness (KAOPEN)

                           .000152              2.88054
                                                                                1.67556



                 pcgdp


                                                                                .008628
2.88054



                                       smkc


.000152
                                                                                2.65663



                                                             kaopen


                                                                                -1.79269
      .008628            1.67556                  -1.79269            2.65663




                                       39
                                       Table A-1
                    Financial Development and Financial Openness
                         Using the “Pseudo-Quinn” Measure
                         Full Sample, Five year panels, 1982-97

                               Liquid      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt     Equity
                        Pred Liabilities   Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover    Issued
                        sign     [1]         [2]         [3]        [4]        [5]        [6]
Financial                (+)     0.0032    0.0083*     0.0053    0.0140**    0.0058      -0.0002
Openness [t-5]                  (0.0043)   (0.0043)   (0.0102)   (0.0065)   (0.0153)    (0.0014)
Financial                 (-)   -0.0003    -0.0031    -0.0122     -0.0866 -0.1167*** -0.0560**
Deepening [t-5]                 (0.0103)   (0.0113)   (0.0321)   (0.0562)¶ (0.0306) (0.0243)

Per Capita               (+)     -0.0016    0.0003   0.0047    0.0045    0.0144* -0.0003
 Income [t-5]                   (0.0032)   (0.0029) (0.0068) (0.0044) (0.0087) (0.0008)
Inflation [t-5]           (-)    -0.0108    0.0012 -0.0611*** -0.0341** 0.0112 -0.0029*
                                (0.0093)   (0.0150) (0.0213) (0.0148) (0.0612) (0.0016)
Trade                    (+)      0.0051   0.0075** -0.0217    0.0044   -0.0118¶ -0.0002
Openness [t-5]                  (0.0050)   (0.0037) (0.0182) (0.0075) (0.0085) (0.0006)

R-squared                         0.03       0.08       0.23       0.27        0.36       0.13
N                                 198        194        136        142         134         53
RMSE                             0.023      0.025      0.045      0.037       0.067      0.003

Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.
Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over a five year period. Financial openness
variable is Quinn’s measure of financial openness, linearly extrapolated using the IMF’s individual
capital control measures. N is the number of observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of
the regression. Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not reported). Observations of
inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. ¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal
significance at the 20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.




                                               40
                                                                          Table A-2
                                                         Financial Development and Financial Openness
                                                              Using the “Pseudo-Quinn” Measure
                                                            LDC and EMG, Five year panels, 1982-97

                                                                   FULL                                                             LDC/EMG
                                  Liquid      Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt      Equity       Liquid       Private    Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Stock Mkt Equity
                           Pred Liabilities   Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover     Issued     Liabilities    Credit     Capital'n Total Value Turnover Issued
                           sign     [1]         [2]         [3]        [4]        [5]         [6]          [7]          [8]         [9]       [10]       [11]     [12]

Financial Openness [t-5]    (+)    0.0002      0.0043      0.0141 0.0103¶14%     0.0006      0.0009     0.0025       0.0125**     0.0123    0.0111*    0.0269¶ 0.0003
                                  (0.0050)    (0.0042)    (0.0129) (0.0069)     (0.0205)    (0.0019)   (0.0081)      (0.0060)    (0.0108)   (0.0066)   (0.0205) (0.0018)
Financial Deepening [t-5] (-)     -0.0258¶ 0.0006         -0.0058    -0.0538    -0.0918**   -0.0532*   -0.0433**      0.0068      0.0451    -0.0637    -0.0920** -0.0516*
                                  (0.0196) (0.0277)       (0.0458)   (0.1232)    (0.0429)   (0.0315)    (0.0213)     (0.0342)    (0.0421)   (0.1119)    (0.0419) (0.0268)


Per Capita Income [t-5]     (+)    0.0013      -0.0039     0.0095     0.0021     0.0145     -0.0005     0.0015       -0.0079*     -0.0048   -0.0003     0.0084 0.0010
                                  (0.0035)    (0.0039)    (0.0108)   (0.0062)   (0.0145)    (0.0012)   (0.0048)      (0.0045)    (0.0053)   (0.0049)   (0.0130) (0.0012)

Inflation [t-5]             (-)   -0.0143¶ 0.0088         -0.0687    -0.0147     0.0348     -0.0039    -0.0367¶       0.0127     -0.0165     0.0037    0.1736¶ -0.0080¶
                                  (0.0101) (0.0178)       (0.0327)   (0.0138)   (0.0700)    (0.0024)   (0.0268)      (0.0375)    (0.0272)   (0.0201)   (0.1184) (0.0055)
Trade Openness [t-5]        (+)   0.0132** 0.0105         -0.0351     0.0118     -0.0032    -0.0008    0.0295*       0.0238***    0.0079     0.0382     -0.0165 -0.0019
                                  (0.0065) (0.0060)       (0.0274)   (0.0080)   (0.0155)    (0.0013)   (0.0170)      (0.0094)    (0.0289)   (0.0346)   (0.0317) (0.0036)


R-squared                           0.09        0.20        0.21       0.11       0.27        0.26       0.16         0.27        0.25       0.15        0.36     0.23
N                                   126         122          73         79         71          30          77          73           68        73          67       29
RMSE                               0.023       0.021       0.048      0.034      0.078       0.004       0.026        0.022       0.036      0.034       0.77     0.004


Notes: Point estimates from OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is the average annual growth rate over
a five year period. Financial openness variable is Quinn’s measure of financial openness, linearly extrapolated using the IMF’s individual capital control
measures. N is the number of observations. RMSE is root mean squared error of the regression. Regressions include fixed time effects (estimates not
reported). Observations of inflation rates in excess of 100% are dropped from the sample. ¶(*)[**]{***} indicates marginal significance at the
20%(10%)[5%]{1%} level.




                                                                                    41
                                  Figure A-1
                      Financial Openness Measure (Quinn)
                            For USA and Argentina
                          usa                                 argentina

                14


                12


                10


                 8


                 6


                 4


                 2


                 0
                     70         75      80               85           90   95
                                                  year




                                  Figure A-2
                          Financial Openness Measure
                          KAOPEN vs. “Pseudo-Quinn”
                                 For Argentina

           2                                                                         14

         1.5                    KAOPEN                                               12
                                Pseudo-Quinn
           1                                                                         10
                                                                                          Pseudo-Quinn
KAOPEN




         0.5                                                                         8

           0                                                                         6
                77              82             87                     92        97
         -0.5                                                                        4

          -1                                                                         2

         -1.5                                                                        0
                                             Years




                                             42
