NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSET PRICES IN A FLEXIBLE INFLATION TARGETING FRAMEWORK

Stephen G. Cecchetti
Hans Genberg
Sushil Wadhwani

Working Paper 8970
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8970

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

Prepared for the conference on “Asset Price Bubbles: Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and
International Policies” organized jointly by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the World Bank,
Chicago, April 22-24, 2002. We would like to thank Kathy McCarthy, Ed Nelson and Peter Rodgers for their
comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Stephen G. Cecchetti, Hans Genberg and Sushil Wadhwani. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework
Stephen G. Cecchetti, Hans Genberg and Sushil Wadhwani
NBER Working Paper No. 8970
June 2002
JEL No. E5, G0

ABSTRACT
We argue that there are sound theoretical reasons for believing that an inflation targeting central
bank might improve macroeconomic performance by reacting to asset price misalignments over
and above the deviation of, say, a two-year ahead inflation forecast from target.
In this paper, we first summarize the arguments for our basic proposition. We then discuss some
of the counter-arguments. Specifically, we counter those who argue that reacting to asset prices
does not improve macroeconomic performance by claiming that they are attacking the ‘straw
man’ under which central bankers react in the same way to all asset price changes. We continue
to emphasize that policy reactions to asset price misalignments must be qualitatively different
from reactions to asset prices changes driven by fundamentals. Hence, we stand by our earlier
results and conclusions.
In practice, we do believe that central bankers can detect large misalignments (e.g. the Nikkei in
1989 or the NASDAQ in early 2000), and that they might be in a better position to react to long-lived
bubbles than many market participants.
However, we recognize that our proposal may present communication challenges, and it is
critically important that policy set to react to asset price misalignments both be explained well
and that it be based on a broad consensus. It is also important to emphasize that our proposal is
wholly consistent with the remit of most inflation-targeting central banks, as we are
recommending that while they might react to asset price misalignments, they must not target
them.

Stephen G. Cecchetti
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
1945 N. High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
(614) 292-9339
cecchetti.1@osu.edu

Hans Genberg
Graduate Institute of
International Studies
P.O. Box 36
CH-1211 Geneva 21
Switzerland
+41 22 908 5928
genberg@hei.unige.ch

Sushil Wadhwani
Monetary Policy Committee
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London EC2R8AH
United Kingdom
+44 20 7601 3235
sushil.wadhwani@bankofengland.co.uk

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

Introduction.
Inflation targeting is being adopted by an increasing number of central banks. Almost
every day another country is added to the list that contained only a handful a few years ago. It is
surely no coincidence that inflation rates (actual as well as expected) have decreased substantially
and, so far, durably in countries that have adopted this strategy for the conduct of monetary
policy.
But what is the essence of inflation targeting, and how should it be implemented in
practice? The straightforward answer to the first of these questions is that the central bank should
strive to maintain inflation as close to a clearly specified target level as possible, while at the
same time limiting fluctuations of real economic activity.1 Interpreted in this way, inflation
targeting is a statement of the objectives of monetary policy alone that allows for different
methods of implementation.2 It is sometimes suggested that a practical strategy for achieving the
inflation-targeting objective is to follow a Taylor rule, whereby a short-term interest rate
instrument responds to deviations of expected future inflation from the target rate and to
deviations of output from its full-employment level.3
Several practical questions must be addressed before such a strategy can be implemented.
The policymaker must choose the relative weights to attach to inflation and output, the precise
horizon for expected inflation and output, the difficulties associated with measuring the fullemployment output level, and whether there is any role in the policy rule for variables other than
expected inflation and the output gap. This paper is about the last of these questions. Specifically
we ask whether there is any role of asset prices in the formulation of monetary policy in a flexible
inflation-targeting framework.
The most common answer to this question is contained in Bernanke and Gertler's
influential study. They conclude that

1

For more detailed discussions about the meaning of inflation targeting see for example Bernanke, Laubach,
Mishkin, and Posen (1999) and Svensson (2001).
2
See also Genberg (2001).
3
While it can be useful to characterize monetary policy in this way in theoretical models, in practice monetary policy
is never implemented according to a rigid rule. Furthermore, in their communication with the public, some inflationtargeting central banks speak only of reacting to an inflation forecast, making no explicit statements about
responding to the output gap.

1

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

"The inflation targeting approach dictates that central banks should adjust
monetary policy actively and preemptively to offset incipient inflationary and
deflationary pressures. Importantly, for present purposes, it also implies that
policy should not respond to changes in asset prices, except in so far as they
signal changes in expected inflation." (Bernanke and Gertler (1999), p. 78)
The primary exception to the view that asset prices do not belong in a Taylor-type
interest-rate reaction function has arisen in an open-economy context. Ball (1999) finds that
adding the exchange rate to the Taylor rule improves macroeconomic performance in a model
where the exchange rate has a significant role in the transmission mechanism of structural shocks
and monetary policy.4 .
Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky, and Wadhwani (2000) [CGLW hereafter] claim, however,
that a more general case can be made for central banks to react to asset prices in the normal
course of policy making. There we argue that:
"[a] central bank concerned with both hitting an inflation target at a given time
horizon, and achieving as smooth a path as possible for inflation, is likely to
achieve superior performance by adjusting its policy instruments not only to
inflation (or to its inflation forecast) and the output gap, but to asset prices as
well. Typically, modifying the policy framework in this way could also reduce
output volatility. We emphasize that this conclusion is based on our view that
reacting to asset prices in the normal course of policy-making will reduce the
likelihood of asset price bubbles forming, thus reducing the risk of boom-bust
investment cycles." (p. 2)
Before we proceed, it is crucial to emphasize what we mean by this statement. It is our
view that central banks can improve macroeconomic performance by reacting to asset price
misalignments. We are not now saying, nor have we ever said, that policymakers should target
asset prices.5
In the remainder of this paper, we first summarize the main arguments made in CGLW
(Section 1). In section 2, we discuss some of the recent work in this area. The implications of the
recent research for our original view of the role of asset prices in the formulation of monetary
policy are summarized in the final section of the paper. To anticipate, we believe that our original
views remain valid. Criticisms have either adopted a too mechanical view of the conduct of
4

See also Svensson (2000).
As was the case in our previous work, this paper is not about what the central bank objective should be. Instead,
we are concerned with how an inflation-targeting central bank can most effectively fulfill its objectives.

5

2

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

monetary policy or assumed that central bankers are incapable of distinguishing (even
approximately) between different types of macroeconomic disturbances. As we explained in
detail in our previous study, and as we reiterate below, we take a different view on both issues.
1. Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy: Cecchetti-Genberg-Lipsky-Wadhwani (2000).
In this section we restate the arguments presented in CGLW (2000) for how asset price
misalignments should be used to guide central bank policy. We are primarily interested in
examining whether and how asset price misalignments should influence monetary policy once
other factors, such as the inflation outlook and the output gap, have been taken into account. In
addition, we make a few brief comments both about the use of asset prices directly in the
inflation measure targeted by the central bank, and about the information content of asset prices
for inflation forecasts.
To avoid confusion or misunderstanding, we want to emphasize that we are not
advocating that asset prices should be targets for monetary policy, neither in the conventional
sense that they belong in the objective function of the central bank, nor in the sense that they
should be included in the inflation measure targeted by the monetary authorities. Instead our
principal claim is that central banks can improve macroeconomic performance by reacting
systematically to asset price misalignments, over and above their reaction to inflation forecasts
and output gaps. It is our view that central banks seeking to smooth output and inflation
fluctuations can improve these macroeconomic outcomes by setting interest rates with an eye
toward asset prices in general, and misalignments in particular. The main reason for this is that
asset price bubbles create distortions in investment and consumption, leading to excessive
increases and then falls in both real output and inflation. Raising interest rates modestly as asset
prices rise above what are estimated to be warranted levels, and lowering interest rates modestly
when asset prices fall below warranted levels, will tend to offset the impact on output and
inflation of these bubbles, thereby enhancing overall macroeconomic stability. In addition, if it
were known that monetary policy would act to “lean against the wind” in this way, it might
reduce the probability of bubbles arising at all, which would also be a contribution to greater
macroeconomic stability.

3

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

The rationale for our conclusions comes both from the intuition gained from simple
theoretical models and from quantitative simulation results. In the remainder of this section we
summarize these arguments.

1.1 The intuitive argument.

The first illustration of the potential usefulness of reacting to asset prices is an application
of the basic insight of Poole (1970), that leaning against the wind of interest rate changes is
useful when disturbances originate in the money market. In CGLW we generalized this argument
slightly to allow for movements in equity (or real estate) prices in an economy where the stock
market (or the housing sector) is particularly important and to allow for changes in the exchange
rate in an economy where the external sector is crucial.
A straightforward application of Poole’s analysis shows that moderating changes in asset
prices diminishes fluctuations in economic activity so long as the underlying reason for the asset
price movement can be traced to a disturbance in the demand and/or the supply of the asset in
question. To be sure, the same logic implies that when asset prices change as a result of
disturbances in other markets, for example if equity prices increase because of favorable
productivity shocks, then the case for leaning against the wind of the asset price change
disappears. It is important not to react automatically to any and all changes in asset prices, but to
evaluate each situation separately and act accordingly.
The second illustration given in CGLW is based on a model due to Kent and Lowe
(1997). Their model is dynamic and explicitly incorporates the notion of asset price
misalignments. In their setup, when a bubble develops in equity markets, standard wealth effects
drive current inflation up. Importantly, though, expected inflation may not change since there is a
probability that the bubble will disappear by itself, reducing future inflationary pressures. A
forward-looking central bank that sets the current interest rate in response to expected inflation
(and does not take the equity price bubble into account) would not tighten monetary policy under
such circumstances. As a result the bubble in the equity market will bring about even higher
inflation in the future if it continues and an even stronger economic slow-down if it collapses
from an even higher level. Although expected inflation (i.e. the probability weighted average of
these two future scenarios) may be on target, the country will suffer from highly variable

4

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

economic activity as a result of the stance of monetary policy. By contrast, a policy of
preemptively tightening in response to the emerging equity price bubble reduces this variability.
Similar mechanisms play a pivotal role in models in which monetary policy is transmitted
via credit channels, and where the financial accelerator plays a significant role. In these cases, an
emerging financial market bubble leads to higher investment as, given the higher value of their
collateral, firms find it easier to borrow. More investment does stimulate aggregate demand and
output in the short run, but in the end creates overcapacity and results in a sharp downturn. Even
if average inflation is not affected significantly, the asset market bubble leads to higher output
volatility. A central bank that reacts to the root cause of the instability − the asset price
misalignment − will reduce the overall volatility in economic activity.
At an intuitive level, these arguments establish a prima facie case for taking asset price
misalignments into account in the normal course of determining monetary policy, not only
because they have an impact on expected inflation, but also because misalignments lead to
unnecessarily large business cycle fluctuations. These conclusions are confirmed by the
simulation results to which we now turn.

1.2 Reacting to asset prices in three macro models.
We summarize results from three simulation experiments. The first uses the small closedeconomy model employed by Bernanke-Gertler (1999) to investigate the appropriate reaction of
monetary policy to stock market bubbles. The second utilizes the small-scale open-economy
model due to Batini and Nelson (2000) in which the exchange rate plays an important role. The
third set of simulations explores the properties of a version of John Taylor's multi-country model
originally developed to analyze international economic interdependence.

1.2.1 A closed-economy model subject to a stock price bubble.
The Bernanke-Gertler model can be characterized as a standard dynamic new-Keynesian
model, modified to allow for financial accelerator effects and exogenous asset-price bubbles.
Briefly, the economy comprises three sectors: households who consume and save; a government
that manages fiscal and monetary policy; and a business sector composed of firms that hire labor,
invest in new capacity, and produce goods and services.

5

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

Firms finance the acquisition of capital both through the use of internal funds and through
external borrowing. The existence of credit market frictions means that there is a premium on
external finance that affects the overall cost of capital and thus the real investment decisions of
firms. This external finance premium depends inversely on the financial condition of potential
borrowers. An improvement in a borrowing firm’s position translates into a fall in the premium,
which serves to magnify investment and output fluctuations. So, for example, an increase in a
firm’s share price, raising the net worth of the owners, will make the firm more creditworthy,
reduce the external finance premium, thereby increasing borrowing and investment. This
financial accelerator mechanism provides an additional channel through which monetary policy
can affect spending. With a fall in real interest rates, for example, asset prices will rise, reducing
the cost of external borrowing and providing an extra stimulus for investment.
For the purpose at hand, the crucial aspect of the Bernanke-Gertler model is the
introduction of financial bubbles through the possibility that observed stock prices differ
persistently from fundamental values, and that this difference grows exponentially. The
consequence of this is that the bubble affects the quality of a firm’s balance sheet, and so the cost
of capital falls systematically when stock prices exceed fundamental values. The result is an
increase in investment, resulting in both higher current aggregate demand and higher future
potential output. When the bubble bursts, the financial accelerator operates in reverse leading to a
reduction in both inflation and output.
To investigate the potential for monetary policy to moderate the influence of the financial
bubble on the economy, CGLW study the consequence of the central bank setting the short-term
interest rate according to the reaction function

Rt = γ Π E t π t +1 + γ y ( y t − y t* ) + γ s s t −1 + γ R Rt −1 .

(1)

where R is a policy-determined short-term interest rate, y is the log of real output, y* is the log of
potential or full-employment output, s is asset price misalignment, and E is the expectation
operator. We assume that policymakers seek to minimize a loss function of the form
L = α var(π ) + (1 − α ) var( y )

(2)

6

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

where α is the relative weight on inflation variability in the objective function. CGLW examine
whether the optimal value of γs > 0, i.e. can loss L be reduced by reacting to the stock price
bubble?
The conclusion of the simulation experiments reported in CGLW was that “In the
majority of the cases we study, it is strongly advisable for interest rates to respond [to stock price
bubbles]. While the reaction may not be very large, it should clearly be there.” (p.25)

1.2.2 Monetary policy and the exchange rate in a small model of an open economy.
CGLW present a second set of simulations designed to investigate whether a central bank
in an open economy should pay attention to exchange rate movements when it sets interest rates.
We employ a variant of the Batini-Nelson (2000) model. This is a relatively conventional small
open-economy model based on an aggregate demand and an aggregate supply relationship
together with an equation determining the exchange rate. Aggregate demand depends on expected
future income in addition to the expected real interest rate, aggregate supply is modeled
according to a partially forward-looking Phillips curve, and the exchange rate is determined by
the condition of uncovered interest parity.
In the simulations we consider two types of shocks: pure financial shocks, corresponding
to deviations from strict uncovered interest parity, and pure aggregate demand shocks unrelated
to disturbances in income or the real interest rate. As before, CGLW were interested in finding
out whether in addition to reacting to expected inflation, the central bank’s interest-rate target
should or should not respond to the exchange rate.
Not surprisingly, we found that the answer depends on the nature of the shock being
considered. When financial disturbances hit the economy are the sole source of shocks, it is
desirable to ‘lean against the wind’ of exchange rate changes. Doing so prevents these shocks
from destabilizing the real sector of the economy. When the objective of the central bank is to
minimize some combination of variability of inflation and output from their respective target
values, taking action to eliminate the effects of financial disturbances is a good thing. On the
other hand, when aggregate demand shocks are important as well, changes in the exchange rate
typically serve a useful function of absorbing some of the adjustment, thereby lessening the
fluctuations in prices and output. Leaning against the wind of such exchange rate changes is then
counterproductive. The simulation results presented in CGLW confirm this reasoning.

7

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

It is possible that these simulation results actually understate the benefits from a monetary
policy rule that, in part, works to counteract exchange rate misalignments. To take a concrete
example, suppose that a bubble creates an unwarranted appreciation of the exchange rate, and
that the bubble can be affected by monetary policy. Then it might make sense to keep interest
rates lower than would be necessary to, say, have expected inflation at a fixed time-horizon equal
to target, because such a policy would mitigate the domestic deflationary impact of the bubble
and reduce the deviation of inflation from the target today, with the added benefit of reducing the
size of the 'shock' from the bubble while it lasts. Moreover, since the bubble will be smaller on
average under the proactive monetary policy, the destabilizing effects of the bursting of the
bubble will also be also smaller. Hence, in this case, a monetary policy that takes the exchange
rate misalignment into account could, under certain circumstances, reduce the average size of the
(absolute) deviations of inflation from target measured over the entire future.6

1.2.3 Reacting to the exchange rate in a large multi-country model.
In a study designed to evaluate the consequences for macroeconomic stability if
Switzerland were to join the Euro-area, Genberg and Kadareja (2000) provide evidence on the
desirability of making Swiss monetary policy react to exchange rate movements. In contrast to
the two previous sections, this is done in the context of a multi-country econometric model
estimated with actual data. Specifically Genberg and Kadareja adapt the model originally
developed by John Taylor in the early 1990s. Taylor's framework is useful for studying monetary
policy interactions and spillovers between the countries, and the role of different types of
exchange rate arrangements.
The Taylor model is a sophisticated Mundell-Fleming model with two important
additions: a set of wage-price relationships on the one hand, and rational expectations on the
other. Genberg and Kadareja modified the original setup by substituting Switzerland for Canada,7
and re-estimating the model with data from 1980 to 1996.8

6

See Wadhwani (2000) for further discussion.
The countries retained were France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United
States.
8
The most comprehensive reference to the specification and performance of Taylor's model is Taylor (1993). The reestimation of the entire model and the specification/estimation of the Swiss module are described in detail in
Kadareja (2000).
7

8

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

In the stochastic simulations of the model the equations were shocked with random draws
from a multivariate normal distribution with the covariance structure estimated from the data. In
all cases the simulated outcomes were compared, variable-by-variable, with a baseline simulation
of the model assuming no shocks. When comparisons between different monetary policy rules
were made, the standard of reference was the root mean square percentage deviation from the
baseline path.
Genberg and Kadareja proceeded to investigate the consequences of having the Swiss
National Bank react to the exchange rate (relative to the Euro) in addition to inflation and the
output gap. The results indicated clearly that some leaning-against-the-wind of exchange rate
changes is always better than free floating, regardless of the relative weight put on output and
inflation in the overall loss function, α in equation (2). How much exchange rate smoothing is
optimal depends on this relative weight, however.
It is important to keep in mind that the Genberg-Karadeja results were obtained under the
assumption that the SNB did not observe the underlying shock to the economy. Rather, the
central bank simply reacted to the observed change in the inflation, output gap and the exchange
rate. Had the authorities been able to distinguish shocks to asset markets from shocks to goods
markets, a more sophisticated strategy, whereby the SNB reacts differently to the exchange rate
depending on the nature of the underlying shock, would have been preferred.
These results are clearly consistent with those obtained using the Batini and Nelson
model. In both cases we conclude that the results depend critically on the source and relative
importance of the shocks that are hitting the economy. It is important to emphasize, however, that
the Genberg-Kadareja results indicate that a policy of leaning against the wind would have been
desirable given the estimated distribution of shocks over the 1980-96 period. (More on this in
section 2 below.)

2. Selected opinions in the recent literature.
Not surprisingly, our view that monetary policy should react to asset price misalignments
has generated responses from other economists, e.g. Professors Bernanke and Gertler, and Drs.
Batini and Nelson have produced simulation results that, at first sight, do not seem to support our
view.9 In this section we review their studies in an effort to determine why there is an apparent

9

See Bernanke and Gertler (2001) and Batini and Nelson (2000).

9

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

disagreement. Our conclusions are straightforward. The relationship between movements in
equity prices and exchange rates on the one hand, and inflation and output on the other, depend
critically on the underlying sources of shocks to the economy. It is therefore important that
monetary policy does not react mechanically and in the same way to all changes in asset prices.
Judgment needs to be exercised in reacting to exchange rates changes and share price movements
just as it has to be in the interpretation of and reaction to fluctuations in the estimated output gap.
Some believe that there is little hope of being able to infer anything from asset price movements
that is useful for monetary policy purposes, partly because asset prices are so volatile and partly
because central banks do not possess more information about equilibrium valuations than the
private sector.10 For reasons that we explained in some detail in CGLW and that we will
summarize below, we believe that central banks can improve macroeconomic performance if they
judiciously incorporate information in asset prices in their decisions on monetary policy.
A similar conclusion emerges from a recent paper by Professors J. Stock and M. Watson
on the information content in asset prices for inflation forecasts.11 As we stressed in CGLW, it is
difficult to find univariate relationships between asset price movements and future inflation that
are stable across countries and over time. The reason presumably is that such relationships
depend both on the institutional structure of an economy and on the shocks that were experienced
during the historical episode in the recorded data. Again, the implication is that monetary policy
cannot be based on a mechanically fixed reaction to all asset price movements, but instead must
depend on whether current asset prices can be justified by underlying fundamental determinants
or are the results of misalignments due to portfolio shifts.
In the last part of this section we take note of the analysis in the 2001 Annual Report of
the Bank for International Settlements which takes a sympathetic, if not openly supportive, view
of the belief that monetary policy can have a role to play in reducing the imbalances caused by
occasional misalignments in asset prices, especially in emerging markets.

10

In his comment on our argument Mishkin (2001) brings up these same points. In addition he erroneously claims
that our arguments imply that central banks should target asset prices. As we emphasize at the outset, this is
definitely not the case.
11
Stock and Watson (2000).

10

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

2.1 Responding to asset price bubbles in simulation models.

The conclusions in CGLW are, in part, based on results from simulations of two
theoretical macroeconomic models, Batini and Nelson's minimal open-economy model in which
the exchange rate plays an important role in the transmission of monetary policy, and Bernanke
and Gertler's somewhat larger closed-economy model in which credit markets play a crucial role
in the monetary transmission process. Two recent papers by the authors of these models
reconsider the issue of what role asset prices should play in the formulation of monetary policy.
In this section we review the conclusions of these papers and relate them to our own.

2.1.1 Batini and Nelson (2000): Reacting to the exchange rate may be counterproductive.
Recall from section 1.2.2 that the Batini-Nelson model we used for our simulations is a
three-equation model of an open economy that determines the rate of inflation, the level of
output, and the exchange rate. The three equations are an aggregate demand relationship in the
form of a forward-looking IS curve, an expectations augmented (new) Phillips curve that serves
as an aggregate supply relationship, and an uncovered interest parity condition linking domestic
and foreign interest rates with the expected rate of change in the exchange rate. Shocks to
aggregate demand, aggregate supply and the interest parity condition lead to fluctuations in the
endogenous variables. The role of the central bank is to set the domestic interest rate so as to
minimize the induced fluctuations in inflation and output around their respective target levels.
Batini and Nelson (2000) introduce an exogenous bubble into the exchange rate process
and study how the central bank should react to exchange rate movements in the course of setting
the interest rate. Crucially, they presume that policymakers are unable to distinguish whether
financial or real shocks are the source of the exchange rate movement. As a benchmark, Batini
and Nelson use a policy reaction function in which authorities react only to expected inflation
rate and the lagged interest rate itself.
Their conclusions can be summarized in three points:

(i)

When the economy is subject only to the three structural shocks (to aggregate demand, to
aggregate supply and to interest parity), there is no benefit to be obtained from reacting

11

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

explicitly to the exchange rate, so long as policy's reactions to the expected inflation rate
and the lagged interest rate are optimal.
(ii) If the exchange rate is also subject to a bubble process in addition to the structural shocks,
then a central bank that systematically leans against the wind of exchange rate changes
will stabilize output somewhat, but it will destabilize inflation, the interest rate itself, and,
surprisingly, the exchange rate. Again, when the responses to expected inflation and the
lagged interest rate are re-optimized, there is no gain from reacting separately to the
exchange rate.
(iii) If the uncovered interest parity condition is replaced by a more ad hoc, but arguably less
empirically flawed relationship, and exchange rate changes have a strong direct influence
on inflation, then a policy that responds to the exchange rate over and above the response
to expected inflation and the lagged interest rate appears desirable.

How, if at all, should our previous conclusions be modified in light of these results? First,
result (i) confirms our view that the appropriate reaction of monetary policy to movements in
endogenous variables such as the exchange rate depends on the underlying source for these
changes. We illustrated this by showing that leaning against the wind of financial shocks is
useful, whereas doing the same in the presence of real shocks is not. Batini and Nelson subject
their model to a particular combination of shocks in their simulations. Apparently, when real
shocks are sufficiently important, leaning against the wind of exchange rate fluctuations becomes
counterproductive.12
Conclusion (ii) is surprising. If short-run exchange rate changes correspond to the
prediction of the interest parity relationship and the private sector knows that a bubble is present
and expects it to last indefinitely, then reacting to the exchange rate may be counterproductive.
Batini and Nelson's simulations suggest that, under these circumstances, the interaction between
the fully forward-looking behavior of the private sector and the central bank rule creates a type of
instability.
We suspect that the result is model-specific, and its interpretation should in any case be
tempered by the following considerations. First, is it realistic to assume that the private sector

12

Recall the simulation results of Genberg and Kadareja, who, on the basis of the estimated distribution of shocks
over the 1980-96 period, arrived at the opposite conclusion. Hence, this is clearly an empirical issue.

12

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

expects the bubble to last indefinitely even if the central bank is actively attempting to prevent
the exchange rate from following the bubble path? It might be plausible to assume that a
monetary policy that reacts to exchange rate misalignments affects both the probability of the
bubble emerging in the first place and the length of its duration. We suspect that this might
reverse their results, though introducing it formally into the simulations is difficult because it
would require a model of the formation of the bubble in the first place.13
Secondly, perhaps the authorities should not react in a similar way to exchange rate
bubbles as they do to normal exchange rate fluctuations? After all, these two types of exchange
rate movements are fundamentally different, and so one would think that they should generate
different policy responses. We therefore stand by the general conclusion in CGLW that monetary
policy reactions to asset price fluctuations should be conditioned by the underlying sources of
these movements, and that leaning against the wind can be helpful in certain circumstances
Finally, there is the issue of the empirical failure of the uncovered interest parity
condition. Batini and Nelson clearly recognize this as a problem, and so examine the impact of
potential substitutes. But what should the uncovered interest rate parity condition be replaced
with? As conclusion (iii) reveals, the answer is crucial for the implications we should draw for
monetary policy.

2.1.2 Bernanke and Gertler (2001): Central Banks should not respond to movements in asset
prices.
In a brief article in the May 2001 issue of the American Economic Review, Bernanke and
Gertler disagree with our view that it is desirable for a central bank to respond modestly to stock
market bubbles over and above its reaction to inflation and the output gap. Using a modified
version of their 1999 model (which they had kindly provided to us for the simulations described
in CGLW), they maintain their judgment that reacting to share price misalignments is counter
productive. What accounts for such different conclusions?
We believe that the apparent disagreements are largely due to different assumptions about
whether a central bank can distinguish between financial and technology shocks. Let us explain
why. The most comparable set of simulation results is the one in which there are no shocks to the
fundamentals. In this case Bernanke and Gertler show that reacting to stock prices instead of

13

See Allen and Gale (2000) for a theoretical model that might be built on.

13

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

reacting to the output gap results in inferior economic performance.14 What this implies is that the
central bank should not ignore the output gap and treat share prices as a substitute for other
information about the economy. We certainly subscribe to this view, and indeed all our results
show that both the output gap and the stock price should be included in the information that the
central bank uses. However, we also argued that taking account of share prices in the process of
setting monetary policy leads to an improvement of economic performance once inflation and the
output gap has been accounted for. We continue to believe that this is the case.
In the simulations underlying their 2001 article Bernanke and Gertler introduce a second
source of shocks that influence stock prices.15 Whereas their original work examined the
consequences of non-fundamental bubbles alone, now they have added the possibility of
fundamental technology shocks as a source of movements in equity values. We did not study the
appropriate policy response to technology shocks in our simulations, but argued on theoretical
grounds that the monetary policy response to such shocks should be different from the response
to financial shocks. Their simulation results confirm this.
Of course, if we simulate an economy where several types of shocks are present
simultaneously, and assume that the central bank has no possibility to differentiate between
underlying sources of movements in endogenous variables, then it is quite possible that it is best
to ignore certain variables when we formulate policy. This would be the case for example when
stock prices have increased, but we do not know whether this is due to a positive productivity
shock in the economy or to a financial bubble.16 There is no controversy here. The bottom line
therefore is whether central banks should try to infer from information in financial markets as to
what kind of underlying disturbance is affecting the economy. We certainly believe that they
should, and that some useful information can be obtained from asset price movements. We shall
return to this issue in the final section of the paper.

14

Here and in the following we are of course assuming that the Central Bank reacts forcefully to the expected rate of
inflation. On this there is no controversy.
15
They also introduce some minor modifications of the model in the latest simulations. These relate to the response
of investment to equity prices and the production function in the capital goods sector. But these changes are not
responsible for our disagreement. Bernanke and Gertler also now allow the size of the stock price bubbles to be
stochastic, while our simulations were, like their earlier simulations, based on fixed-size bubbles.
16
The same principle would also lead us to be very cautious if the latest statistics showed an increase in output, but
we had no way to telling whether that corresponded to an increase in the natural rate of output or not.

14

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

2.2 Asset prices, inflation forecasts and monetary policy.
Stock and Watson (2000) present an up-to-date review of the literature on the reliability
of econometric forecasts of inflation and output growth for G7 countries, together with some new
evidence of their own.17 What stands out in their study is the difficulty of finding any indicator
variable(s) that reliably predict future rates of inflation or growth. The literature contains many
papers that report significant in-sample Granger-causal relationships linking some current asset
price variable with future inflation, but these relationships frequently prove to be unstable when
the sample period is altered. More importantly, in-sample performance usually breaks down in
more realistic out-of-sample forecasting tests.
In CGLW we describe a possible reason for the potential instability between asset price
changes and subsequent CPI inflation. It is as follows. Equity prices and exchange rates respond
endogenously to disturbances that also affect inflation with a lag. Depending on the source of the
underlying shocks to the economy, the relationship between an increase in an asset price and
future inflation can vary in, both, size and direction. Econometric models measure the average
relationship over a particular historical period, and to the extent that certain types of disturbances
were dominant in some samples and other disturbances were more frequent in others, the
relationship between asset prices and inflation will appear unstable in simple reduced-form
models. Uncovering a stable relationship requires finding a way to control for the nature of the
underlying disturbance.
In our earlier work we emphasize that monetary policy should react only to asset price
misalignments, not indiscriminately to all asset price changes. It is crucial that policymakers
differentiate between those asset price changes that are justified by underlying fundamentals and
those that are not. It is only the latter that create the potential for significant future volatility.
A common attitude vis-à-vis the role of asset prices in the formulation of monetary policy
is that they should be taken into account only in so far as they affect a fixed-horizon inflation
forecast. The empirical evidence reviewed and presented by Stock and Watson implies that even
this view does not allow us to be agnostic about the underlying source of asset price changes. The
reason is that the signal carried by the asset price change about future inflation will be different
depending on the source of the underlying disturbance that has created the changes in the first
place.

15

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

According to this interpretation of the empirical evidence, we seem to be forced to take
one of two positions about the role of asset prices in the formulation of monetary policy. On the
one hand we can argue that it is hopeless to identify underlying causes of asset price changes, and
therefore we will never be able to extract reliable signals from them about future inflation. This is
the view that there is no role, direct or indirect (via inflation forecasts) for asset prices in the
conduct of monetary policy. Alternatively we can adopt the position that it is possible to extract
useful information from asset prices, which can be used both in inflation forecasts and in
signaling future volatility. We clearly take the second of these views.

2.3 Financial liberalization, cycles, and policy response in emerging markets.
Chapter VII of the 2001 Annual Report of the Bank for International Settlements argues
that liberalization of financial markets “…has increased the scope for pronounced financial
cycles…” and that “…the damage caused by financial instability has been particularly serious for
emerging market countries.” [BIS (2001), p.123] The report contains an informative review of
the mechanism by which developments in financial markets can lead to instability in the real
sector of the economy. The particular role of property prices is discussed in detail, with an
emphasis on its importance for inflation measurement and the problems it can create that require
policy response.
The BIS report focuses primarily on the risks posed by financial instability and the
regulatory and supervisory measures that can be instituted to make the financial system more
resilient. The report is appropriately skeptical in our view of the possibility of using discretionary
changes in the regulatory framework as a way of dealing with perceived misalignments as they
occur. Although it points to difficulties in identifying asset price misalignments, the BIS report
goes on to argue that “…these difficulties need not rule out the very occasional use of monetary
policy in this way.” (p. 141) In this context it also makes the very useful point that “…the case
for a policy response need not depend on the ability of policymakers to make better judgments
than the private sector. Rather, the fact that policymakers have different responsibilities and
incentives may well mean that they respond quite differently to the same assessment of current
trends.” (p. 136) For example, market participants who feel that the stock market is “overvalued”
may find it difficult to maintain an investment stance that is reflective of their views if the
17

See also, Goodhart and Hoffmann (2000) for some similar evidence.

16

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

“bubble” is relatively prolonged. By contrast, policymakers may well be subject to less short-

termist performance-related pressure.

3. Where do we stand now?
In CGLW we set out to examine whether there is any role for asset price developments in
the formulation of monetary policy. Our analysis was set in a flexible inflation-targeting
framework in which the objective of monetary policy is to stabilize the inflation rate and the
output level around some attainable target levels. In practice this is usually implemented by the
central bank setting its interest rate instrument in response to deviations of an inflation forecast at
a chosen horizon (usually somewhere between one and two years) from the target rate and,
sometimes, a measure of the deviation of actual output from its potential level. We argued that if
the central bank were to react also to estimates of misalignment of asset prices, macroeconomic
performance could be improved.
Has subsequent research led us to modify our view in this respect? The short answer is no.
In a very general sense, the differences of opinion seem semantic. Virtually everyone
agrees that information contained in asset prices should be taken into account in so far as they
have a direct or indirect impact on inflation in the future. Hence, if we take a sufficiently wide
view of ‘having an impact on future inflation’, all the relevant information is already incorporated
into the policy decision.18
In practice, however, inflation forecasts that enter policy decisions often refer to a fixed
horizon, at least in public statements by the central bank. This means that consequences of asset
price misalignments that may emerge at some other frequency might not be given sufficient
weight in policy decisions. Furthermore, to the extent that asset price changes are included in
forecasting equations in the manner suggested in the recent literature,19 the potential effects of
such misalignments may not be captured at all. Yet, as the BIS (2001) argues, financial cycles
brought about in part by asset price movements can create real economic imbalances, and it is
indeed possible to point to concrete examples where this has occurred. We therefore continue to
18

This is certainly true if the objective of policy can be expressed in terms of inflation and output stability alone. If
stability of asset prices has an independent role, then there might be an additional reason to react to asset price
changes. Note in this context that stability of the interest rate is often included in the policy objective in order to
rationalize the sluggishness of interest rate adjustments observed in practice. Whatever argument justifies this
inclusion could perhaps be extended to other asset prices such as the exchange rate.
19
For example, Cecchetti, Chu, and Steindel (2000) and Stock and Watson (2000).

17

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

believe that monetary policy decisions must be based on more than a fixed-horizon inflation
forecast combined with an estimate of the current output gap.
A non-trivial and unresolved issue relates to the communication challenges presented by
our proposal. Setting policy on the basis of conscious deviations of expected inflation from
target at, say, the two-year horizon could hurt credibility. There is a significant risk that policy
becomes less predictable and less transparent, thereby potentially jeopardizing accountability. In
practice, attempts to set interest rates at a level that is different from what is necessary to achieve
the target level at a two-year horizon must be accompanied by a justification that is explained
simply and that commands broad agreement. Policymakers who consciously aim away from their
target at a two-year ahead horizon (in order to reduce inflation volatility at other horizons) will
attract suspicion if their explanation for doing so is complex and not well-understood, or, even
worse, if a significant group of commentators does not agree that aiming away from the two-year
ahead target will actually reduce inflation volatility. We recognize these to be critically important
considerations when deciding on the implementation of our proposal.
What about the recent simulation results of Batini-Nelson and Bernanke-Gertler? These
show clearly that it is important not to react mechanically to all asset price changes regardless of
their source. We certainly do not want to quarrel with this view, which is why our original
argumentation emphasized the need to identify asset price changes that can be justified by
underlying fundamentals and those that can not.20 This of course requires a certain amount of
judgment on the part of policymakers, but that is par for the course. 21
It has been suggested that central bank officials will never be able to determine whether
asset prices are misaligned in the sense we use the term here. After all, the argument goes,
markets have incorporated all available information into prices and what do policymakers know
that market participants do not?
We find this argument to be specious because it assumes that ‘incorporating all available
information’ automatically eliminates misalignments. But unless strong-form market efficiency
holds in practice, this is not the case. Furthermore, our proposal does not call for central banks to
respond to small misalignments. We agree that these are difficult to detect and are unlikely to
have very strong destabilizing effects in any case.
20

This is not unique to asset prices. For example, an increase in inflation that is due to a fall in aggregate supply
should in principle be treated differently from the same increase due to an increase in aggregate demand.

18

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

On the other hand, there are clearly times when egregious misalignments exist. Recent
examples include Japanese stock and land prices in 1989, and the NASDAQ in late 1999 and
early 2000. While some portion of these high price levels may have been justifiable based on
fundamentals, few people would deny that a significant component was due to asset market
disturbances. Ultimately, in terms of reducing inflation and output volatility, it is important that
central bankers respond to these large relatively ‘obvious’ misalignments.
As we have already discussed, central bankers might find it easier to respond to long-lived
bubbles that generate these ‘obvious’ misalignments as compared to the skeptical market
participants who may have been steadily impoverished by the longevity of the bubble.
While we agree that it is difficult to estimate the degree to which an asset price is
misaligned, it is not obvious that it is easier to estimate an output gap or the NAIRU, measures
that are commonly used in helping frame monetary policy. Indeed, one could argue that
assumptions about asset price levels, and the extent of misalignments, are essential inputs into the
process of estimating something like an output gap. The output gap estimate depends importantly
on underlying productivity growth (which affects prospective potential output) and the
equilibrium equity risk premium (which affects corporate investment, which in turn, affects trend
growth) – the same uncertain inputs that are to be necessary to estimate the degree of stock price
misalignment. Moreover, one’s estimate of the prospective output gap also depends on what is
likely to happen to the actual level of output, which, through the standard wealth effect, depends
directly on the degree to which asset prices are misaligned. As we see it, if you cannot estimate
asset price misalignments, you cannot forecast inflation either.
Putting our argument slightly differently, we are not persuaded that one should ignore
asset price misalignments simply because they are difficult to measure. The standard response to
noisy data is to use econometric methods to extract the signal. This is common practice in the use
of statistics in a policymaking environment. If central bankers threw out all data that was poorly
measured, there would be very little information left on which to base their decisions.
Two additional points have at times been suggested in arguing that asset prices should be
ignored. The first is based on the view that there are times when different asset prices give
conflicting signals. For example, housing prices may suggest potential inflationary pressures,
whereas movements in the exchange rate point in a different direction. This clearly complicates

19

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

the inference one might be able to draw from asset prices, but it does not imply that one should
ignore them. Instead, it means that one should look at all relevant asset prices.
Another argument notes that asset price misalignments in small economies may be caused
mainly by developments in financial markets elsewhere, and that monetary policy in the small
country will be unable to alter them significantly. Again, this does not invalidate our proposal.
We are not arguing that monetary policy should target any particular level of share prices, and so
the fact that these prices are determined mainly abroad does not prevent reacting to them. In
addition, the potentially destabilizing effects of asset price misalignments can occur regardless of
what causes these misalignments. Economic policy therefore must be ready to respond.
The conclusions we reached in ‘Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy’ therefore remain.
Monetary policy that pursues an inflation-targeting strategy should attempt to identify and
respond to asset price misalignments. Counter-arguments claiming that it is difficult to interpret
asset price movements are correct, but they apply to other aspects of inflation targeting as well,
so they do not eliminate the case for taking account of asset price misalignments in the conduct of
monetary policy.

20

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

References.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), “Bubbles and Crises”, The Economic Journal, 110, January, pp.
236-55.
Ball, Laurence (1999) “Policy Rules for Open Economies”, in J. Taylor (ed.) Monetary Policy
Rules, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Bank for International Settlements (1998). The Role of Asset Prices in the Formulation of
Monetary Policy. BIS Conference Papers Vol. 5. Basel, Bank for International
Settlements.
Bank for International Settlements (2001). Annual Report. Basel, Bank for International
Settlements.
Batini, N and Nelson, E (2000). “When the Bubble Bursts: Monetary Policy Rules and Foreign
Exchange Market Behavior”. Mimeo.
Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam Posen (1999). Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1999). “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility”. In New
Challenges for Monetary Policy: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 77-128.
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler. (2001). “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in Asset
Prices?” American Economic Review, May.
Cecchetti, S., R. Chu, and C. Steindel (2000). “The Unreliability of Inflation Indicators”, Current
Issues in Economics and Finance. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Cecchetti, Stephen, Hans Genberg, John Lipsky, and Sushil Wadhwani (2000). Asset Prices and
Central Bank Policy. Geneva Report on the World Economy 2. CEPR and ICMB.
Fama, E. F. (1981). "Term Structure Forecasts of Interest Rates, Inflation and Real Returns",
Journal of Monetary Economics, 25, pp. 59-76.
Flemming, J. (1999), “Monetary Policy; questions of adequacy, design and presentation,”
Economic Outlook vol. 24, no. 1, October, 9-13.
Genberg, H. and A. Kadareja (1999). “The Swiss Franc and the Euro”. Graduate Institute of
International Studies, unpublished manuscript.
Gerlach, S. (1995). "The Information Content of the Term Structure: Evidence for Germany".
Bank for International Settlements, Working Papers, No. 29.

21

Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani

Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework

Goodhart, C. and B. Hoffman (2000), “Do Asset Prices help to Predict Consumer Price
Inflation”, unpublished manuscript.
Jorion, P. and F. Mishkin (1991). "A Multicountry Comparison of Term Structure Forecasts at
Long Horizons", Journal of Financial Economics, 29, pp. 59-80.
Kent, Ch. and Ph. Lowe (1997). "Asset-Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy", Research
Discussion Paper 9709, Economic Research Department, Reserve Bank of Australia.
Mishkin, F. (2001), “The Transmission Mechanism and the Role of Asset Prices in Monetary
Policy”. NBER Working Paper No. 8617.
Poole, W. (1970). "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro
Model", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 88, pp. 197-216.
Stock, J. and M. Watson (2000). “Forecasting Output and Inflation: The Role of Asset Prices”.
Paper presented at the Sveriges Riksbank and Stockholm School of Economics
Conference on Asset Markets and Monetary Policy. Stockholm, 16-17 June 2000.
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2000). “Open-Economy Inflation Targeting”. Journal of International
Economics.
Wadhwani, Sushil B. (2000) “The Exchange Rate and the MPC: What Can We Do?” Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, August.

22

