                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TECHNOLOGICAL SUPERIORITY AND THE LOSSES FROM MIGRATION


                                          Donald R. Davis
                                         David E. Weinstein


                                         Working Paper 8971
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8971


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2002




We are grateful to Alan Deardorff and James Harrigan for helpful comments, to Joshua Greenfield for
research assistance, and to the Center for Japanese Economy and Business for support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Technological Superiority and the Losses from Migration
Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 8971
June 2002
JEL No. F2, J6, F1



                                             ABSTRACT

        Two facts motivate this study. (1) The United States is the world’s most productive economy. (2)
The US is the destination for a broad range of net factor inflows: unskilled labor, skilled labor, and
capital. Indeed, these two facts may be strongly related: All factors seek to enter the US because of the
US technological superiority. The literature on international factor flows rarely links these two
phenomena, instead considering one-at-a-time analyses that stress issues of relative factor abundance.
This is unfortunate, since the welfare calculations differ markedly. In a simple Ricardian framework, a
country that experiences immigration of factors motivated by technological differences always loses from
this migration relative to a free trade baseline, while the other country gains. We provide simple
calculations suggesting that the magnitude of the losses for US natives may be quite large– $72 billion
dollars per year or 0.8 percent of GDP.




Donald R. Davis                                                 David E. Weinstein
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
Columbia University                                             Columbia University
420 West 118th Street                                           420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027                                              New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                        and NBER
drd28@columbia.edu                                              dew35@columbia.edu
    Technological Superiority and the Losses From Migration
                       I. Technology, Factor Flows, and Income Losses

         Arguably the distinctive feature of the United States economy in a global context

is the high level of its technology. Whether measured in the aggregate or at the level of

the industry, US technology frequently figures as the most productive in the world, often

by a considerable margin. This productivity, naturally, not only delivers high income to

natives of the United States, but also influences decisions over the international flow of

productive factors to the US economy.

         A striking fact is the breadth of productive factors with net inflows to the United

States. One might expect, on simple factor abundance grounds, that unskilled labor might

find advantage in entering the United States. And so it does. Yet highly skilled labor also

finds it advantageous to enter the United States. And the US has been a net capital

importer for decades.1 One imagines that if land were free to migrate, a great deal of it

might seek to move to the US as well.

         The study of these international factor flows is almost always considered case by

case. There are very good reasons for doing so, since the relevant agents, objectives and

constraints vary considerably across these problems. However, the remarkable fact that

such a broad array of productive resources desires to locate in the United States suggests

that the logic is deeper than may be captured in the one-at-a-time approaches.

         The superiority of US technology provides a parsimonious and plausible

hypothesis to account for the attraction of the US location to such a broad array of

factors. However, it is important to recognize that when factor movements are motivated

1
 For all the talk of the “twin deficits,” net capital inflows continued into the United States even as the US
government budget moved into surplus in the late 1990s.


                                                                                                                2
by technological differences, both the positive and normative dimensions of these flows

may differ significantly from more conventional approaches.

        The conventional approach considers discrete inflows of a single factor to an

economy. It then calculates an immigration surplus as the economy moves down the

marginal product curve for the migrant factor. Much of the discussion concerns the

magnitude of this surplus and whether fiscal considerations offset or reverse the sign of

the net surplus.2

        The conventional approach does not always make explicit the origins of factor

price differences that motivate migration. When these are made explicit, the basis is

usually differences in relative factor abundance. However, this immediately runs into a

problem. In such a framework, if one factor receives a higher return in the US economy

(say unskilled labor), then some other factor (e.g. skilled labor) must receive less – so

want to leave the US economy. This is at odds with the observation that all factors seek to

enter the US.

        This puzzle has an obvious fix. This is to allow international productivity

differences that lead all factors to be more productive in the US, and so lead all factors to

desire to enter such a highly productive economy.3 As a first pass of analysis, this

suggests some economy from treating the multiple factors as a single composite factor.

And this leads directly to a variant of the standard Ricardian trade model, now amended

to allow for migration, as a setting in which to examine the consequences for a country of

immigration when this is motivated by technological advantage.


2
  For example, see Borjas (1995), Figure 1; Lalonde and Topel (1997), Figure 1; or Razin and Sadka (2001)
Figure 1.
3
  Indeed, recent research by Lutz Hendricks (2002) strongly supports the hypothesis that national TFP
differences matter for the wage differences motivating labor migration.


                                                                                                       3
       The key analytic insight can be stated simply. When immigration is motivated by

technological advantages, natives in the country that receives immigrants always lose

relative to a baseline with free trade. This is very much at odds with the presumption in

the literature that considers inflows one factor at a time. Nonetheless, the logic of the

result is quite simple. Even in autarky, a country enjoys the fruits of its own highly

productive technology. When the country opens to trade, having a monopoly on its own

technology is a crucial element of comparative advantage and gives rise to gains for this

economy. Immigration, in this context, amounts to an erosion of this monopoly power.

Although immigration motivated by technological advantage shifts out the world

production opportunities set, the country experiencing the immigration always loses.

Trade arising due to technological differences is a source of mutual gain. However, when

free trade is in place, migration due to technological differences is not a source of mutual

gain. World income rises, but more than all of this is captured by natives of the country

of emigration. Natives of the country experiencing immigration lose.

       Given the simplicity of these analytic results, and the plausibility of the

underlying assumptions, it is surprising that this approach has previously figured almost

not at all in the discussions of factor flows. Although the Ricardian model is nearly

always the first model of trade that we teach students, it is almost never used to discuss

migration issues. We have found only two references. Findlay (1982) discusses the

possibility of native losses from migration in a paper on “International Distributive

Justice,” and Daniel Trefler (1997) does likewise amidst a catalog of models that might

be used to think about these issues. Both solve the model and recognize that immigration

creates a loss for the receiving country. We go beyond their work in several respects. The




                                                                                             4
first is simply to grasp that coordinated inflows of a wide range of productive factors –

unskilled labor, skilled labor, and capital – would make an interpretation of “labor” in the

Ricardian model as a composite factor quite reasonable. The second is to see that this is

in fact a good description of the US experience in recent decades. The third is to use these

insights to develop empirical applications that allow us to quantify the losses for US

natives.4

         Trade theorists have a long tradition of discussing the possibility of losses from

factor accumulation or international factor movements, as in Jagdish N. Bhagwati (1958),

or Gene M. Grossman (1984). Even a graduate textbook treatment of the interaction of

trade and factor mobility has been developed in Kar-Yiu Wong (1995). Yet there seems

not to have been a recognition in the field that the Ricardian model might be the right

framework for thinking about the consequences of such factor inflows to the US

economy. This might reflect the availability of what appear to be more general models of

factor flows, a tendency to think about these flows one at a time, and the fact that until

recently empirical analysis played a relatively small role in the field.

         Empirical consideration of the international movement of labor has attracted some

of the top talent among labor economists. This includes outstanding work by Borjas

(1995, 2001), who is one of the first to take seriously the task of quantifying the

aggregate impact of immigration on US income. It also includes a wealth of work

surveyed by Lalonde and Topel (1997) and Friedberg and Hunt (1995). There are two

4
  Trefler (1997, p. 11) seems to have on his mind only inflows of low-skilled labor, writing “Since
immigrant and native labor compete head on for the same jobs at the same wages, the home country can
only absorb the immigrants in low productivity industries that spring up in response to immigration. One
should think of these industries as garments or citrus fruit which would disappear in the absence of migrant
workers.” By contrast, we think of the inflow of a broad range of factors as potentially expanding output in
many or all sectors.



                                                                                                          5
factors that have tended to distract labor economists from the results we highlight. The

first is simply that they have focused on labor flows, not all factor flows.5 The second is

that distinct methodological traditions have acted as barriers between the labor

economists who have thought hardest about the empirics and the theoretical traditions in

international trade that are a key part of the approach developed here. In any case, the

labor economists must be given great credit for being the first to quantify the impact of

labor flows.

         Finally, those who think about international capital flows have likewise neglected

the issue. The classic model of MacDougall (1960) on the consequences of capital

inflows delivers precisely the type of “immigration surplus” featured in the labor

literature, in this case with capital inflows taking the place of labor inflows. Again, one

reason for neglect of the issues we raise is specialization by field, so that those

economists who think about capital flows rarely concern themselves with labor flows.6

         In sum, our approach to analyzing these factor flows seems not to have been

carried out previously in large part because the analytic and methodological elements key

to these effects have been divided across fields that have too little communication.

         This paper sets out a simple framework for exploring these issues. Section II

considers the gains and losses from immigration within the classic model of Dornbusch,

Fischer, and Samuelson (1977). Section III extends this to consider the case in which

labor quality differs across countries. Section IV establishes our rationale for using the


5
  In this case, the exceptions tend to prove the rule. For example, Lalonde and Topel (1997) do briefly
discuss what would happen if capital moved into the US in the same proportion as labor, but conclude that
it would then leave incomes unchanged due to constant returns to scale, ignoring the possibility of terms of
trade losses that we identify.
6
  A rare exception is Razin and Sadka (2001), who do discuss both Labor and Capital Flows. Nonetheless,
having taken advantage of the symmetry of the problems in analytics when considered one at a time, they
then move to discuss the issues wholly separately.


                                                                                                           6
Ricardian model as a framework for analyzing factor immigration to the US,

documenting the dimensions and magnitude of US technological superiority and of the

inflows themselves. Section V provides empirical exercises that establish baseline

quantification of the losses to US natives of these factor inflows. These exercises build

most importantly on Acemoglu and Ventura (2002) and on Harrigan (1997). We also

consider some robustness checks. Section VI concludes.



              II. Migration in the Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson Model

       We consider a world with two countries, home and foreign (with foreign variables

indicated by an asterisk). The world labor force LW is fixed and distributed among the

home and foreign countries so that:

(1)                                        L + L* = LW

For the moment, we assume there are no possibilities of migration.

       There exists a continuum of goods indexed by z ∈ [ 0,1] . Let output of z at home

be y ( z ) and output of z abroad be y* ( z ) . Then the corresponding production functions

are:

(2)                                    y ( z ) = A( z ) L( z )

(3)                                   y* ( z ) = A* ( z ) L* ( z )

A( z ) and A* ( z ) are the respective productivities. We order the goods according to

decreasing degree of home comparative advantage and for simplicity assume this

ordering is strict. Hence

                                                   A( z )   A( z ′)
(4)                            If z < z ′, then           > *
                                                   A ( z ) A ( z ′)
                                                    *




                                                                                              7
Goods and factor markets are perfectly competitive. Free entry excludes the possibility of

economic profits, so that for any good z, the wage equals the value marginal product in

the market where it is produced:

                        w = A( z ) p ( z ) if z is produced at home.
(5)
                        w* = A* ( z ) p ( z ) if z is produced in foreign.

For any good z, the relative productivities in the goods establish the relative wage at

which the good could be competitively produced in both countries. This defines a

functional relation over z between relative wages and relative productivities that is

derived by taking the ratio of the equations in (5). We assume the goods are traded freely,

so that p( z ) is the common goods price. This yields the function:

                                                    A( z )
(6)                                      ρ ( z) ≡
                                                    A* ( z )

Note that ρ ′( z ) < 0 , indicating decreasing home comparative advantage.

                                                          w
       If we knew the equilibrium relative wage              then we could identify which goods
                                                          w*

are produced in which country. Suppose for a moment that the equilibrium relative wage

is such that some good z can be profitably produced in both locations. Then, since

home’s comparative advantage is strongest in low index goods, it must be the case that

goods produced at home, for which z < z ,

                                          A( z )   w
(7)                                        *
                                                 >
                                          A ( z) w *

Correspondingly, since foreign’s comparative advantage is strongest in high index goods,

it must be the case that goods produced in foreign, for which z > z ,

                                          A( z )   w
(8)                                        *
                                                 <
                                          A ( z) w *


                                                                                              8
Equations (7) and (8) will be very important when we derive the welfare consequences of

migration. But first we show how the equilibrium relative wage is established.

        We assume that consumers in each country have identical log linear preferences,

so that expenditure shares on each good are fixed and common across countries. Let this

                                                                 1
share for good z be given by b( z ) . We require that        ∫ b( z )dz = 1 . We can also define the
                                                                 0



share of spending on goods in the range [ 0, z ] to be given by:

                                                   z
(9)                                    θ ( z ) = ∫ b( z ′)dz ′
                                                  0


This allows us to define a market clearing equation. Assume for a moment that good z

defines a boundary between goods produced at home (low index goods in which home

has comparative advantage) and those produced abroad. Then θ ( z ) is the share of

consumer spending falling on goods produced in the home country. Home and foreign

income (hence spending) are wL and w* L* respectively. Here market clearing can be

expressed as a balanced trade condition:

(10)                               [1 − θ ( z )] wL = θ ( z ) w* L*
This can also be expressed as a relation between the relative wage and the boundary good

consistent with market clearing:

                                                   θ ( z ) L*
(11)                                 ω ( z) ≡
                                                [1 − θ ( z )] L
Note that ω ′( z ) > 0 .

        The relations ρ ( z ) and ω ( z ) can be plotted in the space of relative wages and z.

Their intersection defines the boundary good z and share of spending on products




                                                                                                   9
produced in the home country θ ( z ) consistent with trade according to comparative

advantage and market clearing. Absent migration, this determines equilibrium, as in

Figure 1.

       We now turn to consider the equilibrium when costless migration is allowed in

addition to trade. The first observation is that costless migration will insure that inferior

technologies are never employed. Production will be according to absolute advantage.

Moreover, labor moves to equate wages. By equation (11), adjustment in the distribution

of the world labor force across countries will shift ω ( z ) to achieve equal wages.

       It is worth pausing for a moment to note that allowing labor to migrate freely

expands the feasible world production set any time, as here, that technologies across

countries are not identical. With perfect competition in all markets and an expanded

feasible world production set, we can be assured that world income will go up (at least

weakly) with the possibility of migration.

       This framework gives us two cases to consider. The first is one in which each

country has an absolute advantage in an interval of goods. This is depicted in Figure 2,

and without loss of generality, we assume that the initial distribution of world labor led

country 1 to have a higher relative wage. Then enough foreign labor moves to the home

economy to insure that ω ( z ) and ρ ( z ) cross where the wages are equated.

       The key question to resolve is who gains or loses from this migration. Note that

with an expanded world income, it is feasible for both to gain. If lump sum taxes were

available and employed, both could gain again. Unfortunately, since they are in practice

infeasible either administratively or politically, we look only at gains and losses through

the market.



                                                                                             10
          In the Ricardian framework, it is convenient to derive a real wage separately in

terms of the price of typical goods produced at home and abroad. These allow us to make

the appropriate inferences about welfare.

       For a good produced at home, equation (5) tells us that the wage equals the value

marginal product, or w = p ( z ) A( z ) . It is very useful to rearrange this to define a real

wage in terms of such a good:

                                w
(12)                                  = A( z ) if z is produced at home.
                               p( z )

That is, the real wage in terms of z for a good produced at home is just given by the home

productivity in z. Moreover, since producing a good oneself is always an option, the

home productivity A( z ) is also a lower bound on the home real wage in terms of this

good.

          If a good z is produced abroad, then w* = p ( z ) A* ( z ) . The home real wage in

terms of such a good is:

                          w      w
(13)                           =  *  A* ( z ) if z is produced in foreign.
                         p( z )  w 

Equation (13) reveals that for a good produced in foreign, the home real wage depends on

                                w
the factoral terms of trade,     *
                                   , and the foreign productivity A* ( z ) .
                                w

          The pattern of production and trade in the Ricardian model depends on a

comparison of relative productivities and relative wages. From equation (7) above, a

                                                  A( z )   w
good will be produced at home just in case         *
                                                         > * . In the reverse case it will be
                                                  A (z) w

produced in foreign. It is convenient to rearrange this equation to link the pattern of




                                                                                                 11
production and trade to the real wages for the respective goods. Multiplying through, we

have that a good is produced at home just in case:

                                                      w *
(14)                                       A( z ) >      A ( z)
                                                      w*

These terms compare precisely the real wages developed in equations (12) and (13)

above. That is, a good is produced at home just when the real product wage offered there

exceeds that available through trade.

         This also makes it very easy to understand the impact of migration on home real

wages relative to the free trade baseline. By hypothesis, the initial relative wage of home

       w0                                                                   w
was     *
          > 1 and with free migration, this factoral terms of trade falls to 1* = 1 . With
       w0                                                                   w1

inflows of labor to the home economy, we showed above that the range of goods

produced at home expands. Hence there are at most three types of goods.

         (i) If good z is produced at home before and after migration, then

                                      w
                                            = A( z ) is unchanged
                                     p( z )

         (ii) If good z is initially produced in foreign, but switches to home after the

migration, and recalling that A(z) is a lower bound for a home product wage,

                                 w               w
                                       falls from 0* A *( z ) to A( z ).
                                p( z )           w0

         (iii) If good z is produced in foreign both before and after migration, and recalling

                 w0            w
that initially    *
                    > 1 , while 1* ≡ 1 ,
                 w0            w1

                                w               w
                                      falls from 0* A *( z ) to A *( z ).
                               p( z )           w0



                                                                                             12
       In short, the home country that experiences immigration loses for sure. Its wage is

unchanged in terms of the type (i) goods that it produced both before and after migration.

But its real wage falls in terms of both type (ii) and type (iii) goods, those newly

produced in home due to the migration and those goods produced by the foreign workers

who remain in foreign.

       The foreign country that provides the immigrants gains for sure. The simplest way

to see this is simply to recall that migration leads world income to rise and this must

accrue to someone. If the home labor lost, it must be because the foreign labor reaped

more than all of the world income gains. We could also do the good-by-good analysis as

before. This would reveal that foreign labor neither gains nor loses in terms of the type

(iii) goods it produced before and after. Yet it experienced real income gains in terms of

both goods that it previously imported and those newly produced in the home country.

       Having considered the case in which each country had technical superiority in an

interval of goods, we now can very easily analyze the case in which one country (say

home) has technological superiority in all goods. When migration is not possible, the two

countries trade according to comparative advantage. When migration is possible, the

inferior foreign technologies simply cease to be employed. Again, we could analyze the

movement of wages in terms of the prices of goods initially produced in each of the two

countries. However, a shortcut provides the desired answers more quickly.

       Note that when foreign labor has access to the superior home technology, the

relative prices of all goods are determined simply by the relative productivities of home

technology, exactly as in the home autarky equilibrium. In fact the equilibrium with

migration effectively returns home labor to the autarky equilibrium. Since home labor




                                                                                            13
initially enjoyed gains from trading with the foreign country due to comparative

advantage, this return to effective autarky means that home labor loses for sure. Foreign

likewise may be thought of as having returned to a type of autarky, but it is an autarky

with the superior home technology, so that foreign labor experiences substantial gains

from migration. Again, migration shifts out world production possibilities and with

perfect factor markets raises world income. But, relative to the trading equilibrium, more

than all of the incremental world income from migration accrues to foreign labor. Home

labor loses.7



                                    III. Non-Homogeneous Labor

         The foregoing has assumed that home and foreign labor are identical provided

they have access to the same nation-specific technology. However, we know that in the

United States, immigrant labor has neither the same geographical nor occupational

distribution as natives.8 Moreover, immigrants on average do not earn as much as natives

when controlling for other relevant characteristics. Since the empirical exercises to follow

must confront these non-homogeneities, we need an analytic framework to determine an

appropriate way to do so.




7
  These results have been developed within the context of the Dornbusch-Fischer-Samuelson model, with
its restrictive assumptions on demand, the existence of a continuum of goods, and that the degree of
comparative advantage is itself continuous. These assumptions are convenient for the transparency of the
analysis. However, by analogy with the results developed here, it would be straightforward to demonstrate
that none of these restrictions is necessary.
8
  In what follows we ignore the issue of the geographical concentration of immigrant labor. However, we
will note that an extensive discussion among labor economists has already considered the importance of
this, noting that the opportunities of other potential internal migrants to alter plans and of producers to shift
production mix to adjust to international migrant settlement patterns suggests that the geographical impact
may be quite limited. This seems sensible in an appropriate long run. Borjas (1994, p. 1700) notes that the
puzzling fact is that this equilibration in the case of international migrants seems to happen extremely
rapidly.


                                                                                                              14
        The essential analytic points can be set out in a very simple framework. For this

exercise, let LF be the equilibrium quantity of foreign labor that enters the home

economy. Let ϕ ( z ) ≤ 1 be the productivity of foreign labor relative to home labor when it

has access to the home technology. In other words, allow for the possibility that foreign

labor is less productive than home labor at producing a good z even when it has access to

the home technology. Hence, for foreign labor employed in the home country,

(15)                                 y ( z ) = ϕ ( z ) A( z ) LF ( z )

Output for home labor remains as in Equation (2).

        For simplicity, divide the goods produced in the home country into two groups

Z + and Z − distinguished by the relative productivity of foreign labor, where ϕ ( z ) is

assumed constant within each group and ϕ ( z ) > ϕ ( z ′) if z ∈ Z + and z ′ ∈ Z − . For the

moment, we can simplify further by assuming ϕ ( z ) = 1 for z ∈ Z + (so home and foreign

labor are equally productive in these goods).

        For our purposes, the interesting case to consider is one in which, in equilibrium,

home labor is active in producing both types of goods. In this case, immigrant labor will

be active only in producing Z + -type goods, since the wage on offer to it there will be

equivalent to the native wage while it would be lower were they to be employed in Z − -

type goods.

        This case has two features that are especially important for us. First, immigrant

labor is highly concentrated, producing only Z + -type goods. Second, this concentration is

wholly inconsequential for the equilibrium of the real economy. Since wages of native

and immigrant labor are already equalized, there would be no incentive for either type to

change sectors even if there were no productivity gap in the remaining goods. In this type


                                                                                               15
of equilibrium in which native labor remains active in all sectors and immigrant labor

only in some, one can treat the two as identical even if there are productivity differences

that prevent the immigrant labor from moving into other sectors.

        This can be readily extended to the case in which home labor has a productivity

advantage in both types of goods. In that case, ϕ ( z ) < 1 for z ∈ Z + . So long as the

productivity gap remains smaller in Z + -type goods and native labor remains active in

both sectors, immigrant labor will be concentrated in the Z + -type goods. Changes in

immigrant labor that do not shift us from this equilibrium can be treated as if each

immigrant delivers ϕ ( z ) units of labor when measured in native equivalents. This

rationalizes a world in which immigrant labor is concentrated by productive sector and in

which there exists a wage gap between immigrants and natives. Nonetheless, it says that

we can treat immigrant and native labor as equivalents provided we make the appropriate

conversion to efficiency units.



                IV. The US Productivity Advantage and Factor Inflows

        The empirical segment of this paper has two objectives. The first is to establish on

a prior basis the reasonableness of our use of the Ricardian model as a framework for

analyzing factor inflows to the US economy. The second is then to use this framework,

and simple variants, to calculate the impact of these flows on the US.

        The Ricardian framework is special in two dimensions. The first is that

technological differences are the foundation for observed factor flows. The second is that

the Ricardian model relies on a single composite factor “labor”. For this to be a

reasonable framework for our exercise, we would like to verify the plausibility of these



                                                                                           16
assumptions. For the first, we would like to confirm that the US has productivity

advantages that could be the origin of these flows. For the analytics based on a composite

factor, we would like to see that the entry patterns to the US of mobile factors are at least

broadly similar across different types of factors. Measuring these factor inflows will also

then serve as an input to our calculation of the impact on the US.



                                   A. US Productivity Advantages

         The US enjoys a large productivity advantage over virtually all other countries in

the world. Table 1 presents estimates from Islam (1995 and 2001) of total factor

productivity (TFP) for a large sample of countries. As the data reveal, many developing

countries have TFP levels less than 20 percent of the US level. In some extreme cases,

productivity in developing countries is less than 5 percent that of the US. In these data

only Hong Kong and Canada have TFP levels higher than that of the US. While there is

a rich TFP literature that has produced a variety of point estimates for individual

countries [see e.g. recent work by Hall and Jones (1996)], all studies conclude that TFP in

the US is among the highest in the world.9

         Hendricks (2002) provides an alternative approach that arrives at a similar

conclusion. He draws on observations of the earnings of immigrants to the US from

various countries as one input in a decomposition of the sources of cross-country income

differences. If differences in the quality of human capital were to explain the vast cross-



9
  While differences in aggregate TFP suffice to establish a motive for migration and would be fully
adequate to the story we tell here, trade according to comparative advantage requires as well that there be
variation at the product level in the TFP gap. The best existing evidence is the work of Jorgenson and
various co-authors, as for example in Jorgenson and Kuroda (1990), which shows substantial variation in
relative TFP at the industry level even for relatively rich countries. Moreover, Harrigan (1997) shows that
this industry variation in TFP also affects patterns of international specialization.


                                                                                                         17
country differences in income, then there would need to be very large gaps in wages

between immigrants and US natives – of a magnitude that we do not observe. He

concludes that to make sense of the much smaller actual gaps, even after accounting for

other cross-country differences, one must rely on large differences in TFP – precisely the

mechanism that we rely on in this paper as the motivation for factor migration.



                    B. Contribution of Immigration to the US Labor Force

        The US census provides the most accurate numbers on the percent of the US labor

force that was born abroad. The Census Bureau tries hard to make adjustments for

undercounting of illegal immigrants. The Census Bureau reports that the proportion of

foreign born as a share of the US population in 1998 was 9.8 percent [OECD (2001)].

As it turns out, the contribution of the foreign born to the US labor force is even greater

than its contribution to US population because immigrants have higher labor force

participation rates than natives. As a result, in 1998 fully 11.7 percent of the US labor

force was comprised of people born outside of the US. This is the point estimate that we

will use throughout the remainder of the paper.

        Although census data is superior to INS (2002) data in terms of understanding

what share of the US labor force comes from abroad, INS data is useful in understanding

the timing and sources of immigrant inflows.10 The US immigrant population is largely

the result of a dramatic increase in immigration to the US in recent decades. As we can



10
  One must be careful in comparing the INS data with the census data because gross legal immigrant
inflows into the US are not the same thing as net flows of immigrants. The INS identifies two main sources
of error. First the census bureau estimates that in the 1990’s approximately 220,000 foreign-born residents
and 48,000 native-born residents emigrated from the US each year. On the other hand, the INS estimates
that 275,000 entered the US illegally each year. Surprisingly, these numbers are quite similar, suggesting
net inflows in the last decade were quite similar in magnitude to the level of legal immigration.


                                                                                                        18
see from Table 2, legal immigration rose from approximately 250,000 per year in the

1950’s to close to one million per year in recent decades. In addition to the large absolute

inflows, immigrants have accounted for an increasing share of US population growth.

Between 1950 and 1998, the US population rose approximately 80 percent, growing from

152 million to 271 million. Using legal flows of immigrants as a proxy for net flows, the

share of migrants in US population growth rose from approximately 9 percent in the

1950’s to around 37 percent since 1980. Much of this reflects the fact that legal

immigrant inflows as a share of the existing population rose from around 0.1 percent to

0.3 percent per year. This, coupled with declining fertility in the native population,

accounts for the growing relative importance of immigration in US population growth.

       A second striking feature of the INS data is the sources of immigration. Only 5.5

percent of the legal immigrants to the US in 1999 came from countries whose TFP as

measured by Islam (2001) was at least 70 percent as high as that of the US. Moreover,

over half of the legal immigrants to the US between 1991 and 1995 came from the

Caribbean, Central and South America – countries with typically less than one-third the

US TFP level. Other major source countries, such as the Philippines, the Soviet Union,

China, India, and Vietnam, have low TFP levels as well.

       Taken together, the data reveal that immigration from countries with low TFP

levels account for the vast majority of immigration into the US. Moreover, this

immigration from low TFP countries accounts for a substantial share of the growth in the

US population and labor supply. These facts underscore the Ricardian motivations for

migration.




                                                                                          19
                          C. Composition of Immigrants to the US

        The foregoing has considered the contribution of the foreign born to the US labor

force, yet it has not taken account of possible differences in the skill composition of

native and foreign born workers. Until 1994, the Current Population Survey contained a

question regarding whether or not a worker was born abroad. Based on this, it is possible

to examine differences between native and foreign-born educational attainment (see

Table 3). The CPS data indicate that immigrants have lower levels of educational

attainment. But the differences are not as substantial as one might think. In 1994, 29

percent of foreign-born workers had at least a college degree (16 or more years of

education) while 32 percent of US born workers did. At the high skill end, there is a gap,

but it is small.

        There is a greater difference between immigrants and natives among the lower

tiers of educational attainment. While 33 percent of immigrants had less than 12 years of

education only 13 percent of native-born people did. This suggests the influx of

immigrants is likely to have its biggest relative impact on the factor supply of low skilled

workers in the US.



               D. Contribution of Net Capital Inflows to the US Capital Stock

        Factor inflows to the United States have not been limited to labor. In recent

decades, the US has experienced large and persistent net capital inflows. These capital

inflows have assumed an important and growing role as a share of US gross capital

formation. Figure 4 reveals that while there was a small capital outflow from the US in

the 1970’s, this was reversed in the early eighties. Indeed, for the last two decades, net




                                                                                             20
foreign capital inflows financed between 5 and 21 percent of US gross capital

formation.11

        We would like to emphasize that in making this calculation we do not mean to

imply that technological advantage is the sole determinant of net capital flows. Rather,

we look on national technological advantage as one determinant of the level of

investment, which along with other determinants of saving and investment works through

the national income accounting to determine the net capital flows. Here we are able only

to calculate the impact of actual inflows, not to separate the motivations for these inflows.

This notwithstanding, we believe that national technological advantage, per the

discussion above, is almost certainly an important component in the joint determination

of these net flows.

        We can obtain some sense of the importance of these net flows by looking at how

much of the US capital stock has been financed from abroad. Capital in year t can be

defined as

(16)                                          K t = I t / Pt + (1 − δ ) K t −1

where Kt is the capital stock, It is gross fixed capital formation, Pt is the price of capital

equipment and δ is the deprecation rate.

        We define a counterfactual domestically financed capital stock in year t as,

(17)                                K td = ( I t − NK t ) / Pt + (1 − δ ) K td−1

where NKt is the net flow of capital into the US. K td can be either larger or smaller than

the actual capital stock depending on the sign of NKt. If it is smaller, then it represents


11
  Indeed, by the year 2000 these net capital inflows accounted for one-fourth of US gross capital
formation.


                                                                                                    21
the amount of capital that was financed by domestic savers. If it is larger, then it

represents how much the US capital stock would have been if net flows of investment

funds had not flowed out of the US but rather had been invested domestically.

       Finally, we define the foreign financed capital stock as

(18)                                   K t f ≡ K t − K td .

       Implicitly, this decomposition of the actual capital stock into foreign and domestic

components assumes that the path of domestically financed investments would have been

no different had the US closed its borders to capital inflows. To go beyond this requires a

model of this counterfactual, an exercise we do not perform in this paper. Here we

assume that domestic investment is unaffected by net foreign capital inflows and view

our calculations as a benchmark.

       Using data on investment and the price of capital goods from the IMF, we set the

capital stock in 1947 equal to zero and calculate the US capital stock using the same

depreciation rate (13.3 percent) as in Bowen, Leamer and Sveikauskas (1987) and

Harrigan (1997). We then set the domestic capital stock in 1970 equal to our estimate of

the US capital stock in that year and calculate the domestic capital stock according to

equation (17) and the foreign capital stock according to equation (18). This procedure

yields an estimate of the foreign-financed capital stock in 1998 equal to 11.8 percent of

the total US capital stock.



                     E. Reasonableness of the Ricardian Framework

       We stated two criteria at the outset for the reasonableness of our use of the

Ricardian framework for examining the consequences of the inflow of factors to the US



                                                                                            22
economy. The first criterion is that the US has a productivity advantage that is plausibly a

motivation for these factor movements. We saw that this is strongly confirmed by the

evidence above on US TFP advantages, which are particularly strong relative to countries

that are the main sources for immigration to the US. The second criterion is that it is

plausible to treat the factor inflows as if they were a composite factor as per the Ricardian

model. This in turn requires that the magnitude of the inflows across factors not have

been too different. We saw above that the contribution of the foreign born as a share of

the US labor force is 11.7 percent. Under our assumptions, this number is strikingly close

to the 11.8 percent estimate of the share of the US capital stock financed by net inflows

of foreign capital.

       If this were the whole story, then our treatment of the factors as a composite

would be strongly confirmed. Of course, we also saw that when we disaggregate labor

into different types, there are some differences in composition, especially among the least

skilled. We will address this issue of composition more directly below when we turn to a

multi-sector account of the impact of these factor flows on output composition and our

terms of trade. Nonetheless, the fact that, in broad terms, the inflows of capital and labor

are so similar in magnitude seems to us strong reason for taking seriously our Ricardian

approach to the consequences of factor inflows as an alternative to the standard approach,

which considers inflows only of one factor at a time.



              V. How Factor Migration Affects the Income of US Natives

       In this section we calculate the impact of these factor inflows on the US economy.

In principle, we could generate as many estimates of this impact as there are potential




                                                                                           23
models of the US and world economies. Our core results are developed in two steps. The

first step focuses purely on the rise of the US scale in the world economy due to

immigration and is closest to the macroeconomic literature, as exemplified by Acemoglu

and Ventura (2002). The second step supplements this by allowing for greater

heterogeneity in labor inflows and output composition, and is closer to the international

trade literature, as in Harrigan (1997). We also discuss robustness to alternative

assumptions.12



                                   A. Macroeconomic Approach

        A first step in estimating the impact of factor migration to the US would merge a

simple variant of our Ricardian model above with the AK approach of Acemoglu and

Ventura (2002). We can simplify our Ricardian model so that there is a single good

produced in each of the US and the rest of the world, but which differ from one another.13

As in both our model and that of Acemoglu and Ventura, we will think of only a single

composite factor (“capital” for them, “labor” for us). The US technological advantage

then gives rise to factor movements that raise output of the US good and contract output

of the good produced in the rest of the world. This shift in relative outputs then will have




12
   The simulations we develop are in the same analytic spirit as those of Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997).
Borjas (1999, p. 48) argues in support of this approach, noting that “although the factor proportions
approach relies on theory, so must any applied economic analysis that wishes to do more than simply
calculate correlations. In the end, any interpretation of economic data—and particularly any use of these
data to predict the outcomes of shifts in immigration policy—requires a ‘story’.”
13
  The central results we developed above in Section II are robust to a restriction that the margin of goods
produced in each country does not change, as we assume here. Unfortunately, the empirical researcher does
not directly observe a change in the margin of goods produced, as the theoretical model of Section II would
require. No doubt, some of this change in the margin may be captured by the changing composition of
output considered in Section V.B. below.


                                                                                                        24
terms of trade effects and we will use the elasticities estimated in Acemoglu and Ventura

to evaluate these.

       As noted earlier, our treatment of the factor inflows as a composite is motivated

by the fact that the contribution of foreign labor inflows to the US labor force and the

contribution of foreign net capital inflows to the US capital stock come in at almost the

same level (11.7 vs. 11.8 percent). If we multiply the US labor share by 11.7 percent and

the capital share by 11.8 percent, then, we will then translate this into an equivalent

proportional increase of 11.8 percent in output of the US good.

       At initial prices, this would translate into an equivalent proportion excess supply

of US goods in world markets. Adjustment will occur through a deterioration in the US

terms of trade. For our calculation, we will use the preferred estimate from Acemoglu and

Ventura, in which the elasticity of the terms of trade with respect to GDP is –0.60. The

consequent deterioration in the US terms of trade as a result of the growth implied by

these factor inflows is then –7.0 percent.

       Before we can calculate the cost to the US economy of this, we need to resolve an

ambiguity here. Whether the change in the terms of trade comes through a decline of

export prices or a rise in import prices would be immaterial if trade were balanced.

However, since the IMF reports that exports were 8 percent and imports 11 percent of US

GDP, this could make a difference. Our approach is simply to split the difference,

assuming that the change in the terms of trade comes half in the form of a fall in US

export prices and half in the form of a rise in US import prices.

       Hence our calculation of the lost income via the terms of trade deterioration is of

the form:




                                                                                            25
                                   ∆GDP  T  1  M + E  
(19)                                    ε  *            
                                   GDP   2  GDP  

where the first term in parentheses is the change in GDP due to factor inflows, εT is the

Acemoglu-Ventura estimate of how much GDP growth causes the terms of trade to

deteriorate, M is imports and E is exports. This yields an impact in 1998 of 0.7 percent of

US GDP or $58.4 billion dollars.

       So far, we have focused on the consequences of the expansion of US output of

these factor flows. However, we also need to recognize that their movement leads to a

contraction of output of the rest of the world, making foreign output scarcer relative to

US output, causing additional deterioration in the US terms of trade. These incremental

effects are likely to be smaller than those calculated above precisely because of the lower

productivity of factors in the rest of the world. Of the 28 million foreign-born residents of

the US, only 16 million are actually in the labor force. Given that the World Bank (1999

WDR) puts the global labor force outside of the US at 2.6 billion workers, this probably

only represents a 0.6 percent decline in the number of available workers. In terms of

capital we get slightly larger effects. Davis and Weinstein (2002) estimate that 23

percent of the world’s capital stock is in the US. Since 11.8 percent of the US capital

stock was financed from abroad, the flows imply a 3.5 percent reduction in the capital

stock of the rest of the world.

       Multiplying these numbers by the US labor and capital shares, we estimate that

factor flows from the rest of the world to the US decreased output in the ROW by 1.9

percent. This implies an additional deterioration in the US terms of trade of 1.1 percent,

which would cost the US an additional 9.2 billion dollars. Taken together this first step




                                                                                            26
in our exercise generates a net income loss to the US from factor migration of 68 billion

dollars in 1998 or 0.8 percent of US GDP in that year.



                B. Heterogeneous Labor in Multi-Sector Model Approach

       We now supplement this macro approach with elements focused on composition

effects. There are two key departures. The first is that we disaggregate our labor variable

according to skill class. The second is that we move to a multi-sector model of the US

economy. These departures allow us to develop a simple model that builds on Harrigan

(1997) to describe the impact on the US net offer to the rest of the world at the initial

prices. We then apply terms of trade elasticities at a sectoral level, which we draw from

Deardorff and Stern (1986). Again these will allow us to calculate the impact on US

incomes of the immigration of these factors, now taking account both of scale and

composition effects.

       In this exercise, we disaggregate the labor force into three classes, those with a

college degree, high school graduates, and high school dropouts. As we noted earlier, the

proportion of foreign born in the high educational bracket mirrors reasonably closely that

proportion in the native population. However, this is less true at lower educational levels,

where natives are more likely to have completed high school and the foreign born to have

dropped out. These differences are at least potentially important in our framework

because in a multi-sector model they will have a non-uniform effect on the composition

of output. In principle this could even improve the US terms of trade if the composition

works to principally expand import-competing sectors. By using a multi-sector model and

employing the estimates of Harrigan (1997), we can take direct account of these output




                                                                                            27
composition effects. Finally, the multi-sector model also allows us to move away from

applying a single terms of trade elasticity for composite exports, but rather to allow for

different elasticities by sector.

        We now discuss our implementation. Let Ti be net trade, X i be output and Di be

absorption in sector i. Then,

(20)                                     Ti = X i − Di

i.e. our net offer is just output less absorption in that sector. We now need to see how that

net offer will change at the initial prices if a non-uniform inflow of factors changes

sectoral output, GDP, and absorption. For simplicity, we assume that absorption is

homothetic, so that at initial prices, the inflow of factors affects the scale of absorption,

but not its composition. Keeping in mind that we are looking at discrete changes, we need

                                                             Xi
only take differences in our net offer equation. Let si ≡        be defined to be the ratio of
                                                            GDPi

output in sector i to GDP, and a circumflex, ^, represent a proportional change. In

Appendix A, we show that the change can be examined as follows:

(21)                                               n + X sˆ GDP
                                ∆Ti = X i sˆi + Ti GDP      n
                                                        i i



This differenced equation has three terms. The first is a Composition Effect – reflecting

the fact that even at the original GDP, there is a change in the share of output in sector i.

The second is a Size Effect – reflecting the fact that even if the inflow of factors had no

impact on the composition of output, the simple scaling-up of output would raise our net

offer. Finally, because of the discrete changes, there is also an interaction between the

scale and composition changes that need not be small.




                                                                                                28
         The starting point for the empirical implementation of this equation is the

excellent work of Harrigan (1997). Harrigan builds a full general equilibrium Heckscher-

Ohlin-Ricardo model of global production and then obtains precise estimates of the

effects of productivity and endowments on the production of the various manufacturing

sectors. The parameter estimates that Harrigan derives are exactly what we need in order

to understand how changes in capital and low, medium, and high-skill labor will affect

US exports.

         Harrigan’s point estimates tell us how much a given percentage change in a

particular factor will change the value-added share of a particular sector in GDP. By

multiplying Harrigan’s coefficient estimates (from Table 5 of his paper) by the changes

in US factor supplies implied by migration, we obtain estimates for how much each

sector’s value added share of GDP should change as a result of migration. The only

remaining issue is that trade is the difference between production and absorption, not

value added and absorption. We will assume that the percentage change in a sector’s

share of value added is the same as its percentage change in output. Thus, we can use

Harrigan’s coefficients to calculate sˆi and so to implement the model of the change in the

US net offer embodied in equation (21).14 Since the last CPS data on the composition of

foreign-born workers is from 1994, we will have to assume that this did not change

appreciably by 1998. Performing this calculation for the US reveals that the inflows of

factors into the US caused the biggest expansions in US net offers in processed food,

apparel, and industrial machinery and contractions in paper, chemicals, and metals. We

then calculate ∆Ti by summing the various terms of equation (21).
14
   In calculating the terms of trade changes, we are limited to using the sectors employed by Harrigan. This
is less than the full universe of sectors (cf. Harrigan 1997). Implicitly we are obliged to assume that terms
of trade effects in excluded sectors match the average for included sectors.


                                                                                                          29
        Assessing the impacts of these changes in net offers on prices requires some

additional assumptions and modeling. ∆Ti must be accommodated by adjustments in the

prices of exports and imports. We model this as follows. Assume that price changes in

US goods map into export and import prices according to the following equations:

                                              ∆Ei       ∆p
(22)                                              = ε iE i
                                               Ei        pi

                                              ∆M i       ∆p
(23)                                               = ε iM i
                                               Mi         pi

where Ei and Mi are US exports and imports in sector i, ε iE (ε iM ) is the elasticity of US

exports (imports), and pi is the relative price of US to foreign goods in the sector.15 We

can then write the impact of a change in the US net offer on prices as,

                                                                         ∆pi
(24)                         ∆Ti = ∆Ei − ∆M i = ( ε iE Ei − ε iM M i )
                                                                          pi

or

                                            ∆Ti          ∆p
(25)                                                    = i
                                       (ε Ei − ε i M i ) pi
                                         i
                                          E       M




Equation (25) gives us a mapping between changes in net offers and changes in US

export prices. Using data on sectoral export and import elasticities taken from Deardorff

and Stern (1986) we can estimate the impact of these changes in net offers on prices.

Once again we are faced with the ambiguity of whether a certain percentage change in

the relative price of US exports is due to export or import prices changes. Here again we




15
  US Import demand elasticities were taken from Table 3.2 pp. 42-43 of Deardorff and Stern (1986). US
export elasticities were based on Table 3.2 and recalculated according to Deardorff and Stern's
methodology (equations A.1.25 and A.1.32) with 1994 data.


                                                                                                   30
assume that half of the change is due to export price movements and half due to import

price movements. We calculate the change in the terms of trade as

                                                             1 ∆pi      Ei M i 
(26)                    Change in Terms of Trade =            ∑
                                                             2 i pi    E+M 
                                                                               

where E and M denote aggregate US exports and imports. Using equation (26), we find

that factor composition effects imply that the US terms of trade deteriorated by an

additional 1.5%. This implies an additional loss for the US of 12.5 billion dollars, which

brings the aggregate income loss up to 80 billion or 0.9 percent of GDP.16



                                        C. Magnitude of Losses

         We have now provided an approach to calculating the impact of migration on the

income of US natives in two steps. The first step focuses on pure scale effects in a world

in which US output is a function of the capital stock and aggregate labor and then applies

the trade elasticity estimates of Acemoglu and Ventura (2002). The second step

supplements this by considering a world in which output is divided into multiple

industries and labor is disaggregated according to educational attainment. The impact of

factors on output levels and composition is based on Harrigan (1997) and the sectoral

trade elasticities are drawn from Deardorff and Stern (1986). It is worth noting that the

latter experiment, in which some sectors expand and others contract in relative terms,

could in principle have led to improvements in the US terms of trade.

         The results from these experiments suggest that the resulting terms of trade losses

are approximately $80 billion in 1998. Of this, approximately 90 percent of the loss

16
  Ideally, we would like to have calculated the impact of changing factor ratios on output in the rest of the
world. Unfortunately, we don’t have consistent data on value added by industry that matched the export
data, so we did not do this calculation.


                                                                                                           31
would be borne by US natives, for total income losses from migration of approximately

$72 billion in the same year. These represent losses of approximately 0.8 percent of GDP

annually.

         These are big numbers. These losses to US natives from factor immigration are

approximately equivalent to Feenstra’s (1992) estimate of the annual deadweight loss to

the US from all trade protection. It is approximately two to three times Alvarez and

Jermann’s (2000) estimate of the average annual cost of business cycles to consumers in

the postwar period.17 In other words, immigration (labor and capital together) is about as

costly to the US as all trade protection and two to three times as costly as business cycles!



                                      D. Robustness of Estimates

         This paper asks us to re-think conventions of estimating the impact of factor

migration on the incomes of US natives. And it concludes that the impact is large and

negative. Inevitably, to make such calculations, one is obliged to make important

assumptions about the appropriate underlying model. And it is equally inevitable that we

should want to think hard about how reasonable those assumptions are and if sensible

changes would affect the conclusions in an important way.

         One key assumption is that the US economy as a whole displays constant returns

to scale. If instead it displayed increasing returns in the aggregate, then the conclusions

might be attenuated or even reversed. Some early work has argued that there may be

aggregate increasing returns, as in Domowitz, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) and Hall

(1990). However, Basu and Fernald (1997) have argued that standard approaches of


17
  It’s also worth noting that a main point of the Alvarez and Jermann paper is that they find large costs of
the business cycle relative to the calculations of Lucas (1987).


                                                                                                          32
estimating aggregate increasing returns are severely biased upwards. The reason is

simple. If sectors that experience positive productivity shocks also expand output, then

there will be a positive correlation between productivity and the size of sectors in an

economy. Using US data, Basu and Fernald show that although the aggregate data may

appear to exhibit increasing returns, this is simply an artifact of the aggregation bias.

Most industries in the US seem to exhibit constant or even decreasing returns. Similarly,

using plant level data Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) found that most plants

operated using constant returns to scale technology. Based on these results, we think that

the baseline assumption of aggregate constant returns to scale is reasonable.

       One can turn the question around and ask how big one needs to believe increasing

returns need to be in order to offset the terms of trade effect. The Acemoglu and Ventura

estimate coupled with the importance of trade in the US suggests that elasticity of per

capita income with respect to size is -0.057. However, given that our previous estimate

based on actual factor migration suggested that an 11.8 percent increase in the US

implied a 1.9 percent contraction in the rest of the world, we estimate that the elasticity of

output with respect to size must be in excess of 1.07 in order for factor migration not to

lower the income of US natives.




                                                                                             33
         A second issue is whether there is something unique about immigration that

selects for those who contribute unusually to a society and its economy. We don’t have a

final answer. There is no doubt that some immigrants to the US have contributed

enormously to particular fields (e.g. economics) and industries (e.g. high tech in Silicon

Valley). It is less clear what would have happened in the counterfactual. We would

simply note that Borjas (1999, pp. 96-98) is skeptical, arguing there is “no empirical

evidence” that the contributions of immigrants are outsize to their numbers.18

         A third issue is that so far we have been treating immigrant labor as identical to

domestic labor. It is worth revisiting this in a manner suggested by our model of Section

III. Immigrants typically earn less than domestic workers of similar educational levels.

If this reflects differences in productivity, say due to immigrants’ poor English ability,

then they will not replace native-born workers one for one. One reasonable

approximation for how much less productive immigrants are is given by the differential

between the wages paid to immigrants and the wages paid to native born workers after

controlling for education, age, and region of employment. Borjas (1995) estimates this

gap to be 10 percent in 1990. Indeed, if we assume that one immigrant generates only 90

percent of the output of a native-born worker, the welfare loss for natives falls from 72

billion dollars to 68 billion dollars when we control for both aggregate and sectoral

effects, and less if we think that immigrants into the US are higher quality than the

average worker in the rest of the world. We therefore conclude that adjustments for



18
  Indeed, one of the classic contributions of Borjas (1985) was to challenge the results of Chiswick (1978).
Chiswick, examining a cross section, concluded not only that immigrants closed the wage gap with natives
but actually overtook them, with the supposed explanation being selection for unusually clever immigrants
from among the foreign born. Borjas showed that such results in the cross section would appear even
without any convergence if there were declining average quality of cohorts, a feature of the US time series.


                                                                                                         34
unobserved immigrant quality are likely to have only small impacts on our point

estimates.



                                       VI. Conclusions

        This paper provides an alternative to the conventional account of the immigration

of factors to the United States and their impact on native incomes. In the conventional

account, such migration is considered one factor at a time holding all others fixed. While

the reasons for migration are not always fully articulated, usually the implicit assumption

is that it is a story of relative scarcity of factors, as in simple non-Factor Price

Equalization versions of the Heckscher-Ohlin trade model. In this conventional model,

the movement of productive factors raises world income and these income gains are

shared between natives of both source and recipient countries. In effect, the conventional

account holds that there are mutual gains from migration very much in parallel to the

conventional gains from trade.

        We instead argue for applying a Ricardian framework, in which factor migration

is motivated by the technological superiority of the United States. Such a model has

important positive and normative differences. It implies that all factors should seek to

enter the country with a technological advantage. Indeed, we observe that low-skill labor,

high-skill labor, and capital all have important inflows to the United States. While, as in

the conventional model, the flow of factors raises world income, there is nonetheless a

strong contrast. Instead of these gains accruing in part to natives of both countries, here

more than all of the gains accrue to natives of the source country. Natives of the United

States, as recipient country, suffer income losses.




                                                                                              35
       We also develop a baseline empirical exercise that quantifies these losses in two

steps. The first step focuses on a one-sector macro model with nationally differentiated

products that may be thought of as a melding of a simple Ricardian model with the world

AK trade model of Acemoglu and Ventura (2002). The second enriches this by

disaggregating both labor and product types, allowing the factor flows to affect not only

the level but also the composition of production and trade. The empirical exercise implies

that the combination of labor immigration and net capital inflows is very costly for US

native incomes. In 1998, these losses would have been approximately $72 billion. This is

roughly equivalent to Feenstra’s (1992) calculation of losses from all US protection or

two to three times what Alvarez and Jermann (2000) calculate as the per annum cost of

the US business cycle.

       It is both natural and important that this paper stress the novel elements of our

analysis – in particular the result that US natives may lose a great deal of income from

these factor flows. However, it is likewise important to stress some cautions in applying

this analysis and indicate some directions in which additional research is warranted. First,

as in the conventional model, the flow of factors here enhances world efficiency. In

principle, were it feasible and desirable, lump sum redistribution could yield Pareto gains.

Even if such redistribution is not undertaken, factor migration provides first order gains

both to migrating factors and to those that remain in the source country (the latter via

improved terms of trade) – gains which may far exceed the cost to US natives. In this

respect, it may be looked on as a contribution to world welfare of the openness of the US

to factor migration. Second, our focus on the impact on native incomes naturally cannot

take any account of benefits that may accrue to a society from living in an environment




                                                                                           36
enriched by immigrants in ways not mediated by the market. Third, it is worth examining

more closely the contributions of immigrants particularly to knowledge-intensive sectors,

whether in Silicon Valley or the halls of academia, to identify contributions to income

that may surpass those identified in this paper. Finally, one may in principal identify a

large number of other contributions by immigrants. Follow-on work should aim to

quantify these contributions.




                                                                                            37
                                   REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron; Ventura, Jaume, “The World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, May 2002

Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann (2000) “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Cost
       of Business Cycles, University of Chicago, mimeo.

Baily, Martin Neil; Hulten, Charles; Campbell, David, “Productivity Dynamics in
       Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 0, no. 0,
       Microeconomics 1992, pp. 187-249

Basu, Susanto; Fernald, John G, “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
       Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105, no. 2, April 1997, pp. 249-
       83

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1958. “Immiserizing Growth: A Geometrical Note,” Review
     of Economic Studies 25, (June), pp. 201-205

Borjas, George J (2001) “Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?”
        Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2001, pp. 69-119.

Borjas, George J (1999) Heaven’s Door: Immigration Policy and the American Economy,
        Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Borjas, George J (1995) “The Economic Benefits from Immigration,” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives, vol. 9, no. 2, Spring 1995, pp. 3-22

Borjas, George J. (1995) “The Economic Analysis of Immigration,” in The New Economics
        of Human Behavior, edited by Mariano Tommasi and Kathryn Ierulli, Cambridge
        University Press, 1995, pp. 27-39.

Borjas, George J (1994) “The Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic
        Literature, vol. 32, no. 4, December 1994, pp. 1667-1717.

Borjas, George J (1999) "The Economic Analysis of Immigration," in The Handbook of
        Labor Economics, Volume 3A, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
        North-Holland, pp. 1697-1760.

Borjas, George J, Richard B. Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz (1997) “How Much Do
        Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes? Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity, 1997, pp. 1-67.

Bowen, Harry P; Leamer, Edward E; Sveikauskas, Leo, “Multicountry, Multifactor Tests
      of the Factor Abundance Theory,” American Economic Review, vol. 77, no. 5,
      December 1987, pp. 791-809.



                                                                                       38
Chiswick, Barry R, “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-born
      Men,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 86, no. 5, Oct. 1978, pp. 897-921

Davis, Donald R; Weinstein, David E, “What Role for Empirics in International Trade?”
       in Ronald Findlay, Lars Jonung, Mats Lundahl, eds., Bertil Ohlin: A Centennial
       Celebration, 1899-1999, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002

Deardorff, Alan V. and Stern, Robert (1986) The Michigan Model of World Production
      and Trade: Theory and Applications, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Domowitz, Ian; Hubbard, R Glenn; Petersen, Bruce C, “Market Structure and Cyclical
     Fluctuations in U.S. Manufacturing,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 70,
     no. 1, February 1988, pp. 55-66

Dornbusch, Rudiger; Fischer, Stanley; Samuelson, Paul A, “Comparative Advantage,
      Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,”
      American Economic Review, vol. 67, no. 5, Dec. 1977, pp. 823-39

Feenstra (1992) “How Costly is Protection?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 6,
       no. 32, pp. 159-178.

Findlay, Ronald (1982) “International Distributive Justice: A Trade Theoretic Approach,”
       Journal of International Economics, vol. 13, no. 1-2, August 1982, pp. 1-14

Friedberg, Rachel M; Hunt, Jennifer, “The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country
       Wages, Employment and Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 9, no.
       2, Spring 1995, pp. 23-44

Grossman, Gene M, “The Gains from International Factor Movements,” Journal of
      International Economics, vol. 17, no. 1-2, August 1984, pp. 73-83

Hall, Robert E. (1990) "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity Residual," in
       Diamond, Peter ed. Growth/Productivity/Unemployment: Essays to Celebrate
       Bob Solow's Birthday, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1996) “The Productivity of Nations,” NBER
       Working Paper #5812.

Harrigan, James, “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization:
       Estimating the Neoclassical Model,” American Economic Review, vol. 87, no. 4,
       September 1997, pp. 475-94.

Hendricks, Lutz, “How Important is Human Capital for Development? Evidence From
      Immigrant Earnings,” American Economic Review, vol. 92, no. 1, March 2002,
      pp. 198-219.



                                                                                        39
Immigration and Naturalization Service (2002) Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration
      and Naturalization Service, 1999, Washington D.C.: US Government Printing
      Office.

International Monetary Fund (2000) International Financial Statistics (CD ROM),
        Washington: Publishing Services International Monetary Fund.

Islam, Nazrul (1995) “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 110, pp. 1127-70.

Islam, Nazrul (2001) “Different Approaches to International Comparison of Total Factor
       Productivity,” in Hulten, Charles R., Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds.
       New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, pp. 465-508.

Jorgenson, Dale W. and Masahiro Kuroda, (1990) "Bilateral Models of Production for
       Japanese and US Industries," in Hulten, Charles ed. Productivity Growth in Japan
       and the United States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lalonde, Robert J; Topel, Robert H., “Economic Impact of International Migration and
      the Economic Performance of Migrants,” in Rosenzweig, Mark R; Stark, Oded,
      eds. Handbook of population and family economics. Volume 1B. 1997, pp. 799-
      850, New York: Elsevier Science, North-Holland

Lucas, Robert E. (1987) Models of Business Cycles, New York: Basil Blackwell.

MacDougall, G.D.A. (1960) “The Benefits and Costs of Private Investment From
     Abroad,” Economic Record 36: 13-35.

Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (2001) Trends in International
      Migration, Paris: OECD Publication Service.

Razin, Assaf and Sadka, Efraim (2001) Labor, Capital and Finance: International Flows,
       New York: Cambridge U. Pr.

Trefler, Daniel (1997) “Natives and Immigrants in General Equilibrium,” NBER Working
        Papers #6209, October.

Wong, Kar-Yiu (1995) International Trade in Goods and Factor Mobility, Cambridge,
      MA: MIT Pr.

World Bank (1999) The World Development Report 1999, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.




                                                                                        40
                                    Table 1
              Country Level Total Factor Productivity (US =100)
Country                   Index
Africa                           Asia                    Americas
 Algeria                   18.64 Bangladesh        13.27 Argentina            25.92
 Angola                    13.27 Burma              8.63 Bolivia              16.86
 Benin                      7.07 Hong Kong        153.73 Brazil               41.90
 Botswana                  20.39 India              7.07 Canada              104.08
 Burundi                    6.46 Israel            61.88 Chile                22.54
 Cameroon                  16.04 Japan             78.66 Colombia             28.65
 Central African Republic   5.56 Jordan            25.92 Costa Rica           38.29
 Chad                       4.20 South Korea       38.29 Dominican Republic 21.44
 Congo                     12.00 Malaysia          38.29 Ecuador              23.69
 Egypt                     15.26 Nepal             12.00 El Salvador          24.66
 Ethiopia                   7.81 Pakistan          19.40 Guatemala            31.35
 Ghana                      5.34 Philippines       18.64 Haiti                11.42
 Ivory Coast               16.86 Singapore         86.07 Honduras             12.62
 Kenya                      7.07 Sri Lanka         15.26 Jamaica              16.86
 Liberia                    5.84 Syria             46.30 Mexico               48.68
 Madagascar                 8.63 Thailand          24.66 Nicaragua            30.12
 Malawi                     5.84 Europe                   Panama              28.65
 Mali                       5.56 Austria           67.71 Paraguay             32.96
 Mauritania                 4.60 Belgium           78.66 Peru                 32.96
 Mauritius                 18.64 Denmark           74.83 Trinidad             61.88
 Morocco                   31.35 Finland           50.66 Uruguay              38.29
 Mozambique                12.00 France            78.66 United States       100.00
 Niger                      7.81 Germany           67.71 Venezuela            53.26
 Nigeria                    8.98 Greece            38.29 Australia and Other
 Rwanda                     6.46 Ireland           38.29 Australia            58.86
 Senegal                   10.97 Italy             58.86 New Zealand          58.86
 Sierra Leone               7.43 Netherlands       71.18 Papua New Guinea     17.73
 Somalia                    3.62 Norway            86.07
 South Africa              38.29 Portugal          34.65
 Sudan                      6.14 Spain             78.66
 Tanzania                   4.37 Sweden            71.18
 Togo                       7.07 Switzerland       61.88
 Tunisia                   27.25 Turkey            27.25
 Uganda                    10.44 United Kingdom    71.18
 Zaire                      4.37
 Zambia                     4.20
 Zimbabwe                  10.44


                                                                              41
                                      Table 2
               Capital and Legal immigrant inflows into the US

                                                              Average Annual Net
                                                              Capital Inflows As a
                       Average Number of Percent of Population Percent of Gross
                      Legal Immigrants per  Growth Due to        Fixed Capital
                              Year           Immigration           Formation

1950-1959                   249,927                 9%

1960-1969                   321,365                14%

1970-1979                   423,232                21%                  -0.76%

1980-1991                   807,989                38%                  6.84%

1992-1998                   825,414                36%                 12.81%

Source: INS and IMF. We include 1990 and 1991 in the decade with the 1980’s because
an amnesty program produced very large recorded immigration inflows in the late 1980’s
and early 1990’s.


                                      Table 3
   Educational Attainment of the Labor Force in 1994 by Place of Birth in
                                  Percent

                      Less than 12 Years       12-15 Years of      16 or more years of
                        of Education             Education             Education

Foreign Born                  33.2                  38.0                  28.8

Native Born                   12.5                  55.4                  32.0

Total                         14.8                  53.5                  31.7

Source: CPS




                                                                                    42
                                               Figure 1
                                    The Equilibrium with No Migration




               w/w*
                                                                  θ L*
                         A( z )
                                                                 1−θ L
                         A* ( z )




       Equilibrium
                                                      E
 w
 *
w 




                     0                                 z                1




                                                                             43
                           Figure 2
            Equilibrium with Migration When Both Have
                 Superiority in an Interval of Goods




w/w*

        A( z )                            θ L*
        A* ( z )                         1−θ L




                                  E0
                                           E1
1                                                           1




    0                               z          z′     1




                                                                44
                         Figure 3
         Equilibrium with Migration When One Country
            Has Superior Technology in All Goods




w/w*
                                            θ L*
       A( z )
                                           1−θ L
       A* ( z )




                                 E0




1                                                           1
                                                       E1

0                                                           1
                                  z




                                                                45
                                                                      Figure 4

                                                                          Net Capital Inflow s


                                                     0.25
Net Foreign Capital Inflows Divided by Private and




                                                     0.20
         Public Gross Capital Formation




                                                     0.15



                                                     0.10



                                                     0.05



                                                     0.00
                                                        1970   1975    1980            1985      1990   1995        2000

                                                     -0.05



                                                     -0.10
                                                                                       Year




                                                                                                               46
                                      Appendix A

In this appendix we show how we derived equation (21). If we express equation (20) in
changes, we obtain
(27)                                    ∆Ti = ∆X i − ∆Di
If we make the standard assumption of homothetic preferences, we have
                                               ∆GDP         n
(28)                              ∆Di = Di             = Di GDP
                                                GDP
where a circumflex indicates a percentage change. We can also decompose the change of
output according to the following formula:
               Xi                             Xi         Xi              Xi 
(29) X i =         GDP ⇒ ∆X i = GDP  ∆                +        ∆GDP +  ∆      ∆GDP
             GDP                              GDP  GDP                   GDP 
where the last term would be zero if the changes were not discrete. After a little
manipulation we obtain:
                                ∆ GDP
                                    Xi
                                               ∆GDP            ∆ GDP
                                                                    Xi
                                                                        ∆GDP
(30)                ∆X i = X i  X i  + X i             + X i  Xi 
                                GDP            GDP            GDP  GDP
or
(31)                                                n + X sˆ GDP
                               ∆X i = X i sˆi + X i GDP          n
                                                             i i


Inserting equations (28) and (31) into equation (27) and rearranging terms produces
equation (21) in the text:
                                                 n + X sˆ GDP
                              ∆Ti = X i sˆi + Ti GDP      n
                                                      i i




                                                                                      47
