NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMOCRATIC POLICY MAKING WITH REAL-TIME AGENDA SETTING: PART 1

B. Douglas Bernheim
Antonio Rangel
Luis Rayo

Working Paper 8973
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8973

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

We would like to thank Alberto Alesina, David Baron, Jonathan Bendor, Ted Bergstrom, Kim Border,
Alessandra Casella, Stephen Coate, Dhammika Dharmapala, Avinash Dixit, David Epstein, James Fearon,
Ted Frach, Rod Garrat, Timothy Groseclose, Gene Grossman, Jonathan Gruber, Matthew Jackson, Jonathan
Katz, Eric Maskin, Richard McKelvey, Antonio Merlo, Tom Palfrey, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Debraj Ray,
Thomas Romer, Kent Smetters, Barry Weingast, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Caltech, Columbia,
Harvard, NBER, NYU, Princeton, Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford Institute for Theoretical
Economics, UCLA, UCSB, and University of Pennsylvania. Antonio Rangel gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the NSF (SES-0134618), and thanks the Hoover Institution for providing both
financial support and a stimulating research environment. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by B. Douglas Bernheim, Antonio Rangel and Luis Rayo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Democratic Policy Making with Real-Time Agenda Setting: Part 1
B. Douglas Bernheim, Antonio Rangel and Luis Rayo
NBER Working Paper No. 8973
June 2002
JEL No. D7, H0

ABSTRACT
We examine democratic policy-making in a simple institution with real-time agenda setting.
Individuals are recognized sequentially. Once recognized, an individual makes a proposal, which is
immediately put to a vote. If a proposal passes, it supercedes all previously passed proposals. The policy
that emerges from this process is implemented. For some familiar classes of policy spaces with rich
distributional politics, we show that the last proposer is effectively a dictator under a variety of natural
conditions. Most notably, this occurs whenever a sufficient number of individuals have opportunities to
make proposals. Thus, under reasonably general assumptions, control of the final proposal with real-time
agenda setting confers as much power as control of the entire agenda.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
and NBER
bernheim@stanford.edu

Antonio Rangel
Department of Economics
Stanford University
and NBER
rangel@leland.stanford.edu

Luis Rayo
Department of Economics
Stanford University

1

1

Introduction

Democratic institutions are characterized by a wide variety of rules and procedures
for collective deliberation.

A central objective of research in political economy

is to identify the eﬀects of these characteristics on policy outcomes, and on the
distribution of political power (see Persson and Tabellini [2001] and Besley and
Case [2001] for recent reviews of the literature). Previous research indicates that
the rules governing agenda setting are especially critical.
The fundamental importance of agenda control was established by McKelvey
[1976,1979], whose primary objective was to study voting intransitivities. McKelvey
considered a model in which proposals are considered in a known, deterministic order
established in advance of all voting (the agenda). The first policy is compared to
the second based on majority rule, the winner is compared to the third, and so
forth, with the ultimate victor enacted into law.1

He assumed that voters are

myopic, in the sense that they vote in favor of their preferred policy in every stage,
irrespective of the implications for the final outcome. Under fairly weak conditions,
he demonstrated that, for any two policies p and p0 , there is a finite agenda that starts
with p and implements p0 . Thus, the ultimate outcome is completely determined
by the agenda.

Shepsle and Weingast [1984] subsequently established that the

introduction of strategically sophisticated voting weakens McKelvey’s result, but
does not fundamentally alter the conclusion that the agenda plays a critical role in
policy selection.2
In light of these results, it is important to understand the processes through
which agendas are determined. The existing literature attacks this issue in three
diﬀerent ways. Some papers consider settings in which the agenda is selected by
a single individual (see Shepsle and Weingast [1984], Banks [1985], Miller [1980],
and Bloch and Rottier [2000]). Others assume that the agenda is determined as
the result of strategic interaction among influential individuals (see Austen-Smith
[1987], Banks and Gasmi [1987], Lockwood [1998], Penn [2001], and Dutta, Jackson,
and Le Breton [2001]). An alternative approach is to finesse the problem by identi1

This is known in the literature as a “forward” agenda. With a “backward” agenda, the policy
emerging from the succession of pairwise comparisons is implemented only if it majority-defeats
some exogenously given status quo (otherwise the status quo prevails).
2
More precisely, they demonstrated that, for any two policies p and p0 , there is a finite agenda
that starts with p and implements p0 provided that p does not cover p0 . The policy p covers the
policy p0 if (1) p defeats p0 by majority rule; and (2) every policy p00 that defeats p also defeats p0 .

2
fying outcomes that are robust, in the sense that they emerge whenever the policy
in question is included in the agenda (see Shepsle and Weingast [1984] and Ferejohn, Fiorina and McKelvey [1987]). Not surprisingly (given the results described
above), the existence of such robust outcomes is diﬃcult to guarantee.3 For the first
approach, considerable political power is concentrated in the hands of the agenda
setter. The implications of the second and third approaches for the distribution of
power are less clear.
Despite this variety of approaches, the literature has adhered to the restrictive
assumption that the sequence of proposals is known in advance of all voting (“advance” agenda setting). For many democratic institutions, the agenda is determined
during the course of deliberation, in “real time,” so that the dynamics of proposing
and voting are interlocked.4 Participants in these processes have the opportunity
and incentive to make diﬀerent proposals depending on the outcomes of previous
votes.
The purpose of this paper is to examine real-time agenda setting in a simple democratic institution. In particular, we imagine that there is a group of individuals
charged with making a collective choice. There is also an initial status quo policy,
possibly one inherited from previous rounds of deliberation. Individuals are recognized sequentially in some predetermined order.

Once recognized, an individual

makes a proposal, which is immediately put to a vote. Individuals are permitted
to condition both their proposals and their votes on all preceding events, including
other proposals and votes. Passage of a proposal requires a simple majority. If a
proposal passes, it becomes the new status quo and supersedes all previously passed
proposals. The policy that emerges from this process is implemented.5
The institution described in the preceding paragraph diﬀers from the standard
model of agenda setting only with respect to the timing of proposals.

This per-

mits us to isolate the diﬀerences between real-time and advance agenda setting.
In the sequel to this paper (Bernheim, Rangel, and Rayo [2002]), we explore the
implications of real-time agenda setting for a wider (and more realistic) class of
3

For institutions with forward agendas, such outcomes exist only if the policy space contains a
Condorcet winner. However, for institutions with backward agendas and “pork-barrel” politics,
existence is guaranteed, and the robust outcome benefits a bare majority of agents at the expense
of a bare minority. See Shepsle and Weingast [1984] and Ferejohn, Fiorina, and McKelvey [1987].
4
For example, in the U.S. Congress, when the queue of unvoted amendments reaches size four,
a vote must be taken before further proposals can be made (see Oleszek [2001], chapter 5).
5
In other words, we model institutions with forward agendas. In Bernheim, Rangel, and Rayo
[2002], we consider insitutions with real-time agenda setting and backward agendas.

3
institutions.
We begin our analysis with the observation that real-time agenda setting always
leads to the selection of a Pareto eﬃcient outcome.

Consequently, the bulk of

this paper focuses on distribution. For some familiar classes of policy spaces that
give rise to rich distributional politics, we show that the last proposer is eﬀectively a
dictator under a variety of natural conditions. Most notably, this occurs whenever a
suﬃcient number of individuals have opportunities to make proposals. Thus, under
reasonably general assumptions, control of the final proposal with real-time agenda
setting confers as much political power as control of the entire agenda. Despite the
fact that a majority is required to pass any particular proposal, the process can lead
to an outcome that makes every member of the group worse oﬀ relative to inaction,
save for the last proposer. Ironically, the last proposer need not have dictatorial
powers unless a suﬃcient number of individuals participate in setting the agenda.6
Accordingly, within the class of institutions considered in this paper, reforms that
appear to be inclusive from a procedural perspective (by promoting “participatory
democracy” or guaranteeing a “right to be heard”) can have the unintended eﬀect
of concentrating political power.
This paper is also related to the literature on stochastic bargaining (see, e.g.,
Baron and Ferejohn [1989], Merlo and Wilson [1995], Diermier and Merlo [2000],
Banks and Duggan [1998, 2000, 2001], and Eraslan [1998]), which similarly considers
institutions in which the members of a group vote on proposals sequentially.

As

with real-time agenda setting, each proposal is made after the group has voted on
the previous proposal, rather than in advance of all voting.7 However, in contrast
to the literature on agenda setting, once the group approves a proposal, the process
terminates and the proposal is implemented. Consequently, these institutions do
not allow for reconsideration of decisions once a policy receives majority approval.
This is an important limitation in that, as a practical matter, policy makers can
and do revisit previous decisions (indeed, every policy reform bill has this characteristic). The passage of a bill specifying the policy that is to prevail in some future
year does not typically preclude a legislature from altering that policy by passing
another “reform” bill before the year in question arrives; however, it does alter
6

With a single proposal round, the outcome typically depends on the status quo. In particular,
a status quo that is less desirable from the perspective of a majority of the voters leads to a better
outcome for the proposer. See e.g. Romer and Rosenthal [1978].
7
In the literature on stochastic bargaining, the order of proposers is determined randomly during
the course of play.

4
the default option against which new alternatives are considered. The institutions
studied in the agenda control literature (including the ones examined in this paper
and its companion) are of interest in part because they allow for reconsideration.
This distinction has an important formal counterpart.

For models of stochastic

bargaining, proposals may depend upon history for strategic reasons, but there is
no state variable (unless amendments are permitted). To the extent one focuses on
Markov-perfect equilibrium, members of the group might just as well announce their
proposals in advance.

In contrast, with real-time agenda setting, history always

matters because there is a state variable (the current status quo).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the
basic model. Section 3 presents some general results, including the selection of
Pareto eﬃcient outcomes and Condorcet winners (where they exist).

Section 4

specializes to a familiar policy space with rich distributional politics, and proves
our dictatorship results. Section 5 extends the results to other policy spaces. We
conclude in section 6 with a summary of our findings, and a discussion of results
from Bernheim, Rayo, and Rangel [2002] concerning alternative institutions, rules,
and procedures. To familiarize the reader with our analytic techniques, we include
the proofs of several key propositions in the text.

Other proofs are contained in

the appendix.

2

The Model

Consider a decision-making body (“the group”) consisting of N individuals, labelled
l = 1, ..., N , where N ≥ 5. To avoid complications arising from tie votes, we assume
for convenience that N is odd. Let M ≡

N +1
2

denote the size of the smallest

majority.

2.1

Policies and Payoﬀs

The group must select a policy p ∈ P , where P denotes the set of feasible policies.
Let vl (p) denote the payoﬀ to individual l if policy p is implemented. Except where

indicated, we impose the following two assumptions throughout:
Assumpiton A1: The policy space P is finite.
Assumption A2:
vl (p) 6= vl (p0 ).

Individuals have strict preferences over policies: p 6= p0 ⇒

5
Assumptions A1 and A2 are relatively innocuous. Indeed, given A1, any failure of A2 is non-generic. We nevertheless acknowledge that these assumptions rule
out some interesting and important cases, including the familiar “divide-the-dollar”
problem. The analytics of the divide-the-dollar problem are considerably more complicated because one can exploit indiﬀerence to contrive elaborate history-dependent
strategies. However, as we show in section 5, our central conclusions extend to that
case largely intact.

2.2

Procedures for Collective Choice

The collective choice process consists of a sequence of T “proposal rounds.” Activity
prior to each round t establishes some “status quo” policy, pt−1 . Round t begins
when individual i(t) is recognized.

For now, both the initial status quo policy,

p0 , and the order of recognition, i : {1, ..., T } → {1, ..., N }, are predetermined and

known to all individuals as of round 1. Recognition provides an individual with the
opportunity to make a proposal, pm
t , which can be any element of P . The proposal
is then put to an immediate vote against pt−1 .

If it receives majority approval

(“passes”), it displaces pt−1 as the status quo policy (pt = pm
t ).

If it does not

pass, the status quo policy remains the same for the following round (pt = pt−1 ).
Equivalently, one can think of any given proposal as adding to, deleting, or replacing
portions of the prevailing status quo policy.8 In eﬀect, the round t proposal consists
of the diﬀerences between pt−1 and pm
t .
The ultimate fate of the policy that emerges from the last proposal round, pT ,
is determined in some final stage of the collective choice process. As an example,
consider an institution with a “backward” agenda: the final stage is a final up-ordown vote against an exogenous policy pE ; if pT wins it becomes law, otherwise
8
It may at first seem odd to assume that a new proposal, once passed, displaces all policies
previously passed. However, this assumption involves essentially no loss of generality. It is
important to keep in mind that a policy (and therefore a proposal), as we have defined it, involves
a complete description of all collective actions, and not merely the component actions pertaining
to some particular subset of issues. To illustrate, consider the following example. Imagine that
the government faces two choices: whether to build bombers, and whether to save whales. In each
instance, there are two possibilities: build the bombers (B) or not (NB), and save whales (S) or not
(NS). There are four possible policies: (B, S), (NB,S), (B,NS), and (NB,NS). Imagine also that
the initial status quo policy (p0 ) involves no action (NB,NS). If the first recognized individual
wishes to propose to build bombers, he will propose (B,NS). If this passes, and if the second
individual wishes to save the whales, she proposes (B,S). Though the second proposal, if passed,
technically displaces the first, it is clear that indivdiuals are actually voting on the incremental
component policy S.

6
pE is implemented.9 In most of the paper we focus on the simplest possibility:
pT is directly enacted into law.

Nevertheless, for reasons that will become clear

in the next section, it is analytically useful to allow for greater generality at the
outset. For our purposes, we abstract from institutional details and simply assume
that it is possible to derive some reduced form representation of the final stage,
Ω : P → P . In other words, when the policy pT emerges from the final stage, the
ultimate outcome is Ω(pT ).

Obviously, this framework includes the special case

of a degenerate final stage, wherein pT becomes law without further modification
(Ω(p) ≡ p).

2.3

Behavioral assumptions

Throughout our analysis, we assume that (1) individuals are strategically sophisticated, and (2) they always vote as if they are pivotal. We make the second assumption to deal with the familiar problem of indiﬀerence among non-pivotal voters,
which otherwise gives rise to a vast multiplicity of equilibria. The equilibria that we
rule out through the second assumption are unreasonable because agents cast votes
that are contrary to their true preferences. Together, our two assumptions imply
that individuals compare the continuation equilibrium if a proposal passes with the
continuation equilibrium if it is defeated, and cast their vote for the option that
yields the preferred continuation path. We also confine attention to pure strategy
subgame perfect equilibria.

Henceforth, the term “equilibrium” should therefore

be construed as indicating a pure strategy subgame perfect equilibrium with the
preceding characteristics.

3

Some general results

3.1

An equivalence result for final stages

Let Ω(P ) denote the image of all points in P under the mapping Ω. Plainly, the
final policy outcome must belong to the set Ω(P ). Let J ≡ {j | j = i(t) for some
t = 1, ..., T }; this is the set of individuals who are recognized at least once.

Our first result establishes an extremely simple yet important equivalence prin-

ciple:
9
Institutions with final up-and-down votes (backward agendas) are considered, among others,
by Ferejohn, Fiorina, and McKelvey [1987].

7
Lemma 1: Consider a policy set P satisfying A1 and A2. An institution with
policy set P , initial status quo p0 , and final stage Ω yields the same equilibrium
policy outcome as an otherwise identical institution with policy set Ω(P ), initial
status quo Ω(p0 ), and a degenerate final stage.
The proof of lemma 1 is completely straightforward, and, in eﬀect, involves
relabeling of branches and nodes in the extensive form of the game, as well as
deletion of redundant branches. The lemma is useful because it implies that we can
understand all institutions in this class (including those with backward agendas) by
studying institutions with degenerate final stages (i.e., those with forward agendas).
In particular, if one wishes to know the outcome generated by an institution with
a non-degenerate final stage, one need only derive a reduced form mapping for the
final stage (Ω), and then consider an equivalent institution with a smaller policy
space (Ω(P )) and a degenerate final stage.

3.2

The recursive structure of equilibria

Lemma 1 is also important because it allows us to provide a useful recursive characterization of the equilibria for these models. This requires some additional notation.
For any P 0 ⊆ P and p0 ∈ P 0 define
Z(p0 , P 0 ) ≡ {q ∈ P 0 | ∃ S ⊆ {1, ..., N } with |S| ≥ M and vl (q) ≥ vl (p0 ) for all l ∈ S}.
This is the set of policies in P 0 that (weakly) defeat p0 by majority rule. The use of
weak inequalities here implies that p0 ∈ Z(p0 , P 0 ). However, in light of our genericity
assumption, strict inequalities hold for all other p ∈ Z(p0 , P 0 ). Next, define
ϕl (p0 , P 0 ) ≡ arg

max

q∈Z(p0 ,P 0 )

vl (q).

This represents individual l’s most preferred element of the set Z(p0 , P 0 ).
assumptions A1 and A2, this function is well defined. Finally, define
Φl (P 0 ) ≡ ϕl (P 0 , P 0 ).
This is simply the image of the set P 0 under the mapping ϕl (·, P 0 ).
Now we exhibit the recursion. Consider first the following institution:

Under

8
Institution #1:

T proposal rounds, a recognition order i(t) (for t = 1, ..., T ), a

policy space P , an initial status quo p0 , and a degenerate final stage.
Observe that, without altering the game in any substantive way, one can think
of the final proposal round as part of the final stage.

The policy that emerges

from round T − 1, pT −1 , then serves as the input for the final stage.

For any

particular pT −1 , solving this final stage is straightforward: i(T ) proposes the policy

in P she most prefers among those that (weakly) defeat pT −1 .

In other words,

Ω(pT −1 ) = ϕi(T ) (pT −1 , P ). Lemma 1 tells us that this is in turn equivalent to the
following institution:
Institution #2:

T − 1 proposal rounds, a recognition order i(t) (for t = 1, ..., T −

1), a policy space Φi(T ) (P ), an initial status quo ϕi(T ) (p0 , P ), and a degenerate
final stage.
The preceding argument demonstrates that a basic institution with T proposal

rounds and a degenerate final stage is equivalent to another basic institution with
T − 1 proposal rounds and a degenerate final stage, where the policy space has

been appropriately reduced, and where the initial status quo has been appropriately
transformed. The same argument implies that these institutions are in turn equivalent to another basic institution with T − 2 proposal rounds and a degenerate final

stage, where the policy space has been further reduced to Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ), and
where the initial status quo has been further transformed.

Where does this argument ultimately lead? Recursive application of the same
equivalence principle implies that the original institution is equivalent to a basic
institution with zero proposal rounds and a degenerate final stage, where the policy
space is
Φi(1) ◦ ... ◦ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ),
and where the initial status quo has been appropriately transformed.

Since this

institution is completely degenerate, the transformed initial status quo is simply
enacted into law.
According to the preceding argument, for any initial status quo p0 ∈ P , the

initial institution must generate an outcome in the set Φi(1) ◦ ... ◦ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ).

Notice that we can solve for this set through mechanical application of the Φi mappings. This allows us to completely characterize all possible outcomes of the leg-

9
islative process, for any conceivable initial status quo, without fully specifying the
equilibrium strategies.
For some of the arguments appearing later in this paper, it is also convenient to
define a function Qt (pt−1 ) that maps the status quo pt−1 in round t to the eventual
equilibrium outcome. The map is defined recursively as follows:
QT (pT −1 ) ≡ ϕi(T ) (pT −1 , P )
and, for t < T ,
Qt (pt−1 ) ≡ ϕi(t) (Qt+1 (pt−1 ), Qt+1 (P )).
This intuitive construction corresponds to backward induction. Consider the problem of individual i(t) in round t when the status quo is pt−1 . If proposal p0 passes in
round t, the status quo for round t + 1 is p0 , and the eventual outcome is Qt+1 (p0 ). If
no new proposal passes in round t, the status quo for round t+1 is pt = pt−1 , and the
eventual outcome is Qt+1 (pt−1 ). Thus, i(t)’s problem is to choose the best policy in
the set of continuation outcomes Qt+1 (P ) that can (weakly) defeat the continuation
status quo Qt+1 (pt−1 ) by majority rule. The solution is ϕi(t) (Qt+1 (pt−1 ), Qt+1 (P )).
Note that Qt (P ) = Φi(t) ◦ ... ◦ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ). Thus, Qt (P ) denotes the set of

policies that can emerge as final outcomes if one places no restrictions on the status
quo for round t. Since Φl (R) ⊆ R for all R ⊆ P , every application of a Φl mapping

shrinks the set of possible final outcomes. It follows that the sets {Qt (P )}Tt=1 are
nested: Q1 (P ) ⊆ Q2 (P ) ⊆ ... ⊆ QT (P ).

3.3

Pareto eﬃciency

One can evaluate institutions with respect to the eﬃciency and distributional characteristics of the outcomes they generate. With respect to eﬃciency, we have the
following simple result:
Theorem 1: Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage and a policy set
P satisfying A1 and A2. Then the outcome, pT , is Pareto eﬃcient in P .
Proof:

We know that pT ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). Consequently, we need only demonstrate

that all points in Φi(T ) (P ) are Pareto eﬃcient in P .

Consider some p ∈

Φi(T ) (P ), and suppose contrary to the theorem that it is not Pareto eﬃcient
in P .

In light of assumption A2, there is some p∗ ∈ P such that every

individual strictly prefers p∗ to p. We know that there is some p0 such that p =

10
ϕi(T ) (p0 , P ) = arg maxq∈Z(p0 ,P ) vi(T ) (q).

But p∗ ∈ Z(p0 , P ), and vi(T ) (p∗ ) >

vi(T ) (p), which is a contradiction. Q.E.D.

Theorem 1 assures us that the collective outcome will always lie on the Pareto
frontier. Consequently, starting in the next section, our analysis focuses on distributional politics.

3.4

Selection of Condorcet winners

Bearing in mind the equivalence result of section 3.1, we will continue to focus on
processes with degenerate final stages.

In general, there is no reason to believe

that the policy set P will contain a Condorcet winner (defined as a policy that is
majority preferred to all other policies). However, it is natural to wonder whether
the collective choice process will select a Condorcet winner if one exists. As it turns
out, this question is central to a number of the results proven in later sections.
Plainly, there are institutions of the form considered here that do not select
Condorcet winners. As an example, consider an institution with a single proposal
round. For any given initial status quo p0 , there is no particular reason to believe
that the Condorcet winner, pc , is the recognized individual’s preferred outcome in
Z(p0 , P ). Indeed, it is entirely possible that this individual prefers p0 to pc .
Despite the preceding observation, the group will select a Condorcet winner,
assuming that one exists, provided that a suﬃciently diversified set of individuals
have opportunities to make proposals.
Theorem 2:

Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, and a policy set

satisfying A1 and A2. Suppose that there is a Condorcet winner pc in P . Then
pc is the final outcome regardless of the initial status quo (i.e., Q1 (P ) = {pc })

whenever:

(1) |J| ≥ M , or
(2) pc is the preferred policy in P for some individual l ∈ J.
Proof:

Consider any R ⊆ P with pc ∈ R. For all l, we have pc ∈ Φl (R) (since

pc = ϕl (pc , R)).

Moreover, for all p ∈ Φl (R), we have vl (p) ≥ vl (pc ) (since

pc ∈ Z(p0 , R) for all p0 ∈ P ).

Using the fact that Qt (P ) = Φi(t) (Qt+1 (P ))

(with QT +1 (P ) ≡ P ) and applying induction, we therefore know that vl (p) ≥

vl (pc ) for all l ∈ J and p ∈ Q1 (P ). By assumption A2, it follows that either

11
p = pc or vl (p) > vl (pc ) for all l ∈ J. Conditions (1) and (2) both rule out
the latter possibility. Q.E.D.

For environments with single-dimensional policy sets and single-peaked preferences, theorem 2 provides conditions under which the desires of the median voter
prevail (just as in Downs’ [1957] model of electoral competition). From lemma 1, we
know that an analog of theorem 2 holds for basic institutions with non-degenerate
final stages whenever there exists a Condorcet winner in Ω(P ). This latter observation will prove useful in the next section.

4

Dictatorship results

To characterize the possible outcomes of the collective choice process with greater
precision, one must place some restrictions on the set of feasible policies. In this
section, we restrict attention to a particular class of policy sets that give rise to
rich distributional politics. Models with similar payoﬀ structures appear elsewhere
in the theoretical literature concerning legislative policy making (see, e.g., Ferejohn
[1974] or Ferejohn, Fiorina, and McKelvey [1987]). We extend our analysis to other
types of policy sets in section 5.
For each individual, we assume that there is an associated “elementary policy.”
Let E ≡ {1, ..., N} denote the set of all elementary policies. Each l ∈ E produces

highly concentrated benefits and diﬀuse costs. In particular, policy l generates a net
benefit bl > 0 for individual l, and a cost cl > 0 for every individual (including l).
A policy p is a collection of elementary policies. The set of feasible policies P is the
power set of E; that is, the set of all possible combinations of elementary policies.
P includes the empty set ∅, which represents inaction (nothing is implemented).
Payoﬀs are additively separable:

vl (p) = −

X
j∈p

cj +

½

if l ∈ p
bl
0 otherwise.

Henceforth, we will refer to P as a CBDC policy set (for concentrated benefits,
diﬀuse costs). We impose two additional assumptions:
Assumption A3: Total costs are increasing in the number of elementary policies.
P
P
Specifically, |p| < |p0 | ⇒ j∈p cj < j∈p0 cj .

12
Assumption A4: A mutually beneficial policy (relative to p = ∅) exists for all

coalitions consisting of M or fewer individuals. In particular, for every policy
P
p with |p| ≤ M , bl > j∈p cj for all l ∈ p.

When all elementary policies are equally costly, Assumption A3 is trivially sat-

isfied. Consequently, this assumption eﬀectively restricts the degree to which costs
can vary across elementary policies. For our main result, it is possible to relax this
assumption considerably (see section 5).
Assumption A4 guarantees the existence of policies that are preferred to inaction
by a majority of voters. It also guarantees that there exists such a policy for any
bare-majority coalition. If there does not exist a policy that is mutually beneficial
for all members of some majority coalition, then p = ∅ is a Condorcet winner. It

follows that the group selects ∅ under the conditions identified in Theorem 2, as

well as when p0 = ∅. Ironically, the ability to assemble majoritarian coalitions is

therefore essential for the emergence of the dictatorial outcomes derived below. Note

finally that, under assumption A4, the universalistic policy p = E need not maximize
social surplus. Consider, for example, the case of N = 5 with b1 = ... = b5 = 8,
c1 = c2 = c3 = 2, and c4 = c5 = 1.

Assumption A4 is clearly satisfied, but the

surplus maximizing policy is {4, 5}.

We divide the analysis of CBDC policy sets into three subsections.

The first

considers deterministic institutions in which many individuals have opportunities to
make proposals (“inclusive recognition orders”). We demonstrate that, as long a
suﬃcient number of individuals are recognized at some point during deliberations, a
dictatorial outcome emerges for every recognition order and every initial status quo.
The second considers deterministic institutions in which relatively few individuals
have opportunities to make proposals (“exclusive recognition orders”). Our analysis
of these environments shows that the dictatorial policy occurs with high frequency
when this outcome is not guaranteed. The third considers institutions in which the
recognition order, the number of proposal rounds, or both may be random (“random
recognition processes”). Our discussion subsumes the possibility that there is no
finite bound on the number of proposal rounds. We show that a dictatorial outcome
continues to emerge under reasonable, though somewhat restrictive assumptions
about the manner in which uncertainty is resolved.

13

4.1

Inclusive recognition orders

Some collective choice processes plainly yield majoritarian outcomes.

Consider,

for example, an institution with a degenerate final stage and one proposal round
(T = 1). Imagine that the initial status quo is inaction (p0 = ∅). Then the outcome

necessarily consists of M elementary policies. Specifically, the policy includes the
elementary policy i(1) and the M − 1 least costly elementary policies other than
i(1).

Compare the institution discussed in the previous paragraph to one that is more
inclusive. In particular, imagine that a large fraction of the individuals — perhaps
all of them — have opportunities to make proposals (an inclusive recognition order).
The latter institution certainly seems more egalitarian. Our next result shows that,
in the presence of real-time agenda setting, greater inclusiveness can concentrate all
political power in the hands of a single individual.
Theorem 3:

Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, a CBDC policy

set satisfying A1-A4, and N ≥ 5 individuals. Provided that either |J| > M or

i(T ) proposes more than once, the unique outcome is the policy p = {i(T )}.

Theorem 3 identifies conditions under which the last proposer, i(T ), is a dictator
in the following sense: she obtains her most preferred outcome, {i(T )}, irrespective
of the initial status quo, the order of recognition, or the costs and benefits associated
with any particular elementary policy (provided that A1 through A4 are satisfied).
It is important to emphasize the perversity of this outcome. When, for example, the
initial status quo is the null policy ∅, all individuals other than i(T ) strictly prefer it

to the final outcome. If the group simply failed to meet, everyone would be better
oﬀ except i(T ).

The group produces a result that is contrary to the interests of

almost every member, even though no proposal can pass without majority support.
Theorem 3 has the following ironic implication: within the class of institutions
considered in this paper, reforms that appear to be inclusive from a procedural perspective (by promoting “participatory democracy” or guaranteeing a “right to be
heard”) can have the unintended eﬀect of concentrating political power. For example, a majoritarian outcome results when the group entertains only a single proposal,
but dictatorship emerges when every individual is allowed to make a proposal.

14
4.1.1

An example

We illustrate the logic of theorem 3 through a simple example.
N = 5, and c1 < ... < c5 .

Suppose that

To stack things against our result, we assume that

the last proposer is associated with the most costly elementary policy (i(T ) = 5).
The first step in solving for an equilibrium is to identify the final outcome for every
status quo, pT −1 , that the last proposer might inherit. There are two possible cases:
(1) pT −1 does not include 5, and (2) pT −1 includes 5.
Consider case (1). There are four possibilities. Possibility (a): | pT −1 | = 4

(i.e., |pT −1 | = {1, 2, 3, 4}). In this case i(T ) proposes {1, 2, 5}, which passes with
the support of individuals 1, 2, and 5. Possibility (b): | pT −1 | = 3 . In this case,

i(T ) drops the two most expensive policies and adds her own. For example, if

pT −1 = {1, 2, 4}, she proposes {1, 5}, which passes with the support of individuals

1, 3, and 5. Possibility (c): | pT −1 | = 2 (e.g., {1, 2}). In this case i(T ) drops both

of the elementary policies in pT −1 and adds her own. This leads to the dictatorial

outcome {5}. Possibility (d): | pT −1 | = 1. In this case i(T ) drops the elementary

policy in pT −1 and adds 3 others, including her own. For example, if pT −1 = {1},
she proposes {2, 3, 5}. Thus, in case (1), the only possible outcomes are of the form
{5}, {5, x}, or {5, x, y} (where x and y are elementary policies other than 5).

Now consider case (2). There are two possibilities. Possibility (a): |pT −1 | ≥ 3.

In this case, i(T ) drops at least the two most expensive policies other than her own.

For example, if pT −1 = {1, 2, 3, 5}, she proposes {1, 5}, and this passes with the

support of individuals 1, 4, and 5.10 Possibility (b): |pT −1 | < 3. In this case, i(T )

proposes {5}, and this passes with the support of i(T ) along with all individuals
whose elementary policies are excluded from pT −1 . For example, if pT −1 = {2, 5},

individuals 1, 3, 4, and 5 vote in favor of {5}.11 Thus, in case (2), the only possible

outcomes are also of the form {5}, {5, x}, and {5, x, y}.

From the preceding arguments, we know that, given the equilibrium behavior of

the last proposer, the outcome must be {5}, {5, x}, or {5, x, y}. But this implies
that {5} is a Condorcet winner within the set of policies that can survive the final

proposal round. In particular, {5} majority defeats {5, x} for all x (only individual

10
When pT −1 = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, i(T ) may propose either {1, 2, 5} or {5}. The latter proposal will
receive majority support as long as the policy {1, 2, 3, 4} is not mutually beneficial for at least two
of the included individuals.
11
When pT −1 = {5}, all individuals are indiﬀerent between voting for and against the proposal,
but the outcome is identical in both cases.

15
x is opposed), and {5} majority defeats {5, x, y} for all x, y (only individuals x and
y are opposed). Theorem 2 then delivers the desired conclusion.

To illustrate this final step, suppose that T = 2 and i(1) = 4 (the second-to-last
proposer is associated with the second most costly elementary policy). A careful
review of the preceding arguments reveals that the final outcome never includes
elementary policy 4. Consequently, regardless of the initial status quo, individual
4 proposes either {5} or (equivalently) something that the final proposer can suc-

cessfully replace with {5} (such as {1, 2, 5}), and this proposal passes. Note that
individual 4 may take the initiative in advocating individual 5’s most preferred out-

come. Note also that proposals may pass with the opposition of those who (naively)
appear to benefit. For example, if the initial status quo is inaction (p0 = ∅) and

individual 4 proposes {1, 2, 5}, the proposal passes with the support of individuals 3,

4, and 5, and with the opposition of individuals 1 and 2. This is because, if {1, 2, 5}
is victorious, {5} is the ultimately outcome, but if {1, 2, 5} is defeated, {1, 2, 5} is
the final outcome (since individual 5 proposes it again in the final round).

Real-time agenda setting plays a crucial role in the preceding argument, inasmuch as individual 5 must have the flexibility to make diﬀerent proposals when she
inherits diﬀerent status quos. To illustrate, consider again the case where T = 2,
i(1) = 4, and p0 = ∅, and the equilibrium in which individual 4 proposes {5}. If the

proposal passes, individual 5 proposes {5}, but if the proposal is defeated, individ-

ual 5 proposes {1, 2, 5}. To see that this flexibility is critical, consider an otherwise
identical institution with advance agenda setting, where individual 5 must make
the same proposal regardless of the prevailing status quo. Suppose that, as on the
path of the equilibrium just considered, individual 4 proposes {5} and individual 5
proposes {5}. If individual 4’s proposal passes, the ultimate outcome is {5}. If individual 4’s proposal is defeated, the ultimate outcome is ∅ (since ∅ majority defeats
{5}). Thus, individuals 1, 2, 3, and 4 all vote against {5} in round 1, and the ulti-

mate outcome is ∅ rather than {5}. The same argument holds for any other round
1 proposal that would ultimately lead to the implementation of {5}.

Thus, with

advance agenda setting, there is no equilibrium that yields the dictatorial outcome.
4.1.2

Intuition and proof

The proof of theorem 3 is based on three intuitive observations. First, if the final
proposer inherits her most-preferred policy as the status quo for round T , then this

16
policy is implemented (formally, {i(T )} = ϕi(T ) ({i(T )}, P )). This implies:
Property 1: {i(T )} ∈ Φi(T ) (P ).
Second, regardless of the status quo prevailing prior to the final round, the
outcome never includes the elementary policies of more than M individuals. This
is because the last proposer only needs to secure the approval of a minimal winning
coalition. Formally:
Property 2: p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) ⇒ |p| ≤ M (proof in appendix).
Third, regardless of the status quo prevailing prior to the final round, the outcome always contains the elementary policy of the final proposer. This is because
she can always tailor her proposal to the prevailing status quo. In some instances,
she deletes some elementary policies and adds her own; in others, she adds a collection of elementary policies including her own. Formally:
Property 3: p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) ⇒ i(T ) ∈ p (proof in appendix).
Using properties 1 through 3, we argue that {i(T )} is a Condorcet winner in

Φi(T ) (P ). Consider any other policy p0 ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) other than {i(T )}. By properties

2 and 3, there are at least M − 1 individuals other than i(T ) whose associated

elementary policies are excluded from p0 .

By property 3, all of these excluded

individuals together with i(T ) (a majority) prefer {i(T )} to p0 .

In general, the

identity of the winning majority coalition depends on the choice of p0 .
The desired conclusion now follows from lemma 1 and theorem 2. By lemma

1, the institution under consideration is equivalent to one in which there are T − 1
proposal rounds, and for which the policy space is Φi(T ) (P ) (one must also transform
the initial status quo appropriately, but this is inconsequential). By theorem 2, the
institution therefore selects {i(T )} as long as either i(T ) is recognized twice, or at
least M distinct individuals are recognized in proposal rounds 1 through T − 1. If
|J| > M , the latter condition is satisfied even if i(T ) is recognized only once.
4.1.3

Some remarks on the theorem

A few further remarks concerning theorem 3 are in order.

First, aside from the

requirement that |J| > M , we have placed no restrictions on the order of recognition.

Some individuals may be recognized once or more than once, while others never have

17
opportunities to make proposals. There is no need to cycle through those who are
recognized in any particular order. Indeed, a single individual may be recognized
in several consecutive rounds. It is natural to conjecture that consecutive proposals
are redundant, but this is not the case. Somewhat surprisingly, an individual may
be able to accomplish some objective with two consecutive proposals, but not with a
single proposal. For example, with T = 1, the institution produces a policy with M
elementary components including i(T ). However, with T > 1 and i(T − 1) = i(T ),
the outcome is {i(T )} (this follows by part (2) of theorem 2).

Second, using an alternative argument, one can extend the result to environments

for which diﬀerent elementary policies have the same costs (this violates assumption
A2).12 Since we consider this a knife-edge case, we omit the proof.

We take up

other extensions and generalizations in section 5.
Finally, the theorem does not hold for institutions with three individuals (N =
3). The proof breaks down when one tries to establish property 3. To illustrate,
suppose that T = 3, i(t) = t, and c1 < c2 < c3 . Then the set of continuation
outcomes for any status quo pT is given by
pT −1
∅
{1}
{2}
{3}
{1,2}
{1,3}
{2,3}
{1,2,3}

QT (pT −1 )
{1, 3}
{2,3}
{1,3}
{3}
{1}
{3}
{3}
{1,3}

.

Note that if pT −1 = {1, 2} the eventual outcome is {1}. Since 1 and 2 prefer {1}

to {3}, the latter is no longer a Condorcet winner in QT (P ).

the dynamics that generate dictatorial outcomes.

This undermines

In this case, depending on the

initial status quo, the outcome is either {1} or {2, 3}. Since most collective choice

problems involve more than three decision makers in practice, we regard this as a
technical curiosity.

12
An alternative argument is required because ϕi (p0 , P 0 ) may be set-valued. One must also make
an assumption concerning the manner in which individuals resolve indiﬀerence.

18

4.2

Exclusive recognition orders

It is natural to question the general applicability of theorem 3. Several objections
come to mind. First, the result requires individuals to know the recognition order
as of round 1. For realistic institutions, there may be considerable uncertainty concerning who will be recognized two or three rounds in the future, let alone twenty or
thirty rounds. A second related concern is that individuals must know the number
of proposal rounds as of round 1.

Though it is plausible to assume that there is

a finite upper bound on the number of proposal rounds that can precede any timedated policy, such as the passage of a budget for a given fiscal year, deliberations on
any given proposal may vary randomly in length, creating variation in the realized
number of rounds.

A third concern is that the result appears to require highly

sophisticated strategic reasoning. The familiar centipede game admits a single subgame perfect equilibrium, but this solution presupposes an ability to think through
many layers of strategy. In practice, play of the centipede game fails to unravel as
predicted by theory. Conceivably, our result may be vulnerable to the same criticism. Finally, the requirement that |J| > M is particularly demanding for groups
with large numbers of members.

In this section, we describe one potential avenue for addressing all of these criticisms simultaneously. Each of the concerns mentioned above relates in some way
to the number of proposal rounds. When relatively few individuals have opportunities to make proposals (formally, |J| ≤ M ), one can show that there are always

recognition orders and initial status quos for which {i(T )} is not the outcome. In
this sense, one cannot “improve” upon the requirement that |J| > M .

However,

it turns out that non-dictatorial outcomes are unusual: a high fraction of possible
recognition orders generate {i(T )} for all initial status quos even when |J| is small
relative to M .

Consequently, we obtain a dictatorial or near-dictatorial outcome

“most of the time” (in a sense made precise below), regardless of the group’s size,
as long as individuals can think ahead strategically only a small of number of steps,
and as long as they properly anticipate the number of remaining rounds and the
order of recognition once the end of deliberations draws near.
We begin our analysis of exclusive recognition orders by deriving several conditions under which the dictatorial outcome emerges even for small |J|. The statement

of this theorem requires the following definitions: HK denotes the set of individuals associated with the K most costly policies in E\i(T ), and i∗K is the individual

19
associated with the K-th most costly policy in E\i(T ).
Theorem 4:

Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, a CBDC policy

set satisfying A1-A4, and N ≥ 5 individuals.
(a) If T ≥ 2 and i(T − 1) 6= i∗M−1 , then the outcome is either {i(T )} or

{i(T − 1), i(T )}.

(b) Under either of the following conditions, the unique outcome is the policy
p = {i(T )}:
(b1) some member of HM−2 ∪ {i(T )} has the opportunity to make at least one

proposal prior to round T .

(b2) i(T − 1) 6= i∗M−1 and i(t) 6= i(T − 1) for some t < T − 1.
Theorem 4 implies that institutions with short recognition orders can produce
non-dictatorial outcomes only in relatively unlikely circumstances. We demonstrate
this by deriving a lower bound on the fraction of recognition orders that generate
the dictatorial outcome {i(T )} for all initial status quos.
Theorem 5:

Consider an institution with T > 1 proposal rounds, a degenerate

final stage, a CBDC policy set satisfying A1-A4, and N ≥ 5 individuals. The
fraction of recognition orders that generate the outcome {i(T )} for all p0 ∈ P

is not less than

1
B(N, T ) ≡ 1 −
2

µ

N −1
N

¶ "µ

1
N

¶T −2

+

µ

2
N

¶µ

M
N

¶T −2 #

.

If one imagines that a recognition order is selected at random in an initial stage,
and that this selection process is governed by a uniform distribution over the set of all
feasible recognition orders, then B(N, T ) provides a lower bound on the probability
that the collective choice process yields {i(T )}. Figure 1 illustrates the manner in
which this bound changes with the numbers of rounds and individuals. Notice that,

regardless of whether N is large or small, the bound approaches unity for relatively
small values of T . Also notice that the bound is more sensitive to the number of
proposal rounds than to the number of individuals. To understand why this is the
case, consult part (b1) of theorem 4. If any member of HM−2 ∪ {i(T )} is recognized

prior to round T , the outcome is {i(T )}. The probability of not recognizing a
member of this group in any particular round is approximately 1/2 for all N . This

20
probability compounds rapidly with the number of rounds, thereby generating the
observed convergence with T . Notice also that the bound is actually increasing in
the number of individuals. This suggests that, contrary to the apparent implications
of the requirement in theorem 3 that |J| > M , for fixed T dictatorial outcomes are
even more likely in large groups than in small ones.

Frequency of dictatorship

1

0.8

N = 11
N =9
N =7

0.6

N =5

0.4
2

3

4

5

T

Figure 1: The function B(N, T )
The preceding result concerns the fraction of possible recognition orders that
produce {i(T )} for all initial status quos even when |J| ≤ M . We now consider the

conditions under which a particular initial status quo produces {i(T )} regardless of
the recognition order, again even though |J| ≤ M .
Theorem 6:

Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, a CBDC policy

set satisfying A1-A4, and N ≥ 5 individuals. An initial status quo p0 ∈ P

leads to the outcome {i(T )} provided that at least one of the following condi-

tions is satisfied:

P
(i) |J| > 2 and either p0 = ∅ or j∈p0 cj > ci(T ) ,
P
(ii) |p0 | ≤ M − 1 and j∈p0 cj > ci(T ) ,

(iii) |J| > |QT (p0 )|.

21
Part (i) tells us that, with three or more distinct proposers (a very weak condition
indeed), {i(T )} can be avoided only if the initial status quo consists of a single
elementary policy that is less costly than {i(T )}.

This is a small fraction of all

feasible initial status quos; moreover, this fraction goes to zero as the number of
individuals, N , becomes large. Consequently, if a status quo is selected at random
in the initial stage, and if at least three individuals are recognized, a large group
is almost certain to produce the dictatorial outcome {i(T )}. Part (ii) tells us that

the dictatorial outcome also emerges when the initial status quo is more costly than
{i(T )} but contains fewer than than M elementary policies, regardless of how many
individuals are recognized.

Part (iii) tells us that any initial status quo p0 leads

to the outcome {i(T )} provided that the number of recognized individuals exceeds
the number of elementary policies that would be implemented were i(T ) to inherit

p0 as the round T status quo. Since |QT (p0 )| < M for any initial status quo other

than p0 = ∅, p0 = E, and p0 = {j} for j with cj < ci(T ) , part (iii) is typically weaker
than |J| > M (the requirement in theorem 3).

4.3

Random recognition processes

Next we turn our attention to a more explicit treatment of the possibility, mentioned
at the outset of the previous section, that individuals may be uncertain about the
recognition order, the number of proposal rounds, or both. We demonstrate that
our central result depends not on the absence of uncertainty, but rather on the timing
of the resolution of uncertainty from the perspective of the participants. Under the
conditions identified below, uncertainty can persist as late as the beginning of the
second-to-last proposal round without undermining our conclusions. Notably, our
analysis subsumes cases for which there is no finite bound on the number of proposal
rounds.
Imagine that, prior to the first proposal round, nature selects the pair (T, i(·)),
where T , the number of rounds, is chosen from the positive integers {1, 2, 3, ...}, and
i : {1, ..., T } → {1, ..., N } is a recognition order. Nature might, for example, select
T = T 0 with probability (1 − λ)T

0 −1

λ for λ ∈ (0, 1), and it might select the proposer

in each round through an independent draw from a uniform distribution over the
set of participants. In that case, λ represents a constant termination probability,

there is no finite bound on the number of rounds, and each participant stands a onein-N chance of being named as the proposer in any given round. For our purposes,

22
it is unnecessary to provide a general description of the class of random process
governing the selection of (T, i(·)).
Though nature technically selects the number of rounds and the recognition
order in advance, some or all of this information may be revealed to the participants
at later points in time. We identify two polar cases. At one extreme, participants
do not learn the identity of the proposer in each round t until the beginning of t, and
T is not revealed until after the final round. At the opposite extreme, (T, i(·)) is
revealed prior to the first round. We characterize intermediate cases as follows. If,
for any given process, (T, i(·)) is completely revealed (for the first time) by the end
of round T − K, we say that the process is characterized by K degrees of advance

revelation. The first polar case corresponds to zero degrees of advance revelation
(K = 0), while the second corresponds to T degrees of advance revelation (K = T
for each realization of T ).
Our basic framework subsumes the case where (T, i(·)) is revealed prior to the

first round (T degrees of advance revelation). Theorem 5 allows us to extend this
conclusion to intermediate cases: it tells us that, under plausible assumptions about
the random process governing the selection of proposers (e.g., that all participants
have an equal chance of being selected in any round), for any process with K degrees
of advance revelation, the probability of a dictatorial outcome is close to unity
provided that K is suﬃciently large. One does not need to make strong, simplifying
assumptions concerning the nature of the random process generating (T, i(·)), nor
to assume that the horizon is bounded.13

Moreover, it is apparent from figure 1

that even small values of K are suﬃcient to assure a dictatorial outcome with high
probability.
To underscore this last point, consider the case of K = 2, which requires that,
before the second-to-last proposal is made, participants know both T (i.e. that
there will be two more rounds) and the identity of the final proposer. Part (b1) of
Theorem 4 tells us that the outcome is dictatorial ({i(T )}) if i(T − 1) ∈ HM−2 ∪
{i(T )}. Thus, if all individuals stand an equal chance of being selected as i(T − 1),
the probability of achieving a dictatorial outcome is at least

converges to
13

1
2

M−1
N

=

N−1
2N ,

which

for large groups. Part (a) of Theorem 4 tells us that the outcome

As an example, imagine that, at the end of each period, there is a probability λ that the players
are told the process will end in K rounds and all remaining proposers are identified; with probability
1 − λ, no information concerning T is revealed, and only the next proposer is identified. Note that,
from the perspective of the participants, the potential number of rounds remains unbounded until
the process enters the final K rounds.

23
is either dictatorial or nearly dictatorial ({i(T )} or {i(T − 1), i(T )}) if i(T − 1) ∈
i∗M−1 . Thus, if all individuals stand an equal chance of being selected as i(T − 1),

the probability of achieving a dictatorial or near dictatorial outcome is at least
2(M−1)
N

=

N−1
N ,

which converges to unity for large groups.

For some plausible processes, K = 2 (two degrees of advance revelation) is sufficient to guarantee a dictatorial outcome with high probability.

To illustrate,

imagine that there exists some set of individuals Θ ⊆ {1, ...N } with |Θ| ≥ 3 (e.g.,

elders, faction leaders, or possibly even the entire group) each of whom is always
given one opportunity to make a final proposal before the process terminates. More
specifically, |Θ| rounds prior to termination, participants are told that the process

has entered a final proposal phase consisting of |Θ| rounds, and that, in each suc-

cessive round, the proposer will be selected at random (with equal probabilities) at
the beginning of the round from among those in Θ who have not yet made final
proposals.

We make no other assumptions about the random process generating

(T, i(·)), or about the nature of information revealed prior to round T − |Θ|. Note

that any process with a final proposal phase is characterized by two degrees of advance revelation: once the second-to-last proposer is identified, all participants can
identify the last proposer by default.

However, because the process also reveals

some information about i(T ) and i(T − 1) in period T − 2 (specifically, the identities

of the last two proposers but not their order), we obtain a stronger result than for
the general case of K = 2. Specifically, we have:
Theorem 7:

Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, a CBDC pol-

icy set satisfying A1-A4, and N ≥ 5 individuals.

Imagine that (T, i(·)) is

N−2
N ,

the group adopts the ele-

determined randomly, but that the process is characterized by a final proposal
phase.

Then, with probability not less than

mentary policy corresponding to whichever individual is randomly chosen to
propose last, and nothing else.
Observe that the probability that the last proposer is eﬀectively a dictator converges to unity as the size of the group becomes large.

5

Alternative Policy Spaces

In section 4, our analysis focused on a particularly simple class of policy spaces. It
is natural to wonder whether our central conclusions hold more generally. In this

24
section, we consider three alternative policy spaces. The first generalizes the CBDC
assumptions to cases for which there may be multiple elementary policies associated
with each individual. The second considers cases for which multiple individuals are
associated with the same elementary policy, and therefore have common interests.
The third examines the canonical problem of dividing a fixed payoﬀ.

5.1

Multiple projects

By adjusting the CBDC assumptions to allow for the possibility that each individual
is associated with several elementary projects, each with distinct costs and benefits,
we add considerable richness and flexibility to the policy space. Naturally, we can
no longer uniquely associate individuals with elementary policies. Hence, we define
I = {1, ..., N} as the set of individuals, and E as the set of elementary policies. An

elementary policy e is a pair, (i, k) (denoting the k-th elementary policy associated
with the i-th individual). Let Ei be the subset of E consisting of elementary policies
associated with individual i. Under the assumptions stated below, Ei is the outcome
that i would pick if i were a dictator. Let Ki ≡ |Ei |. We will continue to use P to

denote the power set of E, and p ∈ P to denote a policy (a subset of E). For any
policy p, define pi = p ∩ Ei . That is, pi is the set of elementary policies associated

with individual i in the policy p.

As before, we assume that each elementary policy benefits one individual at a
cost to all others. We write the benefit of the elementary policy (i, k) to i as bik ,
and we write the cost of this policy to each individual as cik .

We continue to

assume that the cost of any elementary policy is the same to all of the individuals.
P
Accordingly, we define the total costs of any policy p as C(p) = e∈p ce . The proof

of the theorem stated below actually uses only the fact that the ranking of the set
P by costs is the same for all individuals. Thus, the assumption can be weakened
to some extent without altering the proof. We also continue to assume that costs
and benefits are additive over elementary policies.
We impose assumptions A1 and A2 as before.

Henceforth, K represents the

largest number of elementary policies associated with any one individual, c represents the highest (c represents the lowest) cost associated with any elementary
policy, and b represents the lowest benefit associated with any elementary policy.
We replace A3 with the following:
Assumption A5: Kc < (M − 1)c.

25
Assumption A5 imposes an upper bound on the total costs of all elementary
policies associated with any one individual. For the case of Ki = 1 for all i, this
assumption weakens A3 in the sense that it requires each elementary policy to be less
expensive than M − 1 other elementary policies, rather than two other elementary
policies.14 We also replace A4 with the following:
¡
¢
Assumption A6: b > c M − 1 + K .

Assumption A6 implies that, if one adopts a collection of M − 1 + K elementary

policies, all individuals associated with elementary policies in this set are better
oﬀ. For the case of K = 1, this coincides (approximately) with assumption A4.15
For K > 1, A6 is more demanding that A4 since it requires the benefit from any
elementary policy to exceed the costs of more than M other elementary policies.
We are now equipped to state the theorem.

Theorem 8: Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, a CBDC policy
set (possibly with multiple elementary policies for each individual) satisfying
assumptions A1, A2, A5, and A6, and N ≥ 5 individuals.

Provided that

either |J| > M or i(T ) proposes more than once, the unique outcome is the
policy p = Ei .

Notice that theorem 3 is a special case of theorem 8 (subject to the technical
qualifications noted in the previous two footnotes).16

It states that, if the recog-

nition order is suﬃciently inclusive, then all elementary policies associated with
the final proposer, and only these policies, are adopted. Thus, the final proposer
emerges as an eﬀective dictator in a very strong sense.

5.2

Quasi-distributional politics

Next we extend the CBDC framework to subsume cases in which members of subgroups share common interests. Policies are then “quasi-distributional,” in the sense
14
By writing the assumption in terms of bounds rather than in terms of the costs of particular
collections of policies, we have actually imposed some incidental restrictions that are not implied
by A3. One can state a version of A5 in terms of collections of policies and thereby generalize A3,
but the notation is less compact.
15
The assumptions are not identical, as A6 is stated in terms of bounds, while A4 is stated in
terms of the costs and benefits for collections of policies. One can state a more cumbersome version
of A6 in the latter form that specializes exactly to A4 when Ki = 1 for all i.
16
The proof is more complicated, however, because it is diﬃcult to show that any policy q ∈
Φi(T ) (P ) contains Ei(T ) (this was straightforward for the case |Ei | = 1 considered in theorem 3).

26
that they aﬀect the distribution of payoﬀs among subgroups, rather than across
individuals.

For this class of environments, we can no longer uniquely associate

elementary policies with individuals.
as the set of individuals.
s =

1, ..., N G ,

group s).

where

NG

As in section 5.1, we define I = {1, ..., N }

The set of individuals is partitioned into groups Is ,
≤ N.

Let Ns = |Is | (the number of individuals in

The assignment of individuals into groups is described by a function

r : I → {1, ..., N G }, so that l ∈ Ir(l) .

Let N ∗ denote the median value of Nr(l) over all individuals. Note that this is

not the median group size. For example, if N G = 5 and the group sizes are 4, 3, 2,
1, and 1, then the median group size is 2, but N ∗ = 3.
There is one elementary policy for each group.
policies is given by E = {1, ..., N G }.

Thus, the set of elementary

Note that we can also use E to denote the

set of groups. When the elementary policy for group s ∈ E is implemented, every
individual bears a cost cs . Each individual l ∈ Is receives a benefit bs . As before,

payoﬀs are additive.

Note that there is a common payoﬀ function, us (p), for all

members of the group s, so vl (p) = ur(l) (p).
power set of E.

The policy set P is once again the

Note that we can use p ∈ P either to represent a policy or a

collection of groups.

We continue to impose assumptions A1 and A2. However, we modify assumptions A3 and A4. In particular, we replace A3 with the following:
Assumption A7: For any p ∈ P with
maxs∈E cs .

P

j∈p Nj

≥ M − N ∗ , we have

P

j∈p cj

>

One can think of assumption A7, like A3, as imposing an upper bound on the
costs of individual elementary policies.

For the case where each group consists

of a single individual, it implies that each elementary policy costs less than the
combination of M − 1 other elementary policies. Clearly, this relaxes A3.

Alternatively, one can also think of A7 as imposing a limit on the sizes of the

groups. It always requires N ∗ < M − 1.17 Under one set of plausible conditions,

it implies N ∗ < M/2.18 These conditions are not, however, necessary for the result
If N ∗ ≥ M − 1, then A7 requires every elementary polilcy to cost strictly more than maxs∈E cs ,
which is impossible.
18
If one assumes that total costsPare increasing
of individuals
whose elementary
P in the number
P
P
policies are included in p (that is, j∈p Nj < j∈p0 Nj ⇒ j∈p cj < j∈p0 cj , which is a natural
generalization of A3), then A7 reduces to the statement that N + N ∗ < M (where N denotes the
17

27
stated below.
winner in P .

For example, when Nr(i(T )) = N ∗ ≥ M , {r(i(T ))} is a Condorcet

Consequently, the same conclusion as in theorem 9 below follows

directly from theorem 2.
To state our next assumption, we need the following definition.
P
Definition: A collection of groups L ⊆ E is decisive if s∈L Ns ≥ M . Moreover,
P
L is minimally decisive if, in addition, s∈L Ns − Nk < M for all k ∈ L. Let
Λ denote the set of all minimally decisive collections of groups.

We replace A4 with the following:
Assumption A8: A mutually beneficial policy (relative to p = ∅) exists for all
minimally decisive collections of groups.
P
bs > j∈p cj for all s ∈ p.

That is, for all p ∈ Λ, we have

Note that, for the case where each group consists of a single individual, assumptions A4 and A8 are equivalent.
Finally, for any recognition order, we define J 0 = ∪j∈J Ir(j) .

This represents

the set of individuals whose interests coincide with someone who has at least one
opportunity to make a proposal.
Now we are equipped to state the theorem.

It is easy to verify that A7 is

never satisfied for N = 3. Consequently, the stated assumptions subsume our usual
requirement that N ≥ 5.
Theorem 9: Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage and a quasidistributional CBDC policy set satisfying A1, A2, A7, and A8. Assume that
¯
¯
Nr(i(T )) ≥ N ∗ . Provided that either |J 0 | ≥ M + ¯Ir(i(T )) ¯ or some member of
Ir(i(T )) proposes prior to round T , the outcome is the policy p = {r(i(T ))}.

¯
¯
Note that the requirement in Theorem 9 is |J 0 | ≥ M + ¯Ir(i(T )) ¯, rather than

|J| > M .

In other words, instead of requiring that at least M + 1 individuals

have opportunities to make proposals, we require only that at least M individuals

other than those in Ir(i(T )) are “represented by” those with opportunities to make
proposals. When groups are large, the latter condition is easily satified even if only
a small number of agents make proposals.
size of the largest group). Note that the latter inequality implies N ∗ < M/2. It holds whenever
the size of the largest group is less than N/4, which in turn requires N G ≥ 5.

28
Note also that the conclusion stated in theorem 9 depends on the identity of
the last proposer.
N∗

or larger.

In particular, this individual must belong to a group of size

By definition, more than half of all individuals belong to such a

group. Thus, if the last proposer is chosen at random (with equal probabilities),
then theorem 9 tells us that one obtains a dictatorial outcome with probability
greater than one-half.
It is useful to identify the analytic problem that arises when Nr(i(T )) < N ∗ . The
proof of theorem 3 makes use of the fact that i(T ) always contrives to make herself
pivotal. This may not be possible in a quasi-distributional setting when i(T )’s group
is small. Consider an example in which there are four groups of sizes 2, 2, 2, and
1, so that N = 7, M = 4, and N ∗ = 2. Suppose Nr(i(T )) = 1. To build a majority
coalition, i(T ) must have the support of at least four other members (instead of
the three needed before).

Accordingly, if pT −1 = E, the outcome must include

the elementary policies associated with two groups other than Ir(i(T )) . But then
ϕi(T ) (pT −1 , P ) majority-defeats {r(i(T ))}, so {r(i(T ))} is not a Condorcet winner
in Φi(T ) (P ).

There is, however, reason to believe that the result might hold with greater
generality, even when Nr(i(T )) < N ∗ .

In the previous example, i(T ) in essence

is required to find coalitions of five individuals (including i(T )) to support any
proposal, rather than the bare majority of four proposals.

Thus, the situation

facing i(T ) is quite similar to that arising with a supermajority requirement. We
treat supermajority requirements in the sequel to this paper (Bernheim, Rangel, and
Rayo [2002]), and demonstrate that the dictatorship result is surprisingly robust.
Despite the foregoing, note that when the groups are of equal sizes, all groups
have size N ∗ , so it is no longer necessary to impose a condition on the identity of
the last proposer. Thus, theorem 9 has the following immediate corollary (where
M G ≡ (N G + 1)/2 and J G denotes the set of groups for which at least one member
makes a proposal):

Corollary: Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage and a quasi-distributional
CBDC policy set satisfying A1 and A2. Suppose that
(i) Nj = N ∗ for all j ∈ E,
(ii) For any p ∈ P with |p| ≥ M G − 1, we have

P

j∈p cj

> maxs∈E cs , and

29
(iii) For any p ∈ P with |p| ≤ M G , we have bs >

P

j∈p cj

for all s ∈ p.

¯ ¯
Then, provided that either ¯J G ¯ > M G or some member of Ir(i(T )) proposes prior
to round T , the outcome is the policy p = {r(i(T ))}.

Condition (i) simply says that all groups are of the same size. Under condition
(i), A7 implies (ii), and A8 implies (iii).

When each group contains exactly one

individual, condition (ii) generalizes A3, and (iii) is equivalent to A4.

Condition

(ii) is never satisfied when N G = 3; hence the corollary requires N G ≥ 5 (the analog
¯ ¯
of N ≥ 5). Note also that |J| > M implies ¯J G ¯ > M G .

Both theorem 9 and its corollary imply that the policy outcome is {r(i(T ))}

whenever any member of Ir(i(T )) , and not just i(T ), proposes prior to round T . If

we interpret groups as political parties, this requirement seems innocuous. Thus,
if the last proposer is a member of a suﬃciently large political party, that party
ordinarily dictates the policy outcome.

5.3

Splitting a fixed payoﬀ

Finally, we consider the canonical problem of dividing a fixed payoﬀ (P = ∆N−1 ,
the unit simplex in RN , and vi (p) = pi ). This policy space violates assumption A1
and, more importantly, A2 (the generic no-indiﬀerence condition).
The violation of A2 undermines the uniqueness of continuation equilibria, and
thereby complicates the analysis considerably.

Nevertheless, provided that one

adopts a reasonable and consistent rule for resolving this indiﬀerence, the outcome
is approximately dictatorial.
To understand the issues raised by the possibility of indiﬀerence, it is useful to
start by defining a weak Condorcet winner within a set R as a policy q ∈ R such

that, for all q 0 ∈ R, a majority of individuals weakly prefer q to q0 . Notice that, in
general, nothing assures the uniqueness of a weak Condorcet winner.

Let pj denote the policy for which j receives a payoﬀ of unity (pjj = 1) and every
other party receives a payoﬀ of zero (pjl = 0 for l 6= j).

that j would select if j were a dictator.

It is straightforward to show that pi(T )

is a weak Condorcet winner in the set Φi(T ) (∆N−1 ).19
19

N −1

This is the alternative

Somewhat surprisingly, it

Technically, Φi(T ) (∆
) is not well-defined unless, as below, one resolves indiﬀerence in a way
that is consistent with the existence of ϕi(T ) (p, ∆N −1 ) for all p ∈ ∆N −1 .

30
is also possible to show that this outcome is the unique weak Condorcet winner in
Φi(T ) (∆N −1 ).20
Were it possible to prove an analog of theorem 2 for unique weak Condorcet
winners, then the implications of theorem 3 would generalize immediately to the
problem of dividing a fixed payoﬀ.

When the policy set includes a unique weak

Condorcet winner pwc , and when the recognition order is suﬃciently inclusive, there
does indeed exist an equilibrium that selects pwc . The problem with indiﬀerence is
that, by appropriately contriving the resolution of indiﬀerence at various stages of
the game, one can in many instances achieve other outcomes.
From our perspective, the most reasonable equilibria in such circumstances are
the ones that select pwc . To sustain other outcomes, one must assume that individuals who will receive zero payoﬀs in all continuation paths, and who therefore have
absolutely nothing at stake, resolve their indiﬀerence when making proposals and
casting votes by supporting the course that inflicts the most damage on individual
i(T ).

It is diﬃcult to sustain these outcomes once one rules out malevolence by

imposing a consistent rule for resolving indiﬀerence.
The violation of A1 also introduces some technical problems related to continuity and openness. We avoid these issues by assuming that the policy space is a
discretized version of ∆N−1 .
ε=

1
m.

∆N−1
ε

Specifically, select some positive integer m, and let

Define
≡

(

N

p∈R

| p ≥ 0,

N
X
l=1

)

pl = 1, and pl = nε for some n ∈ {0, 1, ..., m} .

For our next result, we assume that individuals vote in favor of a proposal only
if they expect to be strictly better oﬀ should the proposal pass. We also rule out
complex history dependent punishments by focusing on Markov-perfect equilibria,
(a sequence
which can be described by outcome functions (Qt )Tt=1 : ∆N−1
→ ∆N−1
ε
ε

of functions that, for each round t, map the status quo to a final outcome). We

demonstrate that, with these restrictions, and with at least three proposers (rather
than five as in our previous results), the final proposer receives virtually all of the
surplus. This holds for every possible initial status quo, including equal division.
In such cases, an approximately dictatorial outcome emerges even though every
individual except i(T ) would be strictly better oﬀ if the group took no action,
Indeed, for any other element of this set, p0 , there is some other element, p00 , such that a
majority of individuals strictly prefers p00 to p0 .
20

31
and even though every proposal requires the approval of a majority to pass. The
outcome is approximately dictatorial in the following sense: as ε approaches zero,
i(T )’s equilibrium payoﬀ converges to unity.
Theorem 10: Consider an institution with a degenerate final stage, a policy set
∆N−1
, and N ≥ 3 individuals.
ε

outcome functions

(Qt )Tt=1

Consider any Markov-perfect equilibrium

under which each individual l votes in favor of pm
t

in round t if and only if (Qt+1 (pm
t ))l > (Qt+1 (pt−1 ))l . Provided that either
|J| > M or i(T ) proposes more than once, we have (pT )i(T ) ≥ 1 − N ε for all
p0 ∈ P .

A natural alternative assumption is that individuals resolve their indiﬀerence in
favor of the current proposal, rather than against it. This case is considerably more
complex.

However, one can demonstrate that the outcome satisfies the following

two properties (proof omitted): (i) virtually all surplus is divided between i(T ),
i(T − 1), and i(T − 2), and (ii) if ε <

δ
N

for some suﬃciently small δ, then as N

goes to infinity, the surplus received by i(T − 1) goes to zero at the rate

surplus received by i(T − 2) goes to zero at the rate

1
.
N2

1
N,

and the

Thus, in large groups,

the last proposer again receives essentially all of the surplus. One can extend these
results to the non-discretized simplex by invoking suitable equilibrium refinements.

6

Summary and Conclusions

In this paper, we have explored the eﬀect of real-time agenda setting on democratic
policy making.

Our analysis reveals a surprisingly robust tendency for a natural

and simple class of democratic institutions to produce high concentrations of political power.

In particular, for some familiar classes of policy spaces with rich

distributional politics, the last proposer is eﬀectively a dictator whenever a suﬃcient number of individuals have opportunities to make proposals, as well as under
a variety of related conditions. Thus, under reasonably general assumptions, control
of the final proposal with real-time agenda setting confers as much political power
as control of the entire agenda. Moreover, this outcome is more likely to arise when
more individuals have opportunities to make proposals. Ironically, the last proposer
need not have dictatorial powers unless a suﬃcient number of individuals take part
in setting the agenda. Accordingly, within the class of institutions considered in
this paper, reforms that appear to be inclusive from a procedural perspective (by

32
promoting “participatory democracy” or guaranteeing a “right to be heard”) can
have the unintended eﬀect of concentrating political power. We have also demonstrated that institutions belonging to the class considered here yield Pareto eﬃcient
outcomes and select Condorcet winners when they exist.
In Bernheim, Rangel, and Rayo [2002], we examine the sensitivity of our central
conclusions to variations in institutional rules. Some apparently minor procedural
details matter a great deal, while seemingly important rules are actually of little
consequence.

Supermajority requirements do little to overcome the dictatorial

power of the final proposer. Endogenizing the order of recognition has no eﬀect on
the high concentration of political power when a chair chooses the order in advance
of deliberations, or when the chair makes these decisions round by round but is
aligned with a particular member of the group.

In the latter case, even a chair

with “universalistic” objectives (one that wishes to implement as many elementary
policies as possible) may find it impossible to manipulate the order of recognition
so as to enact a policy that benefits more than two individuals.
When the rules of the institution permit the group to terminate deliberations
before the final round, the power of the last proposer may evaporate. However, the
particular outcome depends on the details of the termination rule.

For the least

restrictive rule (one that allows individuals to bundle policy proposals with motions
to preclude reconsideration), political power is simply transferred from the final
proposer to the first proposer (and perhaps to one other individual) in a significant
fraction of environments.

When individuals are not permitted to bundle policy

proposals with motions to preclude reconsideration, one can obtain almost anything
from inaction to a universalistic outcome, depending on the initial status quo.
If each proposal is subject to amendment before being put to a vote against
the prevailing status quo, the power of the last proposer evaporates, but in some
instances the group nevertheless selects policies that benefit small minorities (even
a single individual) at the expense of large majorities. A rule precluding the reconsideration of elementary policies once they are passed leads to outcomes that benefit
groups no larger than minimal majorities. Ironically, when such a rule is combined
with a supermajority requirement, the final outcome benefits a minority of members
at the expense of a majority, and the number of individuals benefiting from the final
outcome shrinks with the size of the required supermajority.

Limitations on the

introduction of new business near the conclusion of deliberations promote inaction.

33

Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1: For this proof, we use the notation introduced in section
3.2, except that we write Qt (p; P, Ω) rather than simply Qt (p) to make explicit
the dependence of this function (suppressed in the notation of the text) on both
the policy space P and the final stage Ω.

Also, we use I to denote the identity

mapping. Fix P, Ω, and p ∈ P. We proceed by induction. Using the definition of
QT we obtain:

QT (p; P, Ω) = ϕi(T ) (Ω(p), Ω(P )) = ϕi(T ) (I ◦ Ω(p), I ◦ Ω(P )) = QT (Ω(p); Ω(P ), I) ,
which proves the claim for t = T.
Now suppose the claim is true for t + 1, which together with the definition of Qt
implies:
Qt (p; P, Ω) = ϕi(t) (Qt+1 (p; P, Ω), Qt+1 (P ; P, Ω)) =
ϕi(t) (Qt+1 (Ω (p) ; Ω (P ) , I) , Qt+1 (Ω (P ) ; Ω (P ) , I)) = Qt (Ω(p); Ω(P ), I),
establishing the result. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 3: Aside from properties 2 and 3, theorem 3 is proven in
the text.
To prove property 2, consider p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) and any q ∈ P such that p ∈

ϕi(T ) (q, P ). Suppose that |p| > M . Choose any set S with i(T ) ∈ S and |S| = M ,

such that vl (p) ≥ vl (q) for all l ∈ S (existence of S is guaranteed because p ∈

ϕi(T ) (q, P ), but it may not be unique). S represents a minimal decisive coalition
including the last proposer, all the members of which prefer p to q. Consider some
new policy p0 formed by deleting from p all elementary policies associated with
individuals not in S (formally, p0 = p ∩ S). Note that vl (p0 ) > vl (p) for all l ∈ S
(since total costs are lower).

But then vl (p0 ) > vl (q) for all l ∈ S, which implies

p0 ∈ Z(q, P ), contradicting the fact that p = ϕi(T ) (q, P ).

To prove property 3, it is useful to distinguish between three mutually exclusive

and exhaustive cases, defined by the characteristics of pT −1 .
describe a

p0

containing the elementary policy i(T ) with

that p0 ∈ Z(pT −1 , P ).

|p0 |

For each case, we
≤ M , and we prove

Assumption A4 guarantees that vi(T ) (p0 ) > 0. Since any

34
policy p excluding the elementary policy i(T ) provides individual i(T ) with a nonpositive payoﬀ, this implies that i(T )’s best choice must result in the implementation
of some policy p00 containing the elementary policy i(T ), as desired.
Case 1: i(T ) ∈ pT −1 . If |pT −1 | ≤ M , take p0 = pT −1 . If |pT −1 | > M , suppose

that i(T ) proposes the policy p0 obtained by dropping M −1 elementary policies from

pT −1 other than i(T ). The proposed policy improves the payoﬀ to any individual
associated with an elementary policy that is not dropped. Since this group forms
a majority, p0 ∈ Z(pT −1 , P ).

Case 2: i(T ) ∈
/ pT −1 and |pT −1 | < M . Consider any p0 such that and i(T ) ∈ p0 ,

|p0 | = M , and p0 ∩pT −1 = ∅. By A4, all individuals associated with elementary poli-

cies in p0 strictly prefer p0 to p. Since this group forms a majority, p0 ∈ Z(pT −1 , P ).
Case 3: i(T ) ∈
/ pT −1 and |pT −1 | ≥ M .

Consider any p0 such that i(T ) ∈ p0 ,

|p0 | = |pT −1 |−(M −2), and p0 \{i(T )} ⊂ pT −1 (in other words, drop M −1 elementary
policies from pT −1 and add i(T )). By A3 and N ≥ 5 (which implies M ≥ 3), all
individuals are better oﬀ except those in pT −1 \p0 .
p0 ∈ Z(pT −1 , P ). Q.E.D.

Proof of Theorem 4:

But |pT −1 \p0 | = M − 1, so

The following argument makes use of properties 1-3

from section 4.1.2. We begin with a lemma. Note that the four cases stated in the
lemma are mutually exclusive and exhaustive.
Lemma 4.1: Consider any q ∈ P .
(i) If

P

k∈q ck

¢
¡
> ci(T ) , then ϕi(T ) (q, P ) ∩ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 } = ∅,

(ii) If q = {j} with cj < ci(T ) and j 6∈ HM−2 , then ϕi(T ) (q, P ) = E\ (HM−2 ∪ {j}),

¢
¡
(iii) If q = {j} with cj < ci(T ) and j ∈ HM−2 , then ϕi(T ) (q, P ) = E\ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 } ,
and

¡
¢
(iv) If q = ∅, then ϕi(T ) (q, P ) = E\ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 } .

Proof: For the proof of each part, we use p = ϕi(T ) (q, P ) for notational simplic-

ity.
(i) We begin by showing that there exists p0 ∈ Z(q, P ) such that i(T ) ∈ p0 and
P
P
k∈p0 ck <
k∈q ck . If i(T ) ∈ q, this is trivial (simply drop any elementary policy
from q). If i(T ) 6∈ q, the construct p0 as follows: if |q| > 1, drop any two elementary

policies from q and add i(T ); if |q| = 1, then p0 = {i(T )}.

35
P
P
Clearly, k∈p ck ≤ k∈p0 ck (otherwise i(T ) would propose p0 rather than p).
P
P
Thus, k∈p ck < k∈q ck .

Next we argue that j 6∈ q and j 6= i(T ) implies j 6∈ p. Suppose not. Consider

p00 = p\{j}. All individuals but j prefer p00 to p, and j prefers p00 to q (since j’s
elementary policy is excluded from both p00 and q and since the cost of p00 is lower).

Thus, all those who prefer p to q also prefer p00 to q, so p00 ∈ Z(q, P ). But then i(T )

would propose p00 rather than p, a contradiction.

Now suppose that, contrary to part (i) of the lemma, there exists some j ∈
¡
¢
p ∩ i∗M−1 ∪ HM−2 . Let S = {i ∈ E | vi (p) > vi (q)}. Then |S| = M (if |S| > M ,
then p\{j} ∈ Z(q, P ), and i(T ) prefers p\{j} to p, so p 6∈ ϕi(T ) (q, P )). Since p is less

costly than q, we must have E\S ⊆ q and (E\S) ∩ p = ∅ (otherwise an individual in
E\S would prefer p to q). Since |E\S| = M −1, and since i(T ) 6∈ E\S, there is some

j 0 ∈ E\S with cj 0 < cj . Consider pb formed by deleting j from p and inserting j 0 .
P
P
P
Clearly, k∈bp ck < k∈p ck < k∈q ck . Thus, all members of S\{j} strictly prefer
pb to p and p to q, while j 0 clearly prefers pb to q. Since |(S\{j}) ∪ {j 0 }| = M , we have

pb ∈ Z(q, P ). But since i(T ) strictly prefers pb to p, this contradicts p = ϕi(T ) (q, P ).

(ii) Since i(T ) ∈ p, we know that j strictly prefers q to p. It follows that j 6∈ p

(if not, then p\{j} ∈ Z(q, P ), and i(T ) strictly prefers p\{j} to p, a contradiction).

Moreover, since i(T ) ∈ p and ci(T ) > cj , we know that individual i prefers p to q

only if i ∈ p.

Thus, |p| ≥ M .

Clearly, E\ (HM−2 ∪ {j}) ∈ Z(q, P ).

Moreover,

with j 6∈ HM−2 , this is the lowest cost policy containing i(T ) and at least M − 1

other elementary components other than j. Thus, it is i(T )’s best choice.
¡
¢
(iii) The proof is identical to that of part (ii), except that E\ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 }
takes the place of E\ (HM−2 ∪ {j}).

(iv) Since i(T ) ∈ p and ci(T ) > 0, we know that individual i prefers p to q only
¢
¡
if i ∈ p. Thus, |p| ≥ M . Clearly, E\ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 } ∈ Z(q, P ). Moreover,

it is the lowest cost policy containing i(T ) and at least M − 1 other elementary
components. Thus, it is i(T )’s best choice. Q.E.D.

Proof of part (b1): Lemma 4.1 and i(T ) ∈ p imply that all members of HM−2

prefer {i(T )} to all other elements of Φi(T ) (P ).
individual i(T ).

The same is obviously true for

Given that {i(T )} is a Condorcet winner in Φi(T ) (P ) (see the

proof of theorem 3), part (b1) of theorem 4 follows from theorem 2, part (2).

Proof of part (a): If i(T −1) ∈ HM−2 ∪{i(T )}, we know the outcome is {i(T )}

by part (b1). So, throughout the rest of the proof of part (a), we will suppose that

36
¢
¡
i(T − 1) ∈ E\ {i(T ), i∗M−1 } ∪ HM−2 ≡ LM−1 (note that LM−1 is the set of M − 1
least costly elementary policies other than i(T )).

We claim that {i(T −1), i(T )} ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). In particular, consider q = {i(T ), i(T −

1), i∗M−1 } ∪ HM−2 . Note that {i(T − 1), i(T )} ∈ Z(q, P ) (it is strictly preferred to
¢
¡
q by members of E\ {i∗M−1 } ∪ HM−2 ). The only elements of P that i(T ) prefers

to {i(T − 1), i(T )} are {i(T )} and {i(T ), j} where cj < ci(T −1) .

members of {i(T

− 1), i∗M−1 } ∪ HM−2

Note that all

strictly prefer q to both {i(T )} and {i(T ), j}

(since i(T − 1) ∈ LM−1 and cj < ci(T −1) implies j 6∈ {i(T − 1), i∗M−1 } ∪ HM−2 ).

Consequently, {i(T )}, {i(T ), j} 6∈ Z(q, P ). But then {i(T − 1), i(T )} = ϕi(T ) (q, P ),
as required.

Now we establish that Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) = {{i(T )}, {i(T − 1), i(T )}}.

theorem 3, we know that {i(T )} ∈ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ).

By

Since i(T ) ∈ p for all

p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) and since {i(T − 1), i(T )} ∈ Φi(T ) (P ), we have {i(T − 1), i(T )} =
ϕi(T −1) ({i(T −1), i(T )}, Φi(T ) (P )) ∈ Φi(T −1) ◦Φi(T ) (P ). We claim that p 6∈ Φi(T −1) ◦

Φi(T ) (P ) for all other p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). Suppose not. Consider any q ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) such
that p ∈ ϕi(T −1) (q, Φi(T ) (P )) for p 6∈ {{i(T )}, {i(T − 1), i(T )}}. There are two cases

to consider.

(i) i(T − 1) 6∈ p. Since {i(T )} is a Condorcet winner in Φi(T ) (P ), we know that

{i(T )} ∈ Z(q, Φi(T ) (P )).

But since i(T ) ∈ p, individual i(T − 1) strictly prefers

{i(T )} to p. Thus, p 6∈ ϕi(T −1) (q, Φi(T ) ), a contradiction.

(ii) i(T −1) ∈ p. Since i(T ) ∈ p, we know that |p| ≥ 3. Since p ∈ Z(q, Φi(T ) (P ))

and |p| ≤ M , we must also have |q| ≥ 3 (otherwise all members of (E\p) ∪ {i(T )},
a majority, would prefer q to p).

Everyone in (E\q) ∪ {i(T )} must then prefer

{i(T − 1), i(T )} to q. Since |q| ≤ M and i(T ) ∈ q, this is a majority, so {i(T −
¢
¡
1), i(T )} ∈ Z q, Φi(T ) (P ) . But since i(T − 1) prefers {i(T − 1), i(T )} to p, we have

a contradiction. This completes the proof of part (a).
Proof of part (b2):

From part (a), we know that Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) =

{{i(T )}, {i(T − 1), i(T )}}. All individuals other than i(T − 1) strictly prefer {i(T )}

to {i(T −1), i(T )}. Consequently, for any j 6= i(T −1), Φj ({{i(T − 1), i(T )}, {i(T )}}) =
{i(T )}. The desired result follows directly. Q.E.D.

Proof of Theorem 5: The proof consists of two steps.
Step 1: Characterization of Φi(T −1) ◦Φi(T ) (P ). There are four cases to consider.
(a) i(T − 1) ∈ HM−2 ∪ {i(T )}. Then, by theorem 4, part (b1), we know that

Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) = {i(T )}.

37
(b) i(T − 1) ∈ LM−1 (defined, as in the proof of theorem 4, as the M − 1 lowest

cost elementary policies other than i(T )). From the proof of theorem 4, part (a),
we know that Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) = {{i(T )}, {i(T − 1), i(T )}}.

Note that, in this

case, Φj ◦ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) = {i(T )} for any j 6= i(T − 1).

(c) i(T − 1) = i∗M−1 and i(T ) is not the lowest cost elementary policy. We

claim that, if p is an element of Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ), then either p = {i(T )}, or p is
of the form E\ (HM−2 ∪ {j}) for j ∈ LM−1 . Suppose Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) contains

some other policy p. Consider any q ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) such that p = ϕi(T ) (q, Φi(T ) (P )).
From the proof of theorem 3, we know that {i(T )} ∈ Z(q, Φi(T ) (P )).
4.1, we know that i∗M−1 6∈ p.

contradiction.

By lemma

Thus, i∗M−1 strictly prefers {i(T )} to p, which is a

Note that, in this case, Φj ◦ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) = {i(T )} for any

j ∈ HM−2 ∪ {i(T )}.

(d) i(T − 1) = i∗M−1 and i(T ) is the lowest cost elementary policy.

Then by

lemma 4.1 parts (i) and (iv), i∗M−1 6∈ p for all p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). But then, by theorem
2 part (2), Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) = {i(T )}.

Step 2. Computation of the function B(N, T ). There are two cases to consider.

Case 1: i(T ) is not the lowest cost elementary policy. In that case, according
to step 1, the process can yield an outcome other than {i(T )} only if either (a)

i(t) = i(T − 1) ∈ LM−1 for all t < T − 1, or (b) i(T − 1) = i∗M−1 and i(t) 6∈

HM−2 ∪ {i(T )} for all t < T − 1.
recognition orders:

µ

N −1
N

Case 1(a) occurs for the following fraction of

¶µ

M −1
N

¶µ

1
N

¶T −2

.

Case 1(b) occurs in the fraction of recognition orders:
¶ µ ¶ µ ¶T −2
µ
1
M
N −1
.
N
N
N

Case 2: i(T ) is the lowest cost elementary policy. In this case, according to step
1, the process can yield an outcome other than {i(T )} only if i(t) = i(T −1) ∈ LM−1
for all t < T − 1, which occurs in the following fraction of orders:
¶ µ ¶T −2
µ ¶µ
1
1
M −1
.
N
N
N

Combining these expressions, we find that the fraction of orders producing {i(T )}

is at least:

1−

µ

M −1
N

¶µ

1
N

¶T −2

−

µ

N −1
N

¶µ

1
N

¶µ

M
N

¶T −2

.

38
We replace M −1 with

N−1
2

and factor to obtain the formula for B(N, T ). Q.E.D.

Proof of Theorem 6: We begin the proof with a lemma.
Lemma 6.1: For any p ∈ P and t < T , the total cost of Qt (p) is not greater than
the total cost of QT (p).

Proof: Note first that, for any p ∈ P , if Qt (p) 6= Qt+1 (p), then a majority of

individuals must strictly prefer Qt (p) to Qt+1 (p).

Next we argue that, for all t = 1, ..., T − 1, the total cost of Qt (p) is not greater

than the total cost of Qt+1 (p) (the lemma follows directly). Suppose on the con-

trary the that total cost of Qt (p) is greater than the total cost of Qt+1 (p) for some
such t.

Then all members of E\Qt (p) strictly prefer Qt+1 (p) to Qt (p).

vidual i(T ) also prefers Qt+1 (p) to Qt (p) (since both policies include i(T )).

IndiBut

|{i(T )} ∪ (E\Qt (p))| ≥ M (since i(T ) ∈ Qt (p) and |Qt (p)| ≤ M ), which contradicts

the fact that Qt (p) must be majority-preferred to Qt+1 (p). Q.E.D.
Now we prove the theorem.

Part (i): Consider once again the four mutually exclusive and exhaustive cases
discussed in the proof of theorem 5, step 1.
Φi(T ) (P ) = {i(T )}, so Q1 (p0 ) = {i(T )}.

For cases (a) and (d), Φi(T −1) ◦

For case (b), Φj ◦ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ) =

{i(T )} for any j 6= i(T − 1), so as long as |J| > 2 (which assures i(t) 6= i(T − 1) for
some t < T − 1), Q1 (p0 ) = {i(T )}.

Now consider case (c). We claim that QT (p0 ) is no more costly than the policy
P
LM−1 ∪{i(T )}. By assumption, either p0 = 0 or j∈p0 cj > ci(T ) . First consider the
¡
¢
subcase where p0 = ∅. By lemma 4.1 part (iv), QT (p0 ) = E\ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 } =
P
LM−1 ∪{i(T )}, as required. Next consider the subcase where j∈p0 cj > ci(T ) . Note
that (p0 ∩ LM−1 ) ∪ {i(T )} ∈ Z(p0 , P ) (since it omits from p0 no more than M − 1
elementary policies).

Thus, QT (p0 ) must be no more costly than LM−1 ∪ {i(T )}

(or i(T ) would propose (p0 ∩ LM−1 ) ∪ {i(T )} instead).

In light of the preceding claim, lemma 6.1 tells us that Q1 (p0 ) is no more costly

than LM−1 ∪ {i(T )}. We know from the proof of theorem 5 that if p is an element
of Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ), then either p = {i(T )}, or p is of the form E\ (HM−2 ∪ {j})
for j ∈ LM−1 . Also recall that Q1 (p0 ) ∈ Φi(T −1) ◦ Φi(T ) (P ). But E\ (HM−2 ∪ {j})

for j ∈ LM−1 is more costly than LM−1 ∪ {i(T )} (since the latter policy is the same
¢
¡
as E\ HM−2 ∪ {i∗M−1 } . Thus, Qt (p0 ) = {i(T )}, as desired.

39
Part (ii): If |p0 | ≤ M − 1 and

QT (p0 ) = {i(T )}.

P

j∈p0 cj

> ci(T ) , then {i(T )} ∈ Z(p0 , P ), so

Since {i(T )} is strictly less costly than all other policies in

Φi(T ) (P ) (given that all such policies contain i(T )), lemma 6.1 implies immediately
that Q1 (p0 ) = {i(T )}.

Part (iii): From the argument given in the proof of theorem 2 and the fact that

{i(T )} is a Condorcet winner in Φi(T ) (P ), we know that vl (Q1 (p0 )) ≥ vl ({i(T )})
for all l ∈ J\{i(T )}.

By lemma 6.1, |Q1 (p0 )| ≤ |QT (p0 )| < |J|.

Consequently,

since i(T ) ∈ Q1 (p0 ), there exists l0 ∈ J\{i(T )} such that l0 6∈ Q1 (p0 ).

But then

vl0 (Q1 (p0 )) ≥ vl0 ({i(T )}) implies Q1 (p0 ) = {i(T )}. Q.E.D.

iA

Proof of Theorem 7: Consider the selection of a proposal in round T − 2. Let

and iB denote the two members of Θ who make proposals after T − 2. Suppose

in addition that i∗M−1 ∈
/ {iA , iB } (which occurs with probability
to part (a) of theorem 4, all individuals know that, if

ik

N−2
N ).

According

is chosen to propose last

(k = A, B), the final outcome will be either {ik } or {iA , iB }. From the perspective of

round T −2, all individuals other than iA and iB (including i(T −2)) would therefore

strictly prefer an outcome that produces iA when iA is chosen to propose last, and

iB when B is chosen to propose last, to any other outcome that is achievable given
the continuation equilibria for rounds T − 1 and T . Suppose that i(T − 2) proposes
{iA , iB }, and that the proposal passes. In round T − 1, all individuals other than

iA and iB know that if they vote against pm
t (regardless of what it is), the ultimate
outcome will be ik (with pT −1 = {iA , iB }, ik will propose {ik } in the final round,

k
and this will pass). Consequently, they will vote for pm
t only if it also yields {i }

as the final outcome. Thus, passing the proposal {iA , iB } in round T − 2 produces

iA when iA is chosen to propose last, and iB when iB is chosen to propose last. If

i(T − 2)’s equilibrium proposal led to any other outcome, i(T − 2) would have an

incentive to deviate to the proposal {iA , iB }, and all individuals other than iA and

iB would have an incentive to support it.

Thus, as long as i∗M−1 ∈
/ {iA , iB }, the

process implements the elementary policy associated with the last proposer, and
nothing else. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 8: We begin with some notation. For any i ∈ I and q ∈ P ,

let G(q) denote some set of M − 1 individuals, not including i(T ), satisfying the
¡
¢
following condition: j ∈ G(q) implies vj ϕi(T ) (q, P ) ≥ vj (q). That is, G(q) repre-

sents a group of M − 1 individuals other than i(T ) who (weakly) prefer ϕi(T ) (q, P )

40
to q (by A2, equality will hold only if q = ϕi(T ) (q, P )). By the definition of ϕi(T ) (·),
one can always identify such a group, though it need not be unique. When it is not
unique, G(q) represents some arbitrary selection from the set of groups satisfying
this condition.

Let Γ(q) denote the set of M − 1 individuals which is the com-

plement of G(q) ∪ {i(T )} in I. The support of individuals in Γ(q) is not required

for the passage of ϕi (q, P ) (although in any given instance some members of this

group may nevertheless prefer this outcome to q).

Thus, one can think of Γ(q)

as the “minority.” Finally, we define ϕ−1
(p, P ) as the set of policies q such that
i(T )
p = ϕi(T ) (q, P ). Note that this inverse exists for all p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ).

Step 1: As in the proof of theorem 3, we proceed by demonstrating that

Φi(T ) (P ) has the following three properties.
Property 1: Ei(T ) ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). As before, this is straightforward, since Ei(T ) =

ϕi(T ) (Ei(T ) , P ).

Property 2: For any p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) and q ∈ ϕ−1
i(T ) (p, P ), we have |pj | = 0 for all

j ∈ Γ (q).

¡
¢
0 = p∩ ∪
(p,
P
).
Define
p
Suppose not. Consider any policy q ∈ ϕ−1
E
j
j∈G(q)∪{i(T
)}
i(T )

(in other words, delete all elementary policies associated with individuals in Γ (q)

from p). Plainly, all j ∈ G (q) ∪ {i(T )} strictly prefer p0 to p and weakly prefer p
to q, so p0 ∈ Z (q, P ). But since i(T ) prefers p0 to p, this contradicts the fact that

p = ϕi(T ) (q, P ).

Property 3: For any p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) with p 6= Ei(T ) , we have C(p) > C(Ei(T ) ).

By assumption A5, this is obviously the case for any p with |p| ≥ M − 1. So for

the remainder of this proof, we focus on the case of p with |p| < M − 1. Consider
any q ∈ ϕ−1
i(T ) (p, P ). Note for future reference that |pj | = 0 for some j ∈ G(q) (since

|p| < M − 1).

We prove property 3 through a series of three claims.
Claim 1: C(q) ≥ C(p). Assume on the contrary that C(p) > C(q).

For all

j ∈ G(q) with |pj | = 0, we have vj (p) = −C(p) < −C(q) ≤ vj (q), which contradicts

j ∈ G(q).

Claim 2: If C(q) = C(p), then p = Ei(T ) . By assumption A2, C(q) = C(p)

implies q = p. Assume contrary to the claim that p 6= Ei(T ) . There are two cases

to consider.

¯
¯
¯
¯
Case 1: |pj | = 0 for all j 6= i(T ). Consider any p0 such that ¯p0i(T ) ¯ = Ki(T ) ,
¯ ¯
¯ ¯
¯ 0¯
¯ ¯
/ G(q) ∪ {i(T )}. By assumption A6, all
¯pj ¯ = 1 for j ∈ G(q), and ¯p0j ¯ = 0 for j ∈

41
j ∈ G(q) ∪ {i(T )} strictly prefer p0 to p. Since p = q, we have p0 ∈ Z(q, P ). Since

i(T ) strictly prefers p to p0 , we have p 6= ϕi(T ) (q, P ), a contradiction.
Case 2: |pj ∗ | > 0 for some j ∗ 6= i(T ).

Consider p0 constructed as follows:

p0 = p\Ej ∗ . All individuals but j ∗ strictly prefer p0 to p. Since p = q, p0 ∈ Z(q, P ).
Since i(T ) strictly prefers p0 to p, we have p 6= ϕi(T ) (q, P ), a contradiction.

Claim 3: If C(q) > C(p) and p 6= Ei(T ) , then C(p) > C(Ei(T ) ). We prove claim

3 through a series of three steps. Throughout, we assume that C(q) > C(p) and
p 6= Ei(T ) .

3.1: ∃j ∗ ∈ G(q) such that |pj ∗ | > 0. Suppose not. Then, by property 2, |pj | = 0

for all j 6= i(T ). Arguing exactly as in the proof of case 1 for claim 2, this can only
be the case if p = Ei(T ) , a contradiction.

3.2: |qj | > 0 for all j ∈ Γ(q). Suppose on the contrary that there exists some

j ∈ Γ(q) such that |qj | = 0. Then, since C(q) > C(p), we have vj (p) > vj (q). In

that case, p is preferred to q by all members of G(q) ∪ {i(T ), j}, which constitutes a

supermajority. Consider p0 defined as follows: p0 = p\Ej ∗ (where j ∗ was identified in

step 3.1). Note that p0 is strictly preferred to p by all individuals in G(q) ∪ {i(T ), j}
except for j ∗ . Since p is preferred to q by all members of this same group, a strict

majority prefers p0 to q. Thus, p0 ∈ Z(q, P ). Since i(T ) strictly prefers p0 to p, we

have p 6= ϕi(T ) (q), a contradiction.

3.3: pi(T ) = Ei(T ) (from which it follows immediately that C(p) > C(Ei(T ) ), as

desired). Suppose not. Divide the set G(q) into the following two subsets:
A = {j ∈ G(q) | C(pj ) < C(qj ) − c} and B = G(q)\A.
Now construct p0 as follows:
p0i(T ) = Ei(T ) ,
p0j = 0 = pj for j ∈ Γ(q),
¯ ¯
p0j ⊇ pj and ¯p0j ¯ = |pj | + 1 for j ∈ A,
p0j = qj for j ∈ B.

¢
¡
Note that C(p0j ) ≤ C(pj ) + c for all j ∈ G(q). Thus, C(p0 ) ≤ C(p) + K + M − 1 c.

42
Note also that C(p0j ) ≤ C(qj ) for j ∈ G(q). Thus,

¡
¢
C(p0 ) = C(p0i(T ) ) + C ∪j∈G(q) p0j
¢
¡
≤ Kc + C ∪j∈G(q) qj
¢ £ ¡
¢
¤
¡
≤ Kc + C ∪j∈G(q) qj + C ∪j∈Γ(q) qj − (M − 1)c + C(qi(T ) )
£
¤
= C(q) − (M − 1)c − Kc
< C(q)

(where we have used step 3.2 for the second inequality and A5 for the final inequality). Thus, C(p0 ) < C(q).
Consider any j ∈ A ∪ {i(T )}. Note that

¡
¢
vj (p0 ) − vj (p) ≥ b − C(p0 ) − C(p)
¡
¢
≥ b− K +M −1 c
> 0

by assumption A6.

Thus, all such j strictly prefer p0 to p.

Since A ∪ {i(T )} ⊆

G (q) ∪ {i(T )}, these same individuals strictly prefer p to q, and therefore strictly
prefer p0 to q.

Now consider any j ∈ B. Since p0j = qj , we have vj (p0 )−vj (q) = C(q)−C(p0 ) > 0.

Thus, all such j strictly prefer p0 to q.
q.

From the preceding, it follows that all j ∈ G (q) ∪ {i(T )} strictly prefer p0 to
Thus, p0 ∈ Z(q, P ).

But since i(T ) strictly prefers p0 to p, this implies that

p 6= ϕi(T ) (q, P ), which is a contradiction.

Step 2: Now we argue that Ei(T ) is a Condorcet winner in Φi(T ) (P ).

By

property 1, we know that Ei(T ) ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). Consider any p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) other than
Ei(T ) .

Let q be any policy in ϕ−1
i(T ) (p, P ). By properties 2 and 3, we know that,

for all j ∈ Γ(q), we have vj (Ei(T ) ) − vj (p) = C(p) − C(Ei(T ) ) > 0. Thus, all such
j strictly prefer Ei(T ) to p. Obviously, i(T ) also strictly prefers Ei(T ) to p. Since

|Γ(q)| = M − 1, a majority of individuals strictly prefer Ei(T ) to p, as required.

Step 3: To complete the proof of the theorem, we apply lemma 1 and theorem

2, exactly as in the proof of theorem 3. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 9: Consider any p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). Throughout, we use q to

denote some policy for which p = ϕi(T ) (q, P ) (if there is more than one such policy,
we select one arbitrarily).

43
The proof of this theorem requires the following two preliminary results.
Lemma 9.1: Suppose Ns ≥ N ∗ .

Consider any decisive set L ⊆ E with s ∈ L.

Then there is a minimally decisive set L0 ⊆ L with s ∈ L0 .

Proof: Let S ≡ |L|.

Let the function µ : {1, ..., S} → L be such that, for

all l ∈ {1, ..., S}, we have (i) for all l, l0 ∈ {1, ..., S}, µ(l) 6= µ(l0 ), (ii) for all l ∈

{2, ..., S}, Nµ(l) ≥ Nµ(l−1) , and (iii) if Nµ(l) = Ns for some l with µ(l) 6= s, then

l < µ−1 (s). In other words, µ−1 (·) indexes the elements of L in order of increasing

size (with s placed after other groups of equal size). Since L is decisive, we know
P
that Sl=1 Nµ(l) ≥ M . Moreover, Nµ(S) < M (otherwise we would have N ∗ =

Nµ(S) ≥ M , which would violate A7). Accordingly, there exists some integer z ∈
P
P
{1, ..., S} such that Sl=z Nµ(l) ≥ M and Sl=z+1 Nµ(l) < M . Let L0 = {µ(z), µ(z +
P
P
1), ..., µ(S)}. In light of (ii), Sl=z+1 Nµ(l) < M implies that j∈L0 Nj −Nk < M for
all k ∈ L0 . Thus, L0 is minimally decisive. Let L00 = {l ∈ E | Nl > N ∗ }. In light
P
P
of (iii) and the fact that Ns ≥ N ∗ , we have Sl=µ−1 (s)+1 Nµ(l) ≤ j∈L00 Nj < M .
Thus, z ≤ µ−1 (s), which implies s ∈ L0 . Q.E.D.

Lemma 9.2: There exists p0 ∈ Z(q, P ) such that r(i(T )) ∈ p0 and p0 ⊆ L for some
L ∈ Λ.

Proof: There are two cases to consider.
Case 1: r(i(T )) ∈ q.

If q is not decisive, take p0 = {r(i(T ))}. Notice that p0 is preferred to q (weakly

if q = p0 ) for the decisive set E\q, so p0 ∈ Z(q, P ).

Moreover, we know that

{r(i(T ))} ⊆ L for some L ∈ Λ (this follows directly from lemma 9.1, since one can
always find a decisive set containing r(i(T ))).

If q is minimally decisive, simply take p0 = q.
If q is decisive but not minimally decisive, then, by lemma 9.1, there exists some
P
P
minimally decisive set p0 ⊆ q such that r(i(T )) ∈ p0 . Since j∈p0 cj < j∈q cj , all
j ∈ p0 strictly prefer p0 to q, so p0 ∈ Z(q, P ).

Case 2: r(i(T )) ∈
/ q.
P
First suppose that j∈q Nj ≥ M . By deleting elements of q starting with those

associated with the smallest groups and moving to the largest, one can find some
P
q 0 ⊂ q such that M > j∈q0 Nj ≥ M − N ∗ . Construct q 00 = (q\q0 ) ∪ {r(i(T ))}. By
P
P
A7, j∈q00 cj < j∈q cj . Thus, all individuals in any group l ∈ E\q 0 strictly prefer

44
q 00 to q. By construction, E\q 0 is decisive. By lemma 9.1, we know there exists
some L ⊆ E\q 0 with r(i(T )) ∈ L and L ∈ Λ. Let p0 = L ∩ q00 . Individuals within

groups belonging to L (weakly) prefer p0 to q 00 , and strictly prefer q 00 to q. Thus,

p0 = Z(q, P ), as required.
P
Now imagine that j∈q Nj < M . Note that the set E\q is decisive. Thus, by

lemma 9.1, there is a minimally decisive set p0 ⊆ E\q with r(i(T )) ∈ p0 . By A8, all

individuals belonging to groups within p0 strictly prefer p0 to q. Thus, p0 ∈ Z(q, P ).

Q.E.D.

Now we return to the proof of the theorem. Much as in the proof of theorem 3,
we proceed by establishing three properties of Φi(T ) (P ).
Property 1: {r(i(T ))} ∈ Φi(T ) (P ).

Since {r(i(T ))} is the favorite policy of individual i(T ), we have {r(i(T ))} =

ϕi(T ) ({r(i(T ))}, P ).

Property 2: p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) implies p ⊆ L for some L ∈ Λ.

Assume not. Let Ψ denote the set of groups that (weakly) prefer p to q. Clearly,

Ψ is decisive, and Ψ contains r(i(T )). From lemma 9.1, we know that there exists
some L ∈ Λ with L ⊆ Ψ and r({i(T )}) ∈ L. Consider the policy p0 = p∩L. Since it
P
P
is not the case that p ⊆ L, we have p0 ⊂ p, so l∈p0 cl < l∈p cl . Consequently, all

members of any group j ∈ p0 (including r(i(T ))) strictly prefer p0 to p. Since these
individuals also (weakly) prefer p to q, they strictly prefer p0 to q, which implies

p0 ∈ Z(q, P ). But since i(T ) strictly prefers p0 to p, this contradicts p ∈ ϕi(T ) (q, P ).
Property 3: p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) implies r(i(T )) ∈ p.

Suppose that the property is false, i.e. that there exists p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ) with

r(i(T )) 6∈ p.

Then vi(T ) (p) ≤ 0.

Lemma 9.2 establishes the existence of some

p0 ∈ Z(q, P ) such that r(i(T )) ∈ p0 and p0 ⊆ L for some L ∈ Λ. Clearly, vi(T ) (p0 ) ≥
vi(T ) (L) > 0, where the second inequality follows from A8. Thus, p 6∈ ϕi(T ) (q, P ),

which is a contradiction.

Now we prove the theorem. In particular, we claim that {r(i(T ))} is a Condorcet

winner in Φi(T ) (P ). By property 1, we know that {r(i(T ))} ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). Consider
P
any other p ∈ Φi(T ) (P ). By property 3, j∈p cj > cr(i(T )) . Thus, all individuals

within groups j ∈ E\p strictly prefer {r(i(T ))} to p, as do individuals within r(i(T )).

Note that the set of individuals who strictly prefer {r(i(T ))} to p can be written
as E\ (p\{r(i(T ))}). Since, by property 2, p ⊆ L for some L ∈ Λ, we know that
p\{r(i(T ))} is not decisive. But then E\ (p\{r(i(T ))}) is decisive, as required.

45
Since {r(i(T ))} is a Condorcet winner in Φi(T ) (P ), we know (from the argu-

ment used in the proof of Theorem 2) that, for all p ∈ Q1 (P ), we have vi (p) ≥
vi ({r(i(T ))}) for all i ∈ J 00 ≡ {j | j = i(t) for some t = 1, ..., T − 1}, and hence

If J 00 ∩ Ir(i(T )) is non-empty, then the fact that vi (p) ≥
¯
¯
vi ({r(i(T ))}) for i ∈ J 00 ∩ Ir(i(T )) requires p = {r(i(T ))}. If |J 0 | ≥ M + ¯Ir(i(T )) ¯,
¯
¯
then ¯∪j∈J 00 Ir(j) ¯ ≥ M , in which case the fact that vi (p) ≥ vi ({r(i(T ))}) for all
for all i ∈ ∪j∈J 00 Ir(j) .

i ∈ ∪j∈J 00 Ir(j) implies p = {r(i(T ))} (otherwise {r(i(T ))} would not be a Condorcet
winner). Q.E.D.

Proof of Theorem 10: The theorem is trivial when ε ≥ 1/N . Consequently,

assume ε < 1/N . We begin with two lemmas.

. Under either of the following condiLemma 10.1: Consider any pT −1 ∈ ∆N−1
ε

tions, there exists some set of individuals S with i(T ) 6∈ S and |S| = M − 1

such that (QT (pT −1 ))l = 0 if and only if l ∈ S.
(i) QT (pT −1 ) 6= pT −1 ,
(ii)(QT (pT −1 ))i(T ) < 1 − N ε.
Proof:

(i) Since QT (pT −1 ) 6= pT −1 , there exists a set S 00 with i(T ) 6∈ S 00

and |S 00 | = M − 1 such that (QT (pT −1 ))l > (pT −1 )l ≥ 0 for l ∈ S 00 .

that (QT (pT −1 ))l = 0 for all l ∈

E\ (S 00

∪ {i(T )}).

Suppose not.

We claim

Consider p0

constructed as follows: p0l = 0 for l ∈ E\ (S 00 ∪ {i(T )}), p0l = (QT (pT −1 ))l for
P
l ∈ S 00 , and p0i(T ) = (QT (pT −1 ))i(T ) + i∈E\S 00 (QT (pT −1 ))i (in other words, divert

all surplus from members of E\ (S 00 ∪ {i(T )}) to i(T )).
l ∈ S 00 ∪ {i(T )}.

Plainly, p0l > (pT −1 )l for

Since |S 00 ∪ {i(T )}| = M , the policy p0 would pass if proposed

in round T ; since p0i(T ) > (QT (pT −1 ))i(T ) , individual i(T ) would therefore have
an incentive to propose it.
is i(T )’s optimal proposal.

But this contradicts the hypothesis that QT (pT −1 )

Since (QT (pT −1 ))l = 0 for l ∈ E\ (S 00 ∪ {i(T )}) and

|E\ (S 00 ∪ {i(T )})| = M − 1, we must have (QT (pT −1 ))i(T ) > (pT −1 )i(T ) ≥ 0 (or

QT (pT −1 ) would not pass).
conclusion.

Taking S = E\ (S 00 ∪ {i(T )}) delivers the desired

(ii) In light of part (i), we prove this by showing that QT (pT −1 ) 6= pT −1 . Sup-

pose on the contrary that QT (pT −1 ) = pT −1 . Since (pT −1 )i(T ) < 1 − N ε, we have
P
0
0
j6=i(T ) (pT −1 )j ≥ (N + 1) ε, which implies the existence of a set S with i(T ) 6∈ S

46
and |S 0 | =

N−1
2

= M − 1 such that

P

j∈S 0

(pT −1 )j ≥

¡ N+1 ¢
2

ε = M ε. It is therefore

possible to construct a policy p0 with the property that p0j ≥ (pT −1 )j +ε for all j 6∈ S 0 .

All members of E\S 0 , including i(T ), strictly prefer p0 to pT −1 . Since |E\S 0 | = M ,

the policy p0 would pass if proposed in round T , and i(T ) would therefore have an
incentive to propose it. But this contradicts the hypothesis that QT (pT −1 ) = pT −1 .
Q.E.D.
Lemma 10.2: Consider any set A with i(T ) 6∈ A and |A| = M − 1.

Define the

A
policy xA as follows: xA
i(T ) = 1−(M −1)ε; for l ∈ A, xl = ε; for l 6∈ A∪{i(T )},
A
A
xA
l = 0. Then Qt (x ) = x for all t = 1, ..., T .

Proof: First consider the case of t = T . If QT (xA ) 6= xA , then there must be M
¡
¢
¡
¢
A
individuals with QT (xA ) l > xA
l . But this can only be the case if QT (x ) i(T ) <

A
xA
i(T ) , which implies that i(T ) would not propose QT (x ), a contradiction.

Now suppose that Qt+1 (xA ) = xA .

Imagine that, contrary to the claim,
¡
¢
¢
¡
Qt (xA ) 6= xA . Then there must be M individuals with Qt (xA ) l > Qt+1 (xA ) l =
¡
¢
A
A
xA
l . Once again, this can only be the case if Qt (x ) i(T ) < xi(T ) . But then we
¢
¡
know that there is some set B with |B| = M and i(T ) 6∈ B such that Qt (xA ) l >
¡
¢
∗
Qt+1 (xA ) l = xA
l . Since |A| = M − 1, there is at least on individual, j , in both A
and B.

Consider some equilibrium from round t onward, given pt−1 = xA , for which the
outcome is Qt (xA ). Let pA
T −1 denote the status quo at the outset of round T on
A
the equilibrium path. Plainly, QT (pA
T −1 ) = Qt (x ). There are two possibilities.

∗
A
(i) pA
T −1 = QT (pT −1 ). Consider any set D = B\{j} for some j ∈ B\{j }. Since
¡
¡
¡
¢
¢
¢
P
Qt (xA ) l ≥ ε for l ∈ D\{j ∗ } and Qt (xA ) j ∗ ≥ 2ε, we have l∈D Qt (xA ) l ≥ M ².
¡
¢
Consequently, we can construct a policy p0 with p0l = Qt (xA ) l + ε for l ∈ E\D.
0
A
Since pA
T −1 = Qt (x ) and |E\D| = M , if p is proposed in round T , it will pass.

Since i(T ) prefers p0 to Qt (xA ), i(T ) will propose p0 , which contradicts the hypothesis
that the outcome is Qt (xA ).
A
(ii) pA
T −1 6= QT (pT −1 ). Then, by lemma 10.1 part (i), there exists a set S with

i(T ) 6∈ S and |S| = M − 1 such that (QT (pT −1 ))l = 0 for all l ∈ S.

But this

contradicts the existence of the set B. Q.E.D.

Now suppose, contrary to the theorem, that there exists p0 such that (Q1 (p0 ))i(T ) <
1 − N ε. Consider some equilibrium resulting in the outcome Q1 (p0 ), and suppose

that, for each t = 1, .., T , the policy pbt−1 is the status quo at the outset of each round

47
pt−1 ) = Q1 (p0 ).
t on the equilibrium path (by construction pb0 = p0 ). Plainly, Qt (b

We claim that, for all t ∈ 1, ..., T − 1, we have (Qt+1 (b
pt−1 ))i(T ) < 1 − N ε.

pt0 −1 ))i(T ) ≥ 1 − N ε.
Suppose on the contrary that there is some t0 for which (Qt0 +1 (b

Then we know that, in equilibrium, pbt0 6= pbt0 −1 is proposed in round t0 and it passes

(so that the outcome is Qt0 +1 (b
pt0 ) rather than Qt0 +1 (b
pt0 −1 )). But, by lemma 10.1

part (ii), there exists a set of individuals S with i(T ) 6∈ S and |S| = M − 1 such

that (Qt0 +1 (b
pt0 ))l = (QT (b
pT −1 ))l = 0 for all l ∈ S. Moreover, (Qt0 +1 (b
pt0 ))i(T ) <
(Qt0 +1 (b
pt0 −1 ))i(T ) . Thus, under the assumption that those who are indiﬀerent vote

against proposals, at least M individuals (those in S ∪{i(T )}) vote against pbt0 , which
contradicts the hypothesis that pbt0 passes.

Since (Qt+1 (b
pt−1 ))i(T ) < 1 − N ε, we know from lemma 10.1 part (ii) that, for

every round t, there exists some set of individuals S(t) with i(T ) 6∈ S(t) and |S(t)| =
pt−1 ))l = 0 if and only if l ∈ S(t). Imagine that i(t) proposes
M −1 such that (Qt+1 (b

xS(t) (as described in lemma 10.2, with A = S(t)). If the proposal passes, we know
S(t)

by lemma 10.2 that the outcome is xS(t) . Since xl

pt−1 ))l for all l ∈ S(t)
> (Qt+1 (b

as well as for l = i(T ) (given that (Qt+1 (b
pt−1 ))i(T ) < 1 − N ε), we know that the

proposal passes (given that |S(t) ∪ {i(T )}| = M ).
proposes more than once.

Consider the case where i(T )

In any round t < T for which i(t) = i(T ), individual

i(T ) would gain by deviating to the proposal xS(t) , contradicting the assumption of
equilibrium.

Now consider the case where |J| > M . We know from lemma 10.1

pt00 ))i(t00 ) = 0, which
part (ii) that there is some t00 ∈ {1, ..., T − 1} such that (Qt00 +1 (b
implies (Qt00 +1 (b
pt00 −1 ))i(t00 ) = 0 (otherwise i(t00 ) would propose pbt00 −1 ), and hence
i(t00 ) ∈ S(t00 ).
00

But then individual i(t00 ) would gain by deviating to the proposal

xS(t ) , contradicting the assumption of equilibrium. Q.E.D.

48

References
[1] Austen-Smith, D. [1987], “Sophisticated sincerity: voting over endogenous
agendas,” American Political Science Review, 81(4):1323-1330.
[2] Banks, J.S. [1985], “Sophisticated Voting Outcomes and Agenda Control,” Social Choice and Welfare, 1:295-306.
[3] Banks, J.S. and J. Duggan [1998], “Stationary Equilibria in a Bargaining Model
of Social Choice,” mimeo, California Institute of Technology.
[4] Banks, J.S. and J. Duggan [2000], “A Bargaining Model of Collective Choice,”
American Political Science Review, 94: 73-88.
[5] Banks, J.S. and J. Duggan [2001], “A Bargaining Model of Policy-making,”
mimeo, California Institute of Technology.
[6] Banks, J.S. and F. Gasmi [1987], “Endogenous Agenda Formation in Three
Person Committees,” Social Choice and Welfare, 4(2):133-52.
[7] Baron, D. and J. Ferejohn [1989], “Bargaining in Legislatures,” American Political Science Review, 83:1181-1206.
[8] Bernheim, B.D., A. Rangel, and L. Rayo [2002], “Democratic Policy Making
with Real-Time Agenda Setting. Part 2.” Mimeo, Stanford University.
[9] Besley, T. and A. Case [2001], “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Empirical Evidence from the United States,” unpublished manuscript.
[10] Bloch, F. and S. Rottier [2000], “Agenda Control in Coalition Formation,”
unpublished manuscript.
[11] Diermier, D. and A. Merlo [2000], “Government Turnover in Parliamentary
Democracies,” Journal of Economic Theory, 94: 46-79.
[12] Downs, A. [1957]. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper and
Row.
[13] Dutta, B., M. Jackson, and M. Le Breton [2001], “Equilibrium Agenda Formation,” unpublished manuscript.

49
[14] Eraslan, H.K.K. [1998], “Uniqueness of Asymmetric Equilibria in the BaronFerejohn Model,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
[15] Ferejohn, J. [1974]. Pork Barrel Politics. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
[16] Ferejohn, J., M. Fiorina, and R. McKelvey [1987], “Sophisticated Voting and
Agenda Independence in the Distributive Politics Setting,” American Journal
of Political Science, 31: 169-94.
[17] Lockwood, B. [1998], “Distributive Politics and the Benefits of Decentralization,” CSGR working paper No. 10/98, University of Warwick.
[18] McKelvey, R.D. [1976], “Intransitivities in Multidimensional Voting Models and
Some Implications for Agenda Control,” Journal of Economic Theory, 12:472482.
[19] McKelvey, R.D. [1979], “General Conditions for Global Intransitivities in Formal Voting Models,” Econometrica, 47:1085-1111.
[20] Merlo, A. and C. Wilson [1995], “A Stochastic Model of Sequential Bargaining
with Complete Information,” Econometrics, 63:371-399.
[21] Miller, N. [1980], “A New Solution Set for Tournaments and Majority Voting,”
American Journal of Political Science, 24:68-96.
[22] Oleszek, W. [2001], Congressional Procedures and the Policy Process. CQ Press:
Washington, D.C.
[23] Penn, M. [2001], “A Distributive N-Amendment Game with Endogenous
Agenda Formation,” unpublished manuscript.
[24] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini [2001], Political Economics (Zeuthen Lectures).
MIT Press.
[25] Romer, R. and H. Rosenthal [1978], “Political resource allocation, controlled
agendas, and the status quo,” Public Choice, 33(4):27-43.
[26] Shepsle, K. and B. Weingast [1984], “When Do Rules of Procedure Matter?,”
The Journal of Politics.

