NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, ANTITRUST AND STRATEGIC BEHAVIOR

Dennis W. Carlton
Robert H. Gertner

Working Paper 8976
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8976

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

This paper incorporates parts of and extends testimony Carlton gave before the Federal Trade Commission’s
Hearings on Global and Innovation-based Competition in 1995. We thank Greg Pelnar for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Dennis W. Carlton and Robert H. Gertner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Intellectual Property, Antitrust and Strategic Behavior
Dennis W. Carlton and Robert H. Gertner
NBER Working Paper No. 8976
June 2002
JEL No. L

ABSTRACT
Economic growth depends in large part on technological change. Laws governing intellectual
property rights protect inventors from competition in order to create incentives for them to innovate.
Antitrust laws constrain how a monopolist can act in order to maintain its monopoly in an attempt to
foster competition. There is a fundamental tension between these two different types of laws. Attempts
to adapt static antitrust analysis to a setting of dynamic R&D competition through the use of "innovation
markets" are likely to lead to error. Applying standard antitrust doctrines such as tying and exclusivity
to R&D settings is likely to be complicated. Only detailed study of the industry of concern has the
possibility of uncovering reliable relationships between innovation and industry behavior. One important
form of competition, especially in certain network industries, is between open and closed systems. We
have presented an example to illustrate how there is a tendency for systems to close even though an open
system is socially more desirable. Rather than trying to use the antitrust laws to attack the maintenance
of closed systems, an alternative approach would be to use intellectual property laws and regulations to
promote open systems and the standard setting organizations that they require. Recognition that optimal
policy toward R&D requires coordination between the antitrust and intellectual property laws is needed.

Dennis W. Carlton
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
dennis.carlton@gsb.uchicago.edu

Robert H. Gertner
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

I.

Introduction

Over the past twenty years macroeconomists have given renewed attention to the
importance of technological change for economic growth. Since Schumpeter, microeconomists
have understood that there may be a tradeoff between achieving static efficiency through
competition and achieving long-run efficiency through optimal investment in research,
development and diffusion of innovation. Recent empirical research in industrial organization
demonstrates that the social value generated by new goods is large. This suggests that policies that
encourage innovation, even perhaps at the expense of short-run market power, may be beneficial.

The traditional roles of antitrust policy and industry regulation have been to promote static
efficiency. Acknowledgement of the importance of technological change, therefore, raises several
important questions for antitrust policy.1 The questions relate to whether and how antitrust policy
should concern itself with promoting efficient dynamic competition in technological change,
whether and how the static concerns of traditional antitrust policy should apply in industries with
rapid technological change, and to what extent courts are capable of dealing with the complexities
and uncertainties of technological competition.2

In this paper, we explore several aspects of these questions. First, we consider merger
policy, one of the most important areas of antitrust enforcement. One argument that has been put
forth is that antitrust authorities should consider “innovation markets” separately from standard
product markets and block mergers that significantly increase concentration in such an R&D
market. We explain how three conditions are necessary to justify such an expansion of traditional
concerns in mergers. They are: (1) reducing R&D expenditures is undesirable; (2) if there are
fewer firms performing R&D, there will be less aggregate R&D and fewer new products; and (3)
it is possible to determine that there are not enough other firms to perform R&D and develop
1

These questions have been the subject of much discussion. See, e.g, Carlton (2001), (2002), Evans and Schmalensee

(2001), and Porter (2002).
2

See Posner (2001) for a discussion of the ability of courts to deal with technologically changing industries, especially

pp. 276-280.

1

future products to compete with the future products developed by the merged firm. We argue that
there is no general theoretical or empirical support for any of these three conditions. Therefore, we
are skeptical of the benefits of expanding antitrust merger enforcement to block mergers that
concentrate “innovation markets” as a general policy, with the important caveat that there may be
several special industries where such a policy may be sensible. Moreover, in some cases certain
types of evidence, which we discuss below, may be available that could justify blocking a merger.

Intellectual property (IP) policy (patents, copyright, trademark, trade secret) conveys
market power to developers of intellectual property. Antitrust policy determines, in large part, the
constraints society places on companies with extensive market power. This creates a potential
fundamental conflict between intellectual property policy and antitrust policy. Intellectual property
policy conveys market power; antitrust policy constrains its use. Therefore, any application of
antitrust policy in R&D intensive industries should consider whether it is complementing or
thwarting the goals of IP policy. If under current antitrust enforcement, IP policy generates the
amount of market power that creates the optimal incentives for R&D, then any significant change
in antitrust policy towards R&D intensive industries could lead to sub-optimal R&D investment.
At a theoretical level, the right question is “is it a good idea to change antitrust enforcement and
simultaneously alter IP protection to keep R&D incentives the same?” But this is a policy
adjustment beyond the powers of either antitrust authorities or the courts.

IP policy and other features of high-tech industries such as network externalities and
economies of scale in R&D make the existence of short-run market power common. The legal
doctrines and economic analysis that underlie antitrust policy have largely developed without a
focus on dynamic technological competition. Because of the prevalence of market power in hightech industries, it is important to understand the fit between existing policy and the features of
these industries. The proper application of antitrust doctrines such as predation, tying, and
exclusive contracts to high-tech industries is an issue of significant importance. These issues have
received a fair amount of theoretical attention, so we touch on them briefly and only make some
general observations. We argue that many of the theories that justify these antitrust doctrines also
apply in high-technology companies, but several additional caveats may apply. First, the factual
inquiry may be much more difficult, requiring courts to make complex and subtle judgements

2

about disputed technology issues. This makes the process more costly and more prone to errors.
Second, developing workable rules that provide guidance to companies with market power may be
very difficult.

We also explore the role for antitrust enforcement to affect dynamic R&D competition that
attempts to replace existing market leaders. In many high-tech industries, competition is inherently
dynamic. A single technology may be the winner in the marketplace at one point in time.
Competitive forces will then be focused on developing new technology that can replace the
existing winner. Antitrust policy towards companies with market power did not develop with this
form of competition in mind. The proper role for antitrust policy in making this process work
effectively has received little attention, but may well be the most important way that antitrust
policy can affect competition in high-tech industries. We consider this question in the context of
dynamic, multi-generational platform competition, where participants can choose between
developing closed and open systems. We argue that winners in early stages of competition often
have the incentive and ability to close the system and thereby reduce subsequent competition.

We provide some preliminary thoughts on the role for antitrust policy to improve this
dynamic systems competition. We do not attempt to develop any standards that enforcement
agencies or courts should adopt, but we do think our theoretical arguments imply that close
attention should be paid to conduct that creates a proprietary, closed system subsequent to open
competition. However, policies other than antitrust enforcement may be more effective
instruments to improve performance. Government subsidization of standards development,
reduced restrictions on research joint ventures or other forms of research coordination where
systems are important may be justified. Furthermore, companies that subvert cooperative standard
setting processes to create their own proprietary, closed systems should face severe penalties.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the essential
features of R&D competition that form the basis for our subsequent analysis. Section III discusses
the role of antitrust enforcement for mergers in R&D intensive industries. Section IV discusses the
scope of monopolization issues in R&D intensive industries. In Section V we discuss multi-

3

generational competition among open and closed systems and discuss its implications for antitrust
and other policy. Section VI concludes.

II.

Characteristics of R&D Competition for Antitrust Policy

Perhaps the single most important characteristic of technology competition is uncertainty.
Not only is the outcome of any particular R&D project uncertain but so is the impact of successful
innovation on markets and competition. Anecdotes abound of an industry being transformed by an
innovation coming from completely unrelated industries, bringing completely new technology into
an industry.3 These anecdotes show that basic research can have unanticipated consequences, and
perhaps more importantly, that the same is true even for very applied, specific research. However,
it is possible to make too much of these anecdotes. We discuss below a growing body of
systematic empirical evidence that much innovation comes from within an industry. We note,
however, that these studies define industries broadly relative to typical market definition used for
antitrust enforcement.

All policy towards technological competition should take into account the inability to
foresee perfectly the outcome or impact of R&D. The structure of the patent system can be best
explained by the inability of government officials to foresee the impact of particular technologies
on R&D activities. The outputs of R&D are ideas. Once an idea is discovered, the marginal cost to
society of using the idea is close to zero. Without property rights over ideas, good new ideas
would be freely employed. Although efficient after the fact, the result may be no return for the
innovator, reducing the incentive to engage in innovative activity. Patents convey monopoly
power to innovators who then can charge super-competitive prices for goods that embody the
patented technology and/or license the technology above the marginal cost of transfer.

If government officials were omniscient, a superior system would be to subsidize R&D
directly or award prizes to innovators based on the value of the innovation. This would create

3

We note some examples of this in Section III.

4

incentives to engage in innovative activity and avoid the monopoly distortions of the patent
system. Although we do provide significant subsidies for R&D projects, it is limited by the
enormous difficulty of determining the appropriate size of prizes or direct subsidies to specific
projects.4 Policy instead is a mixture of subsidies, usually to more basic research by non-profit
institutions, patents, and other forms of property rights.5

A characteristic of technology competition closely related to uncertainty is its dynamic
nature. Not only does the process of R&D take time, but also the goal of technological
competition is to replace existing technology with new technology, an inherently dynamic process.
All policy toward technological competition should acknowledge this. Policy based on static
models of competition must be evaluated with great care before applied to technological
competition.

High concentration and short-run market power in the product markets that use the ideas
that result from innovation often characterize R&D intensive industries. There are several reasons
for this. First, of course, is patent or other IP protection. Second, R&D investment is usually a
fixed, sunk cost. The investment will only be justified if these costs can be recovered with the
expected rents associated with innovation. Many industries other than high tech have significant
fixed, sunk costs. Transportation industries such as railroads and ships, power plants, and many
entertainment products such as movies, music recordings, books, and television production all
have large fixed, sunk costs.6 It is probably no accident that these industries are or have been
often regulated, and many have been the subject of some very complicated and famous antitrust
cases.

Yet another reason for high concentration in R&D intensive industries is demand-side
scale economies or network externalities. A demand side scale economy or network externality is
4
5
6

See Kremer (1998) for a discussion of how a system of prizes might work and the history of innovation prizes.
See Spence (1984) for a model on the tradeoff between patents and subsidies.
R&D intensive industries exhibit endogenous sunk costs because the level of R&D spending is chosen by firms in a

way that depends on competitors’ R&D expenditures. Sutton (1998) shows how this leads to high levels of
concentration independent of market size.

5

simply that consumer value for the product increases the greater is other consumers’ presence.
Direct network effects can generate this – a consumer values a communications network more
highly as more people join the network. It can also be generated indirectly by supply of
complementary products. For example, the value of a computer operating system is greater if more
consumers purchase the same operating system because more applications will be developed for
the operating system. When this happens, competition among applications is more likely, leading
to lower prices and higher quality, valuable upgrades to the operating system are more likely, and
continued customer support can be expected. Demand-side scale economies lead to concentration
of technology. If the network effects are large enough it is difficult for a small competing,
incompatible technology to survive.

The output of R&D, ideas, are primarily not consumed directly, but incorporated into
goods and services that are consumed. The previous paragraphs followed much of the writing in
this area by implicitly assuming vertical integration between the R&D stage and the
commercialization of the innovation. It is possible, and often the case that a monopoly patent
holder will choose to license its innovation widely. This preserves downstream competition,
although the downstream firms often face a monopolistically set input price for the licensed
technology. Licensing to create efficient deployment of a technology can be hampered by
appropriation problems. If a technology has weak or no patent protection, attempts to license the
technology run the risk of appropriation by potential licensees. If part of the licensing negotiation
reveals the innovation, the potential licensee may choose to reject the offer and develop goods or
services based on the innovation itself. If the risk of appropriation is high absent patent protection,
the innovator may only be able to earn a return on its technology by commercializing it and
reaping the benefits of being a first-mover in the market. Appropriation may still occur but
perhaps only after the innovator has established a position in the market. Thus, the implicit
assumption of vertical integration is often justified in the absence of adequate patent protection.
This suggests an often-overlooked benefit of patent protection – it allows for efficient allocation of
an innovative technology to the companies who can use it most effectively.7

7

Hall and Ziedonis (2001) demonstrate that patent protection and subsequent licensing allows small semiconductor

design firms to compete in innovation despite lacking the scale and resources to manufacture.

6

Similarly, although network effects lead to a small number of surviving technologies, the
technology need not be controlled by a single company. Network externalities lead to a single
protocol for fax machines, but the protocol is not controlled by a single company, so there can be a
great deal of technological competition among fax machine suppliers. In many situations,
however, companies do compete with proprietary, incompatible technologies. Then, network
effects can lead to concentration of both technology and market power.

We, therefore, do not adopt a view that R&D intensive industries are inevitably
monopolized and therefore antitrust law can do no more than favor one monopolist over another.
We do believe that R&D intensive industries are more prone to market concentration and the
exercise of market power than most others, that there can be significant social value from market
power in these industries, but that it is not necessarily the case that only one technology must
survive for efficiency reasons.

The combination of dynamics, uncertainty, and market power leads to one of the most
important features of many R&D-intensive industries – an important form of competition is in
R&D to replace the existing technology winner that has static market power with another based on
improved technology. This form of competition occurs throughout the computer, pharmaceutical,
and chemical industries, as well as most other R&D intensive industries. This process of “creative
destruction” or “Schumpeterian competition” is not the type of competition that antitrust
enforcement typically tries to protect, but assuring the efficiency of this process may be an
important difference in the role that antitrust policy should play in R&D intensive industries
relative to others.8

Another feature of R&D competition is that it may involve redundant investment. Any
type of private investment may involve some degree of rent-stealing from competitors, i.e., part of
the returns from investment comes from reducing or eliminating the rents available to others. This

8

See Carlton (2002) and Porter (2002) as well as other articles in the "Symposium on The Antitrust Analysis of

Mergers: Merger Guidelines v. Five Forces," University of West Los Angeles Law Review (2002) 7.

7

effect may be especially pronounced in some forms of R&D competition. For example, if two
firms follow similar research programs to develop a patentable technology, it becomes a race and
the benefits to consumers relative to a single firm engaging in the research may be small. Free
entry into the race may lead to either too much R&D or too little R&D and the division of the
resources among competing projects may not be optimal.9

III. Merger Policy in R&D-Intensive Industries

With these (mostly) familiar characteristics of R&D competition in place, we can now
address the role of antitrust policy towards these industries. In this section, we take on the question
of whether or not it is appropriate to consider "innovation markets" as distinct from product
markets for the purpose of merger analysis. Gilbert and Sunshine (1995) make this suggestion;
antitrust authorities have investigated the impact of mergers on R&D; and the US Department of
Justice (DOJ) has blocked at least one merger on the basis of anticipated reductions in innovation
using the concept of “innovation markets”.10

Mergers in R&D intensive industries have become quite common in the past decade. The
pharmaceutical industry has had several major mergers and numerous smaller acquisitions;
defense contractors have undergone extensive consolidation, as have telecommunications
companies. This is in contrast to the 1980s where R&D intensive industries had not been the focus
of much merger activity.11

In a free market economy, a voluntary decision of two firms to merge should be made
because the firms believe that their joint value exceeds the sum of their independent values. This is
generally because they believe that there are efficiencies associated with combining the two
companies. However, some mergers can lead to a reduction in competition that causes output to
9

The idea of wasteful competition for rents has been analyzed by economists in many analogous settings.

10

This was the proposed acquisition of the Allison Transmission Division of General Motors by ZF Friedrichshafen

AG in 1993. We discuss this case in more detail below.
11

See Hall (1988) and Pound et al. (1986).

8

decline and consumer prices to rise.12 It is commonly accepted, as a matter of theory, that a
reduction in competition from a merger can have these undesirable effects. Large-scale crosssectional studies of the relationship between concentration and price suffer from severe
measurement and causality problems that make it difficult to assess the general relation between
concentration and pricing. However, there are also several empirical studies of individual
industries which show that reductions in the number of competitors or increases in market
concentration can harm consumers by increasing price.13 Overall, there is both empirical and
theoretical support for an antitrust policy aimed at preventing mergers that so concentrate an
existing product market so as to make price increases likely.

Current antitrust enforcement focuses on short-run anticompetitive harm. If the antitrust
authorities can show that price would rise in the first two years after the merger, the merger is
likely to be enjoined. Arguments that significant efficiencies will be realized in subsequent years
are likely to have no impact. And for good reason. Antitrust authorities are acknowledging that
predicting the future is hard. Future benefits from a merger, as well as future harms, should be
discounted for time and the likelihood that they will actually occur. Short-run harm to competition
is more immediate (by definition), and probably more highly predictable.

The potential competition doctrine takes the small step of logic to extend antitrust merger
review to firms that do not currently compete but might compete in the future in the absence of the
merger. In theory, the issues are identical to a merger among current competitors. As a practical
matter, however, one must predict the impact on competition in the more distant future. Questions
that should be addressed include: if the merger occurs will there be more entry by others? Absent
the merger, will the potential competition turn into significant actual competition? How will
competition in the market evolve over the next several years with and without the merger? Since
predictions like these are quite unreliable and mergers tend to generate efficiency gains, antitrust
regulators should and do set a high standard before blocking a merger on potential competition
grounds.
12

There is also a large literature arguing that agency costs can explain many mergers, i.e., a merger that is not value-

enhancing may still be in management’s interest.
13

See, e.g., Chapter 9 in Carlton and Perloff (2000).

9

If the potential competition doctrine is a small step in economic logic from the usual
antitrust policy aimed at firms actually competing, then the innovation market doctrine may seem
to be only another small step removed from the potential competition doctrine. The only
difference between the two doctrines may seem to be that one is about future competition in an
existing product market, while the other is about competition in R&D which leads to future
competition in current or future product markets. Yet, it is no small step in logic to reach the
conclusion that concentration of an innovation market is undesirable or that antitrust policy should
seek to block mergers that significantly increase such concentration.

To reach such a conclusion, one must accept the theoretical and empirical validity of the
following claims:
1.

Reducing R&D expenditures is undesirable;

2.

If there are fewer firms performing R&D, there will be less aggregate R&D and
fewer new products;

3.

There are not enough other firms to perform R&D and develop future products to
compete with the future products developed by the merged firm.

Neither theoretical nor empirical analysis has established the general validity of any of these three
claims.14 We will discuss each claim in turn.

A.

Reducing R&D Expenditures is Undesirable

Since R&D expenditure is an input, not an output, it is desirable only because it leads to
knowledge that ultimately benefits society, as would occur if new products embodying the
knowledge were produced. As with all inputs, efficiencies can cause output to be produced with
less inputs; a merger that reduces R&D expenditure may be beneficial if it allows the R&D to be
conducted more efficiently. Since competing R&D expenditures may be duplicative, a merger that
eliminates redundancy may lead to the same knowledge produced at lower costs, or even greater

14

This is not from lack of study. There is a large literature on each of these topics. See Cohen and Levin (1989) for a

large survey covering these and other issues.

10

knowledge at lower costs. The same or increased knowledge would likely be embodied in the
same or greater number of products, so long as there was no traditional market power problem
with the merger in the consumer market.15 Other efficiencies beyond elimination of redundancy
could be an enhanced interchange of ideas and sharing of resources. Although situations where
R&D reductions are efficiency enhancing may be hard to identify, it is incorrect to conclude that
any reduction in R&D is necessarily bad for consumers. It can be a difficult question whether a
merger that will reduce R&D should be blocked, even if the authorities cannot demonstrate a
reduction in output.

A comparison to other sources of cost savings in a merger is useful. We would never say a
merger is anticompetitive simply because it leads to reduced overhead, labor or materials savings.
It would be necessary to study whether or not there would be output reductions.16 Possible reasons
to adopt a different standard with respect to R&D reductions compared to other cost reductions
would be that it may be difficult to prove the output effect and policy makers may conclude that
consumers are generally harmed from R&D reductions.

Indeed it is very difficult to measure the output from R&D. This is because the ideas
generated are idiosyncratic, their value is hard to measure, and the R&D process takes time and
the outcomes are uncertain. Estimating a production or cost function for R&D would be virtually
impossible unless one used broad proxies, such as patents issued, for output.

Even if one could show that less R&D would lead to fewer new products, the question still
remains whether this is bad for society. It is well known that competition may result in either too

15

For example, consider an R&D joint venture by two competitors where both get to share in the cost-reducing

technology produced by the joint venture, but still compete with each other in the product market. One can show that,
under some circumstances, the joint venture will invest in the same amount of R&D as each firm would individually
absent the joint venture. The result of the joint venture is the same cost reduction, the same product market prices, but
a 50% savings in R&D costs. The joint venture is a Pareto-improvement.
16

If one adopted the reasonable view that overall efficiency (not consumer welfare) was all that mattered, then one

would look at the net surplus resulting form the merger.

11

few or too many new products. Unlike output restrictions, which cause unambiguous consumer
harm, a reduction in the rate at which new products emerge may or may not be desirable. This is
recognized in limited patent length and other aspects of intellectual property policy.

The antitrust treatment of R&D should be viewed in the context of all aspects of
intellectual property policy. Maybe one could have the same amount of innovation with shorter or
narrower patents and weaker antitrust enforcement or vice versa. It simply does not follow from
any theoretical argument that, given current patent policy, using antitrust enforcement to block
reductions in R&D is good for society.
There is some empirical evidence on this point.17 For much R&D, it appears that the social
rate of return exceeds the private one, suggesting that more R&D would be desirable. In addition
the recent literature on the value of new goods suggests that consumer returns from innovation are
very large. However, the correct question compares the marginal social return from R&D with the
marginal private return, yet most of our evidence is on average returns. Even if we accept that
more R&D would be beneficial (and we tend to hold this belief), there is no evidence to suggest
that stricter antitrust enforcement is a more cost-effective way to achieve this compared to
increased patent protection or other changes in IP policy.

One approach that addresses the possible efficiency of eliminating duplicative R&D, and at
the same time achieves some of the benefits of competition in the output market is a research joint
venture. Such a joint venture can be either open to any firm that chooses to join or it can be limited
to only a few firms. The joint venture can provide the fruits of its labors to the participating firms
that compete in the output market. By making available the R&D input to several rival firms in the
output market, some of the benefits of competition can be preserved. Although structuring a
research joint venture can raise complicated issues, it can be a viable substitute to a much less
competitive output market structure.18 Antitrust authorities recognize this and have loosened
enforcement against research joint ventures.

17
18

See, e.g., Jones and Williams (1998).
See Carlton and Salop (1996).

12

B.

Fewer Competing Firms will Reduce R&D

There is no consensus in the theoretical or empirical literature that reduced competition
leads to less R&D and fewer new products. Not all new technology can be patented, so imitation
and reverse engineering are possible in many industries. For example, some software is protected
only by copyright, so a software developer can legally implement its own version of innovative
features in a competitor’s product. If imitation is possible, a more concentrated market can permit
the innovator to capture more of the value of its innovation. In this way, market concentration
helps solve the appropriability problem and could increase innovation.

Patent protection can reduce or eliminate the appropriability problem, but it does not solve
the lack of theoretical consensus on the relation between concentration and R&D activity. Various
theories predict that competition can have significant impact on R&D activity; the problem is that
the results can go either way. For Schumpeter (1943), market concentration aids innovative
activity because large firms can absorb the risks and costs of innovative activity. For Arrow
(1962), a competitive firm will typically have a greater incentive than an established monopolist to
invest in R&D since it can gain the entire monopoly profits in the market while the incumbent will
only gain the incremental monopoly profit from the innovation. This holds if the innovator
captures the entire market. However, if an innovative entrant and the incumbent compete, then the
incumbent may have greater incentive to invest to avoid the lost industry profits associated with
duopoly.

Sophisticated theoretical models of patent races show that competition to discover and
patent an invention could lead to too much aggregate R&D expenditure. There are two external
effects of increased R&D investment: it lowers rivals’ payoffs and the innovator does not capture
all the social value of its invention. These two effects go in opposite directions. The theory
remains ambiguous and the size of these two effects is difficult to measure in any real setting.

The empirical literature provides no firmer foundation for an antitrust policy designed to
prevent mergers that will concentrate "innovation markets." Although some early research
suggested a positive relation between R&D and concentration, subsequent research has failed to

13

confirm this result. In an extensive survey, Cohen and Levin (1989) conclude, “The empirical
results concerning how firm size and market structure relate to innovation are perhaps most
accurately described as fragile….these results leave little support for the view that industrial
concentration is an independent, significant, and important determinant of innovative behavior and
performance.”

In summary, neither theory nor empirical work provides any general justification for an
antitrust merger policy aimed at preserving competition in R&D markets. They certainly tell us
nothing about essential policy issues, such as at what levels of concentration should there be
concern. Do economists really know so little about R&D and concentration that there is no basis at
all for an antitrust policy aimed at preventing a reduction in R&D competition? The short answer
is “yes” but it is important to note that the empirical literature, for the most part, relies on crosssectional studies across industries, which cannot control for the impact of industry-specific factors.
Such studies, like similar ones for price and concentration, do not provide a sound methodology
for uncovering such a pattern, if one exists. Moreover, industries probably vary too much for one
theory to fit all.

This means that a study of an individual industry over time could find a stable empirical
relationship between concentration, R&D activity, and innovation, all else equal. Indeed it is
precisely the industry in which the merger is proposed that should be studied to see if a pattern
exists. If no data are available to perform such a study, then there is no other general economic
literature to justify an antitrust challenge that concentrates R&D. It is precisely when data on
individual industry behavior are available that the economist should try to use his empirical tools
to detect whether there is any effect of concentration on R&D competition.

The empirical academic literature on the relationship between concentration and price has
shifted to industry studies over the past twenty years. In order to identify a relation, there must be
time series or cross-section variation in concentration. In addition, since this variation is usually
endogenous, one needs instruments to identify the effect of concentration. This has limited the
number of industries where such studies can be done. The data problems are more severe with
R&D. We can think of no good examples where there is useful geographical cross-section

14

variation in R&D – ideas have no geographical boundaries and innovations are typically
implemented everywhere. One could imagine studies across, say, different classes of
pharmaceuticals or defense-related R&D projects but the differences in the R&D production
functions could be difficult to identify. Similar problems exist over time – does R&D go down
because concentration increased or because the opportunities for technological improvements
declined? Thus, although industry studies can be appropriate, we think that they could well raise
difficult empirical issues.

C.

There are not Enough Other Firms to Produce the R&D in the Future

Of the three logical underpinnings for an antitrust merger policy aimed at preserving
competition in R&D markets, this one may be the most troublesome. The basic problem is similar
to the one that arises in the application of the potential competition doctrine where all future
competitors have to be identified in order to determine whether the elimination of a single one
would harm competition. Identifying future competitors for a known product strikes us as
generally pretty hard, especially as the time period lengthens. Identifying future competitors for an
unknown product is likely to be an order of magnitude more difficult.

In order to identify an "innovation market," one must include the innovation activity of all
those firms with R&D efforts that might result in products competitive to the ones that the merged
firm may develop. This means that there typically will be firms in the "innovation market" who do
not currently compete in any way with the firms that propose to merge. Indeed, because the results
of R&D are so difficult to predict, the analyst may be unable to determine all, or even most, of the
relevant firms who might produce competitive products in the future. This problem becomes
increasingly severe the longer it takes before any new products are expected to come to market
and the more uncertain and rapidly changing is the industry.

Indeed, it is often impossible to predict which industry, let alone which firm, will develop
a particular type of new product. R&D in one product has frequently led to unpredictable
applications elsewhere. For example, Teflon was discovered as a byproduct during an experiment
on refrigerator gases. Teflon has since been used for a wide variety of applications such as

15

microchip packaging, non-stick coatings, and artificial arteries. 19 Research on dressings for
wounds led a researcher to discover a new coating that leaves fabric waterproof but breathable.
The company, Biotex, that developed this product did so as part of its research on artificial hearts
and is now venturing into the textile business.20 In 1988, Wayne Matson developed a machine to
analyze brain chemistry. Soon, it was clear that the machine had other uses and has since been
used to identify the components of fruit juices.21 Corning, a glass company, became a leading
supply of telecommunications equipment based on technology that would have been impossible to
predict before the fact.

These examples illustrate that it can be hard even to contemplate all the unlikely sources of
tomorrow’s products. How many economists or lawyers would have predicted even ten years ago
that R&D in computers, cable, and telecommunications would result in products that compete with
each other? The implication is that innovation markets will tend to be quite broad so that it is
unlikely in many cases that a merger should raise concerns about significantly diminishing R&D
competition.

Despite the entertaining anecdotal evidence about the serendipitous nature of innovation, a
number of recent studies cast doubt on a general conclusion that innovation is, on average,
serendipitous. Methe, Swaminathan and Mitchell (1996) show that established firms are often
sources of major innovations in telecommunications and medicine. Note that the industry
definition of telecommunications and medicine used in these articles is significantly broader than
market definitions that are typically used in antitrust policy. Prusa and Schmitz (1991) show that
new firms have a comparative advantage developing new categories of software while established
firms have a comparative advantage developing improvements to existing categories of software.
Tether (1998) shows that although small firms have more innovations per employee, large firms
develop more important innovations. However, Kortum and Lerner (2000) show that venture
capital accounts for a disproportionate share of industrial innovation.

19
20
21

See Wall Street Journal, October 4, 1984.
See Wall Street Journal, October 19, 1984.
See Wall Street Journal, February 5, 1990.

16

Thus, in some limited circumstances, an analyst may be able to identify the firms who are
likely to be pursuing R&D that will lead to competing products several years in the future. Perhaps
in some industries such as pharmaceuticals, where R&D is becoming more systematic and there is
a regulatory pipeline (e.g., FDA) for approval, or defense products, where government funding or
approval is required, such identification is possible. But the longer the time period, the less
reliable is the prediction. Finally, in those rare cases where the analyst can confidently predict that
a merger will lead to a decline in competition in R&D which, in turn, will lead to a decline in
competition in new products, it would seem likely that the potential competition doctrine could be
used to prevent the merger. The use of the potential competition doctrine might involve applying it
to products that do not now exist but will exist in the future with a high degree of certainty. This
seems like a logical and straightforward use (or extension) of the potential competition doctrine.
We prefer the potential competition doctrine to the innovation market approach because the
potential competition doctrine, unlike the innovation market approach, focuses on the effects in an
output market of reduced competition (i.e., price, quality, speed of introduction), instead of the
more general and harder to predict effect of reduced R&D on unspecified future products.

Not all R&D is designed to create new products; much R&D investment is designed to
lower production cost of existing products or to make incremental improvements to existing
products. In such situations, it is more likely that an insider rather than an outsider will develop
such an improvement. Although in these markets, it may be possible to define the set of firms that
compete in R&D, it is also in these settings that some of the problems identified in the preceding
sections become most severe. Imagine that two manufacturers of a particular product wish to
merge. There is no direct antitrust problem in the product market because there are many other
competitors. But the two firms compete in R&D to produce the product less expensively while
none of the other product manufacturers compete in R&D. It is exactly in a situation such as this
where a merger could increase R&D by reducing appropriation risk or eliminating redundancy.
The impact of successful innovation on product market competition is also unclear in such a
setting. If the innovation is patented, the diffusion may be same with or without the merger. If it
cannot be patented, the innovation may be more widely used if there is a merger.

17

D.

Application of the Doctrine

The doctrine that mergers can concentrate an innovation market and harm R&D
competition has been applied in merger analysis. One of the first such cases was the proposed
acquisition by ZF Friedrichshafen AG of the Allison Transmission Division of General Motors.
Allison makes automatic transmissions for certain types of trucks (e.g., refuse trucks) and buses.
ZF also makes transmissions, including automatic ones, for certain trucks and buses. The U.S.
Department of Justice (DOJ) issued a complaint to stop the merger in November 1993, and the
deal then died. In its complaint, the DOJ alleged that the acquisition would reduce competition in
two product markets, one for refuse trucks and one for transit buses. It also alleged that
competition would be adversely affected in the worldwide market for innovations in automatic
transmissions. Specifically, the DOJ was concerned that ZF would not continue to engage in R&D
in as vigorous a fashion after the merger.

Assume that it would have been possible to allay the competitive concerns about the two
traditional product markets by having ZF license an independent third party, and further suppose
that there were at least some efficiency motivating the transaction. The transaction was stopped in
1993, so consumers have been deprived of eight years of benefits (indeed the DOJ can influence
the size of the benefits that consumers receive by the type of license arrangement it accepts). As of
2002, we understand that no significant new products in automatic transmissions have emerged
from ZF nor has ZF become a more vigorous competitor. In fact, we understand that ZF has
withdrawn form the refuse truck market.
We do not want to comment on whether it was wise to issue the complaint. 22 We simply
point out that that the benefits from R&D that was the concern of the DOJ are highly uncertain
and difficult to predict. It is therefore useful to follow this case and others like it, to see whether
consumers ever receive any benefit from the R&D that was the concern of the DOJ or FTC in
blocking a merger and, if so, when. The expectation of these benefits should be discounted and
compared to the immediate efficiency benefits that could likely have been achieved by a well-

22

Dennis Carlton served as a consultant for GM and ZF.

18

structured settlement. Only by systematically keeping track of the subsequent evolution of
industries will we be able to decide what are good antitrust merger enforcement policies.

IV.

Monopolization in R&D Intensive Industries

R&D intensive industries are prone to short-run exercise of market power. Patent
protection, economies of scale in R&D, network effects, and significant horizontal and vertical
differentiation all can lead to some market power. In many situations single technologies dominate
the market and sometimes a single firm controls those technologies.

Since this is an inherent feature of R&D-intensive industries, it would be seriously
misguided to employ the antitrust laws to prevent the exercise of market power in these industries.
Obviously, not allowing a patent holder to exercise market power would defeat the purpose of the
patent laws. Even absent patent protection, market power derived from successful R&D creates
incentives for R&D that are beneficial.

Fortunately, it is a basic tenet of antitrust law that monopoly power is not, by itself, illegal.
Only certain categories of conduct designed to obtain, extend, or preserve monopoly are illegal.
The types of conduct that have been successfully challenged include predatory pricing, exclusive
dealing, and tying.

Since we are generally unconcerned about market power initially obtained through R&D
investments, we will focus on the role of antitrust policy with respect to conduct that extends or
preserves legally obtained market power in R&D intensive industries.

Ever since Schumpeter introduced the idea, many commentators have emphasized that
competition in R&D markets is largely about innovation designed to replace existing firms with
market power. This dynamic competition has received so much attention that it has several names:
“Schumpeterian competition,” “creative destruction,” and in the context of computing systems,
“dynamic platform competition.”

19

It follows that competition policy in R&D intensive industries should focus on the
performance of this dynamic competitive process. Perhaps we should not worry about the static
exercise of market power, or even the exercise of static market power over long periods of time,
but we should worry about firms with static market power distorting the dynamic innovation
competition for future market power. It does not yet follow, however, that there is a role for policy
intervention in this process, nor does it follow that antitrust is the best policy tool to regulate this
process. However, we do think it is an area that merits careful analysis and continued research. We
take a few preliminary steps in this section.

A current technology leader with market power would like to earn as much rents from its
intellectual capital for as long as possible. Many of its activities will have an impact on such a
firm’s ability to sustain its position. They include investment in R&D to develop product
improvements or next generation products, long-term contracts with customers, tying or bundling,
changing compatibility with complementary products, cross-licensing technology deals with
potential competitors, and aggressive pricing.

Some of these actions may reduce the likelihood that a competitor will replace the existing
market leader, they may reduce R&D investments by potential competitors, and they may reduce
social welfare. The correct policy response cannot be that a company that has legitimately
obtained market power through its innovative efforts is under a legal obligation to adopt strategies
that (someone believes) are in the public interest. It should not always be illegal to undertake a
strategy that is in the firm’s private interest, simply because there is a different strategy that
(someone believes) leads to higher consumer welfare. Such a policy would be unworkable, would
put an impossible burden on innovative firms to evaluate social effects of a multitude of strategies,
and is completely inconsistent with free market principles.

Throughout antitrust law, courts have identified certain classes of monopoly conduct as
potentially suspect. In most cases, after certain preconditions are met (such as market power in a
well-defined antitrust market) courts follow a rule of reason analysis. In some situations, this
inquiry will simply try to weigh the anticompetitive harm against procompetitive benefits. For

20

some allegations, such as predatory pricing, the plaintiff must make a number of specific showings
(below cost pricing and likelihood of recoupment).

Analyses and arguments over the choice of the best rule for particular types of conduct
have filled volumes of law and economic journals. Most agree that the factors to consider include
the likelihood of incorrectly punishing procompetitive conduct versus the likelihood of failing to
identify anticompetitive conduct, the costs of different types of mistakes, the social return from
eliminating the anticompetitive conduct, and the value of explicit guidelines that allow companies
to evaluate the legality of different conduct.

The question for us becomes what types of rules should apply to conduct by a monopolist
in an R&D intensive industry that may reduce Schumpeterian competition. For many types of
conduct, the basic theory underlying conventional antitrust analysis applies to R&D competition
as well. The comparisons are useful. For example, there is a well-developed theory of exclusive
dealing where exclusive contracts can lead to less competitive actions by competitors including
reduced investment, exit or entry deterrence.23 Similarly a monopolist in an R&D intensive
industry may sign long-term contracts with customers. This could induce a potential competitor to
reduce its investment in R&D and could occur when a patent is about to expire and the contracts
act to deter effective generic entry.24

Applying the theories of antitrust harm to the R&D setting will usually create a more
difficult factual inquiry. In most cases, it would be very difficult to develop compelling evidence
on the level of R&D spending by potential competitors in the “but-for” world – in Section III we
argued that it may not even be possible to identify who potential R&D competitors are. Even if
one could identify the likely R&D competitors and their but-for R&D investments, it would be
difficult to determine the social value of such investment and compare it to any efficiency gain.
And once again the conflict between monopoly power creating IP policies and antitrust becomes
evident. Are we better off with patent protection of 20 years and tough antitrust rules that reduce

23
24

See, e.g., Bernheim and Whinston (1988).
Nutrasweet signed long-term contracts with Coke and Pepsi shortly before its patent expiration.

21

the likelihood of extending the monopoly through exclusive contracts or with patent protection of
17 years and weak antitrust rules? We have no broad answer to this question. If the conduct has
the effect of stifling the dynamic process of creative destruction, the social costs may be large and
antitrust enforcement seems justified. But it might be very difficult to know in a particular setting
if this is the case.

A similar point applies to using the antitrust theories related to tying and bundling. The
theoretical arguments of how tying could lead to anticompetitive harm include Whinston (1990),
Carlton and Waldman (2001), Choi and Stefandis (2001), and Nalebuff (1999). The basic idea in
all these models is that tying makes it more difficult for an entrant to compete. In Whinston, it
may be impossible to get to sufficient scale to compete in the tied market and thereby allow a
monopolist to extend its monopoly power into the tied market. In Carlton and Waldman as well as
Choi and Stefandis, a similar, but dynamic process makes it more difficult for entrants to compete
in the tying market, while in Nalebuff the pricing advantage of a bundled product makes it more
difficult for an entrant to compete in either market.

The basic competitive effect of the monopolist’s strategic behavior of tying or bundling in
these models is reduced investment by a competitor. In an R&D intensive industry, the strategic
conduct can therefore reduce competitive R&D investment. As just discussed, applying an
antitrust theory of harm in an R&D setting can be complicated, especially when the tie involves
incorporating additional functionality into existing products. Again the possible harms from
stifling the innovative process will often be hard to weigh against the possible benefit of raising
the return to an innovator and, again the relation between antitrust policy and IP policy must be
considered.

V.

Schumpeterian Competition between Open and Closed Systems

Firms in some R&D intensive industries have to decide whether to make their product
compatible with complementary component products or to make all components itself. A firm
with market power in one or more components of an open system may choose to close its system

22

by creating incompatibilities with other products, thereby reducing competitive R&D investment
for subsequent generations. This same choice can appear in non-R&D intensive industries, but
here the choice could have a great influence on future R&D competition.

The theoretical literature on open versus closed systems considers competition for a single
generation of the technology but does not focus on competition across many generations.25 The
single generation models reveal a tradeoff in the choice between open and closed systems. It is
more difficult to win with a closed system against an open system, all else equal – the closed
system must provide better value to consumers than mixing and matching the best components
across all producers of open system components. However, the gains from winning with a closed
system may be greater because the closed system provider can earn greater rents under certain
circumstances.

Placing the closed/open systems choice in the context of multi-period Schumpeterian
competition can change the tradeoff significantly. We use a simple two-period model of
Schumpeterian competition in order to compare R&D investment incentives between open and
closed systems. Here we present an example of the model to demonstrate how a leading
component firm may choose to close a system in order to deter dynamic competition that could
replace it. The sole purpose of the admittedly simple model is to illustrate an overlooked incentive
for dynamic competition to produce closed systems.

Consider the following model. There are three components of a system, each of which is
necessary for the system to have any value to a user. For each component, three firms compete to
develop the component. Prior to the first period of R&D, firms that research different components
can merge in order to develop a closed system. If they do not merge, they each develop a
component for an open system.

25

Contributions to this literature include Besen and Farrell (1994), Economides and Salop (1992), Farrell and Saloner

(1985), Farrell and Saloner (1992), Katz and Shapiro (1985), and Matutes and Regibeau (1988).

23

In period 1, each firm chooses whether or not to invest in R&D. If it invests in R&D it
develops a component that has uncertain value to consumers. If a consumer selects an open
system, he can mix and match among all open components. If he chooses a closed system, he must
choose the single element of the closed system for each component. Consumers are all identical,
so each chooses the same system.

We denote the three components of the system by A, B, and C. There are three firms
(subscripted by 1, 2, and 3) with the capability to develop each component, so there are nine firms
overall. In order to develop a component, a firm must incur R&D costs of K; in return it develops
a component that has quality of V/3 + θ, where θ is a random variable. In our numerical example,
θ is a discrete random variable that takes on the value –ε with probability α, ε with probability α,
and 0 with probability 1-2α. Demand for the system is linear with unit demand, and the intercept
is the total quality of the system V+θΑ+θΒ+θC, which we denote by Z. If the total price of the
system is P, demand is V+θΑ+θΒ+θC-P.
Once each firm makes an R&D investment decision, the outcome become known. We
assume the following about competition: First, it is winner take-all, so the highest quality system
gets the entire market. If there is a tie for the highest quality component, each wins with
probability ½. Second, losing firms drop out of the market, so the quality of their technology does
not constrain the winner. (Assume that there is an additional small cost of product development so
that a firm with an inferior quality component chooses not to remain because it will make no
sales.) Third, if there is an open system, each component producer chooses its price
simultaneously and non-cooperatively. The equilibrium is for each firm to charge Z/4, quantity is
Z/4 and each firm earns profits of Z2/16. If all three firms for a given component engage in R&D,
the expected quality for that component will equal V/3 + max i θi where subscript i indicates a
firm. This equals V/3 + 2α(1-α)ε.

24

Prior to R&D investment decisions, a firm can choose to vertically integrate and develop a
closed system.26 They then develop a closed system, i.e, they produce components that are
compatible with each other but incompatible with any competitors’ components. A closed system
wins only if the sum of the value of its 3 components exceeds the value of the best open system
which equals the sum of the value of each of the three best components. Since there are two open
firms for each component and consumers can mix and match to choose the best of each
component, the closed system will be disadvantaged. The expected quality of a closed system
component is simply the expectation of a single draw for a component, which is V/3. For example,
if α= 1/3, the probability of a closed system winning is approximately 0.24 which is less than the
1/3 probability of winning for each component in an open system.

Although a closed system is less likely to win, its profits are greater conditional on
winning. The closed system monopolist will set a price of Z/2 for the entire system. Its profits will
be Z2/4, which exceeds the entire open system’s profits of (3/16)Z2. If α=1/3, an open component
has a 50% greater chance of winning, but 25% lower profits conditional on winning. With these
parameters, in a single period model, the equilibrium is for all firms to choose open system
components.

However, when one introduces the dynamics of competition, the results can change
dramatically and favor a closed system. To see this we model a second period of R&D investment.
This R&D competition is Schumpeterian; if a firm invests, then there is some probability it will
develop the technology for a component that surpasses the quality of the incumbent monopolist’s
component. There is no issue of compatibility across generations, i.e., there are no consumer
switching costs. Prior to period 2, a winning open-component firm from period 1 may try to
vertically integrate to form a closed system.

In period 2, each firm again chooses whether or not to invest in R&D. To keep the model
simple, we assume that an investment of k generates a probability γ that component i will have a

26

To keep the exposition of the model simple, we focus on an equilibrium where there can be at most one firm with a

closed system.

25

value that surpasses the existing technology by µ. If no improved system is developed, consumers
will continue to purchase the old system. Again, to simplify the analysis, we assume that the
incumbent and one other firm have access to this R&D capability for each component. Finally to
avoid the possibility of mixed strategy equilibria, we assume that the incumbent moves first; it has
the ability to commit to engage in R&D prior to any challenger.

This game is subject to well-understood forces. An incumbent has less incentive to invest
as its fear of entry subsides because it is already earns monopoly rents -- it cares only about
incremental rents, while the entrant can replace the monopolist and earn both the incremental and
base monopoly rents. Since the incumbent can move first, however, for some parameter values it
may choose to invest in order to deter the entrant from investment.

For each element of the open system, it is easy to characterize the equilibrium. For low
levels of k, both invest. As k increases, holding all other parameters constant, the incumbent does
not invest and the entrant does; as k continues to increase, preemption becomes possible and the
incumbent invests and the entrant does not. For very high levels of k, neither firm invests.

The key difference between an open and closed system is that in the closed system, an
entrant for a single component cannot invest in R&D, succeed and thereby displace the incumbent
unless every other component’s potential entrant also invests in R&D and succeeds. We assume
that the each first generation component is protected by a patent, so that if a company develops a
single new component to compete against a closed system, it cannot obtain other components to
provide a product to consumers.27 The probability of three innovations is γ3, so unless γ is close to
1, the likelihood of displacing a closed system is small relative to displacing at least one element
of an open system. Thus, for some parameter values, there will be R&D investment by entrants if
the incumbent system is open, but there will be no R&D investment by entrants if the incumbent
system is closed. Closing a system could lead to dramatic reductions in dynamic innovation
competition.

27

This is an extreme assumption that helps illustrate the basic point dramatically. The assumption can be weakened

and the same basic forces will still apply. We discuss this point briefly below.

26

If the closed system is unchallenged, the incumbent monopolist will invest in R&D only if
the incremental profits cover the cost of innovation. Since it does not reap all the benefits of
product improvement, there will be less R&D investment than is socially desirable. An open
system is likely to lead to more competitive innovation, but the level of innovation could be
socially excessive. The motivation of substituting oneself for the existing monopolist as the
recipient of existing monopoly profits is rent-seeking that has no social value. However, the only
way to do this is to engage in socially valuable innovative activity.

In many settings, it is possible to convert an open system to a closed system by imposing
incompatibilities at low cost. In our model, after the winning components are determined in the
first stage of R&D competition, the winnings firms could choose to create a closed system through
vertical integration or contractually. If possible, this would allow them to deter competitive
innovation without having to bear the heightened risk associated with developing a closed system
in the first stage.

One way to interpret the model is in terms of externalities. The beneficiaries of open
systems are future consumers and firms that will have R&D opportunities in the future. If all of
these parties could get together to provide appropriate subsidies and coordinate R&D efforts,
efficient displacement of the closed system monopolist would occur. Such coordination is, of
course, impossible. The result is that too little investment in displacing a closed system may occur
and that there may be an incentive for open system suppliers to coordinate and close their system.
The model is most similar in structure to Nalebuff’s papers on bundling.28 These papers
focus on the difficulty for a single product producer to compete against a bundled product. In his
model, there are no complementarities in demand, but pricing strategies by the incumbent makes
single product entry less profitable and plays a similar role to the independent uncertainties of
R&D that drive our model.

28

See Nalebuff (1999) and Nalebuff (2000).

27

There are a number of possible extensions to the model. It may be extreme to assume that
innovation in all three components is necessary to replace the existing technology. If one develops
a much superior single component, it may be possible to use non-proprietary technology for the
other components. This may reduce the advantage of a closed system, but not completely. The
closed system monopolist will have an incentive to devote significant resources to R&D for any
component where significant competition exists. A closed system monopolist has the ability to
focus its R&D efforts at the component that is most vulnerable. A single component competitor
will generate external benefits for other component firms -- unless they can coordinate and
subsidize the innovative firm, the incumbent’s advantage and ability to deter remains. In addition,
the incumbent could try to acquire any firm that is successful and incorporate the component into
its system.

Open systems have additional consumer benefits when there is horizontal differentiation
among components. Variety of components that are compatible can add significant value. This
may be another source of welfare loss from closing a system.

The model implies that the benefits to winning with a closed system may be large – shortrun and long-run market power without the need to invest too heavily in R&D to maintain its
position. This suggests that firms could devote enormous resources in the competition to have the
winning closed system. The model does not allow variable levels of R&D investment. In a richer
model, the efficiency question is whether this compensates for the welfare losses from the closed
system. There are several reasons to think that it would not. First, there may be significant
diminishing returns of consumer benefits and perhaps even the private benefit from incremental
spending on R&D or marketing to become the initial winner. If the former is the case, consumers
do not benefit much from the intense competition to be the monopolist. If the latter is the case,
expenditures may not be too large.

Second, if initial R&D is very uncertain, no firm may try to innovate with a closed system
because the probability of beating a mix and match open system would be too small. Each firm
will instead develop single components or several components as part of an open system.
However, if at any point one company dominates an important component of the open system, it

28

may have the ability to develop a winning closed system at low cost. If it is technologically
possible to take the winning component and develop proprietary interfaces with other components,
then the firm could acquire or develop the other components. The component producers, fearing
obsolescence may be willing to sell out a low price.

We have developed a story of how Schumpeterian competition between closed and open
systems could result in too little innovation and continued exercise of static market power. If one
accepts the logic of the basic story, the next question is whether or not antitrust policy should play
a role to improve performance. Although the model suggests close scrutiny of mergers or conduct
that creates a closed system, the exact role for antitrust is not straightforward. It is first necessary
to define the conduct that is suspect – it certainly cannot simply prohibit offering a closed system,
nor can investing a great deal in R&D to make the system better than rivals be illegal. In many
circumstances, closed systems may create consumer value by allowing more effective
coordination among components and competition to become the winning closed system may be
effective. Furthermore, the determination of the optimal level of R&D remains elusive, so it does
not follow that simply because creation of a closed system may reduce R&D that the new level of
R&D is less than optimal.

One type of conduct that possibly could present an antitrust problem is actions a firm with
market power takes to make a system closed or more closed.29 Yet the rule of reason analysis
needed would be very difficult and require a great deal of technical sophistication by courts.
Antitrust laws may be too crude a policy tool for dealing with these problems. Maybe subsidies for
maintaining open systems or for open standard-setting organizations would be more effective.

A second set of policies that may be justified are those which promote open systems
perhaps through limited subsidies, tax benefits, lessened antitrust restrictions on institutions that
promote standards, and increased antitrust scrutiny on conduct that subverts such institutions.
Standard setting can be a critical element in having an open system. Therefore, the strategic

29

Economides and White (1994) discuss antitrust implications of closing a system and explain its relationship to tying

and exclusive dealing. They do not focus on the impact of closing a system on innovation.

29

subversion of the standard setting process can be especially harmful to competition between open
and closed systems. In several recent court cases, companies have alleged that a rival participated
in deliberations of collective standard setting in an effort either to obtain information to file
patents that could then be asserted against those adhering to the standard or to encourage adoption
of a technology for which they already had patent rights.30 These acts occurred despite the reliance
upon each other by firms in the standard setting process that the standards raised no patent issues.
The subversion of the setting of open standards can defeat the purpose of having open standards
and could make it impossible for open systems to survive in competition with closed systems.

IP policy could play a significant role as well. Restrictions on the ability to patent certain
types of interfaces or limitations on how such a patent can be enforced may be justified. In
addition, government subsidies for research could include requirements for some degree of
openness.

VI. Conclusion

Economic growth depends in large part on technological change. Laws governing
intellectual property rights protect inventors from competition in order to create incentives for
them to innovate. Antitrust laws constrain how a monopolist can act in order to maintain its
monopoly in an attempt to foster competition. Antitrust doctrines have for the most part been
developed with a static setting in mind. There is a fundamental tension between these two different
types of laws. Attempts to adapt static antitrust analysis to a setting of dynamic R&D competition
through the use of "innovation markets" are likely to lead to error. Applying standard antitrust
doctrines such as tying and exclusivity to R&D settings is likely to be complicated. Only detailed
study of the industry of concern has the possibility of uncovering reliable relationships between
innovation and industry behavior. One important form of competition, especially in certain
network industries, is between open and closed systems. We have presented an example to

30

See, e.g., Micron Technology Inc. v. Rambus Inc., U.S. District Court for District of Delaware, Civil Action No.
DO-792, Rambus Inc. v. Infineon Technologies, U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Richmond,
Civil Action NO. 3:00 CV 524, and FTC v. Dell Computer Corp., 121 FTC 616. Carlton has served as an expert for
Infineon and Micron.

30

illustrate how there is a tendency for systems to close even though an open system is socially more
desirable. Rather than trying to use the antitrust laws to attack the maintenance of closed systems,
an alternative approach would be to use intellectual property laws and regulations to promote open
systems and the standard setting organizations that they require. Recognition that optimal policy
toward R&D requires coordination between the antitrust and intellectual property laws is needed.

References
Arrow, K. 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inventions. In The Rate
and Direction of Inventive Activity, ed. R. Nelson. Princeton University Press.
Bernheim, B.D. and M. Whinston. 1988. Exclusive Dealing. Journal of Political Economy 106:
64-103.
Besen, S. and J.Farrell. 1994. Choosing How to Compete: Strategies and Tactics in
Standardization. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8:117-131.
Carlton, D. 2001. The Lessons from Microsoft, Business Economics 32: 47-53.
Carlton, D. 2002. Should The Merger Guidelines Be Scrapped? Introduction to a Debate,
University of West L.A. Law Review 33: i-v.
Carlton, D. and S. Salop.1996. You Keep on Knocking But You Can't Come In: Evaluating
Restrictions on Access to Input Joint Ventures. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 9.
Carlton, D. and M. Waldman. 2001. The Strategic Use of Tying to Preserve and Create Market
Power in Evolving Industries, forthcoming, Rand Journal of Economics.
Choi J. and Stefandis, C. 2001. Tying, Investment and Dynamic Leverage Theory, Rand Journal
of Economics 32:52-71.
Cohen, W., and R. Levin. 1989. Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market Structure. In Volume
II of Handbook of Industrial Organization, eds. R. Schmalensee and R. Willig. Elsevier
Science Publishers B.V.
Economides, N. and L. White. 1994. Networks and Compatibility: Implications for Antitrust.
European Economic Review 38: 651-662.
Evans, D. and R. Schmalensee. 2001. Some Economic Aspects of Antitrust Analysis in
Dynamically Competitive Industries, in Innovation Policy and the Economy, volume 2., eds.
A. Jaffe, J. Lerner and S. Stern, 1-50.

31

Farrell, J. and G. Saloner. 1985. Standardization, Compatibility and Innovation. Rand Journal of
Economics 16: 70-83.
Farrell, J. and G. Saloner. 1992. Converters, Compatibility and the Control of Interfaces. Journal
of Industrial Economics 40: 9-35.
Gilbert, R., and S. Sunshine. 1995. Incorporating Dynamic Efficiency Concerns in Merger
Analysis: The Use of Innovation Markets. Antitrust Law Journal 63: 569-601.
Hall, B. 1988. The Effect of Takeover Activity on Corporate Research and Development. In
Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences, ed. A. Auerbach. University of Chicago
Press.
Jones, C. and J. Williams. 1998. Measuring the Social Return to R&D. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113: 1119-1135.
Katz, M. and C. Shapiro. 1985. Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility. American
Economic Review 75: 424-440.
Kortum, S. and J. Lerner. 2000. Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation.
Rand Journal of Economics 31: 674-692.
Kremer, M. 1998. Patent Buy-outs: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 1137-1167.
Matutes, C. and P. Regibeau. 1988. “Mix and Match”: Product Compatibility without Network
Externalities. Rand Journal of Economics 19: 221-234.
Methe, D., A. Swaminathan and W. Mitchell. 1996. The Underemphasized Role of Established
Firms as the Sources of Major Innovations. Industrial and Corporate Change 5: 1181-1203.
Nalebuff, B. 1999. Bundling. Working Paper, Yale School of Management.
Nalebuff, B. 2000. Competing against Bundles. Working Paper, Yale School of Management.
New York Times. 1988. A Researcher's Serendipity 50 Years Ago Brought Forth Teflon. April 6.
Porter, M. 2002. Competition and Antitrust: Toward a Productivity based Approach to Evaluating
Mergers and Joint Ventures, University of West L.A. Law Review, 33: 17-34.
Posner, R. 2001. Antitrust Law, 2nd edition, University of Chicago Press.
Pound, J., K. Lehn, and G. Jarrell. 1986. Are Takeovers Hostile to Economic Performance?
Regulation 10: 25-30, 55-56.
Prusa, T. and J.Schmitz, Jr. 1991. Are New Firms an Important Source of Innovation? Evidence
from the PC Software Industry. Economic Letters 35: 339-342.
Schumpeter, J. 1943. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Unwin University Books.
32

Spence, A.M. 1984. Cost Reduction, Competition, and Industry Performance. Econometrica 52:
101-122.
Sutton, J. 1998. Technology and Market Structure. M.I.T. Press
Tether, B. 1998. Small and Large Firms: Sources of Unequal Innovations? Research Policy 27:
725-745.
Wall Street Journal. 1984. Sticking Points: Teflon Is Versatile, but It Is Hell on Skis. October 4.
Wall Street Journal. 1984. Research on an Artificial Heart Leads to a Breathable Fabric. October
19.
Wall Street Journal. 1990. Many Uses Are Seen for ESA's Analyzer. February 5.
Whinston, M. 1990. Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion. American Economic Review 80: 1-26.

33

