                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               PATENT PROTECTION AND INNOVATION OVER 150 YEARS


                                              Josh Lerner


                                         Working Paper 8977
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w8977


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2002




I thank for their assistance the librarians of the Boston Public Library, Fish & Richardson, the Hagley
Museum Library, the Harvard University Libraries, Testa, Hurwitz & Thibeault, and especially Ines Salter
of the Max Planck Institute for Foreign and International Patent, Copyright and Competition Law and
Stephen van Dulken of the British Library. Helpful comments were provided by seminar participants at
Chicago, Harvard, and the NBER, as well as by Sam Kortum, Jenny Lanjouw, Ariel Pakes, and Steven
Shavell. Claudia Goldin and Sam Kortum helped identify data sources. Harvard Business School’s Division
of Research provided financial support. Parmeshwar Chadha, Colin Kegler, Alex Spencer, and especially
Vera Alexandropoulou provided excellent research assistance. All errors are my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Protection and Innovation Over 150 Years
Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 8977
June 2002
JEL No. O31, O34



                                             ABSTRACT

        The paper seeks to understand the impact of the patent system on innovation by examining shifts
in the strength of patent protection across sixty countries and a 150-year period. An examination of 177
policy changes reveals that strengthening patent protection appears to have few positive effects on patent
applications by entities in the country undertaking the policy change, whether filings in Great Britain or
the nation making the policy change are considered. Cross-sectional analyses suggest that the impact of
patent protection-enhancing shifts were greater in nations with weaker initial protection and greater
economic development, consistent with economic theory. I address concerns about the endogeneity of
these changes by employing an instrumental variable approach.




Josh Lerner
Morgan Hall
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

       The impact of intellectual property rights on innovation is one of the most

persistent empirical questions in the economics of technological change. In a memorable

formulation, Penrose [1951] noted:

       If national patent laws did not exist, it would be difficult to make a
       conclusive case for introducing them; but the fact that they do exist shifts
       the burden of proof and it is equally difficult to make a really conclusive
       case for abolishing them.

Nearly five decades later, a literature review by Mazzoleni and Nelson [1998] reached a

similar conclusion, “our lack of knowledge here clearly limits our ability to analyze

intelligently the current pressing issues of patent reform.”



       This paper addresses this question by examining the impact of major patent policy

shifts in sixty nations over the past 150 years that enhanced the amount of patent

protection provided (but not the scope of awards). I examine the changes in patent

applications by residents of the nation undertaking the policy change. While I tabulate

the filings that the residents made domestically, confounding factors may influence this

measure. Thus, I focus on filings made by residents of the nation undertaking the policy

change in a nation with a relatively constant patent policy, Great Britain. As a control, I

also compute the changes of filings by foreign entities in the country undertaking the

policy change. The policy shifts and their impact on patenting activity are determined

from examinations of numerous guides to patenting activity, as well as the publications of

the World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO) and the various national patent offices.
          The basic patterns are striking.     Consider, for instance, policy changes that

strengthen patent protection.      Once overall trends in patenting are adjusted for, the

changes in patenting by residents of the country undertaking the policy change are

negative, both in Great Britain and in the country itself. Subject to the caveats noted in

the conclusion, this evidence suggests that these policy changes did not spur innovation.



          The extensive theoretical literature on patenting suggests at least three predictions

about when strengthening patent policy should particularly boost innovation. To explore

these suggestions, I examine cross-sectional differences across these events. Consistent

with theoretical suggestions, I find that patent protection-enhancing shifts have a lesser

impact on innovation when the nation already has strong patent protection and when its

per capita gross domestic product lags further behind other nations. These patterns

continue to hold when I employ an instrumental variables approach, which partially

addresses the concern that the timing of these policy changes is not exogenous.



          This paper takes a considerably different tack than earlier works on this question,

which have largely focused on understanding the impacts of a single patent policy

reform.      Examples include studies of the broadening of Japanese patent scope

(Sakakibara and Branstetter [2001]), the establishment of the Court of Appeals for the

Federal Circuit in the United States (Kortum and Lerner [1998], Hall and Ziedonis

[2001]), and the strengthening of patent protection of pharmaceuticals in such nations as

India (Lanjouw [1998]) and Italy (Scherer and Weisburst [1995]).                These papers

generally cast doubt on claims that enhancing patent policy changes spurs innovative




                                                2
behavior. My results are largely consistent with the earlier work. But by aggregating a

large number of episodes, I am able to reduce the problem of confounding effects that

individual case studies often face.



       This paper is also related to works in the international trade literature, which have

sought to relate indexes of intellectual property protection (such as those developed by

Ginarte and Park [1997] and Rapp and Rozek [1990]) to the volume of trade or foreign

direct investment. (This literature is reviewed in Maskus [2000].) Reflecting the nature

of these indexes, these papers have typically examined these relationships at a single

point in time or over a very short time period. As a result, these analyses have found it

challenging to disentangle the causal relationships: e.g., the possibility that countries

could have greater intellectual property protection because they engage in more

international trade, not vice versa.



       The plan of this paper is as follows. The second section reviews the theoretical

work that motivates the analysis. I discuss the construction of the data set in Section 3.

Section 4 presents the analysis. The final section concludes the paper.



2. Theoretical Perspectives

       In this section, I discuss theoretical predictions concerning the impact of enhanced

patent protection on innovation and the implications for my analysis.




                                             3
A. Impact of Enhanced Patent Protection

       Much of the theoretical economics literature has assumed an unambiguous

relationship between the strength of patent protection and the rate of innovation. To cite

a few examples, in Gilbert and Shapiro [1990], Kamien and Schwartz [1974], Klemperer

[1990], and Waterson [1990], an increase in the amount of patent protection offered

unambiguously increases the rate of innovation.       A crucial assumption behind such

findings is that the nature of the patent award does not affect the incentives of subsequent

researchers to pursue innovations.1



       This assumption has been relaxed in a line of work on sequential innovation,

beginning with Scotchmer and Green [1990]. When the nature of protection offered the

initial innovator affects the incentives of subsequent researchers, the conclusions may

change. The effects of such an adjustment are perhaps most starkly illustrated by Bessen

and Maskin [2000], who assume that a firm must be actively competing in the product

market in order to introduce a next generation product. In this case, a strong patent award

has the effect of precluding other firms from pursuing a subsequent innovation. They

suggest that strong patent protection may actually lead to significantly less innovation

than no patent protection at all.2


1
 Williams [1994] suggests that while an increase in patent protection may spur
innovation, its effect may be very modest. His simulations suggest that a 10% increase in
patent life will boost productivity by less than one-tenth of one percent.
2
 In addition to the theoretical rationales suggested above, there could be several other
reasons why enhanced patent protection could lead to a (temporary) decline in patenting.
One possibility is a “crowding out” effect. Case studies suggest, for instance, that foreign
pharmaceutical companies aggressively expanded their operations in countries that
enhanced pharmaceutical patent protection. In some of these cases, the new entrants
hired many local researchers away from basic research positions with local firms. Often,


                                             4
B. The Relative Effect of Patent Policy Shifts

       Theorists have also focused on the question of when strong patent protection is

likely to have a powerful effect on innovation. Researchers have examined the impact of

differences along two dimensions: the strength of the patent protection in the nation and

the technological standing of the nation relative to other countries.



       The strength of existing patent protection in the nation. Gallini [1992] considers

the impact of increasing patent life when rivals can “invent around” previous discoveries

(at some cost). When patent awards are short, her model predicts that increasing the

length of a patent award will lead to innovators enjoying increased rewards, and hence to

them having a greater incentive to innovate: stronger patents will lead to more

innovation. But above a certain threshold, increasing patent length leads rivals to seek to

imitate the patent. The losses from the increased imitation may more than offset the

gains from the longer patent protection: when patents are already strong, increasing

patent length further may actually depress the level of innovation. This insight is refined

in a series of subsequent models, such as Cadot and Lippman [1995] and Horwitz and Lai

[1996]. These models similarly suggest that the relationship between patent length and

innovation will display an “inverted U” shape.




the foreign companies used the scientists for more applied roles (e.g., obtaining local
regulatory approval for already-developed drugs). Since in many cases the local
companies found it hard to replace these individuals, fewer domestic patents may have
resulted. Alternatively, local companies may have initiated basic research programs after
the policy change, but these may have taken many years to generate any patent filings.



                                              5
        The stage of the nation’s development. Much of the economics research into the

determinants of the optimal degree of patent protection has focused on the nation’s stage

of development. Initial analyses focused on a single-country setting. In the classic model

of Nordhaus [1969], a policy-maker considered how to encourage an incremental (cost

saving) innovation. The greater the degree of patent protection, he assumed, the greater

the resources that a private firm will devote to pursuing the innovation and the greater the

probability of a discovery (though the probability increases at a declining rate with the

amount spent on R&D). The analysis suggests that the impact of changes in patent

protection on innovation will be determined by the curvature of the R&D cost function,

which may be interpreted as the ease of further discovery for a given additional

expenditure.    In settings where relatively modest investments are likely to lead to

substantial discoveries but progress beyond a certain point is much more costly—which

Nordhaus suggests will characterize nations who are technological followers—increased

patent protection will have a limited impact on the pace of innovation.



        This insight has been corroborated in subsequent models that depict a world with

both a developed and developing nation. A number of papers (e.g., Chin and Grossman

[1990], Deardorff [1992], and Helpman [1993]) suggest that mechanistically transferring

the intellectual property practices in place in the developed world to developing countries

is problematic. These works suggest that the spur to domestic innovation will be modest

in these settings.3

3
 Diwan and Rodrik [1991], however, show that if the developing country has a need for
innovations that differ from that of the developed nation, strong intellectual property
protection may be desirable. Otherwise, it may not be able to induce the developed
nation to undertake innovations in this area.


                                             6
C. The Mapping Between Theory and Empirical Tests

       These works discussed above focus on innovations by domestic entities. One way

to test these models is to examine patenting by residents of a large number of nations

making patent policy shifts. Patent applications by domestic residents can be examined

both in the nation undertaking the policy change and in a nation with a relatively stable

patent policy over this period.



       The mapping between what I seek to measure (innovative activity) and the

dependent variable in this analysis (patent applications) is, of course, not exact. It has

long been recognized (see the discussion, for instance, Griliches [1990]) that many

important innovations are not patented, while some patents are awarded for very modest

discoveries. While it would have been desirable to assess the importance of the patents

through the analysis of patent citation and renewal data, this information was not

available for most countries and time periods.



       It is worth emphasizing, however, that what I will be analyzing here is not the

absolute level of patenting, but rather the changes in patenting associated with policy

shifts. As long as the propensity to patent does not change, this measure will be a

reasonable proxy for the shifting level of innovative activities.     I also address this

problem by examining not just patent applications filed by domestic entities in the

country undergoing the policy change, but also activity in another country where patent




                                            7
policy has been relatively constant. To control for patenting trends, I adjust patent counts

by the overall growth in patenting.



       It is also important to emphasize the fact that while I examine several types of

policy changes that enhance patent holder rights, I do not include changes that altered the

scope of patent protection. If shifts that broadened patent scope were included, the

interpretation of the dependent variable would be problematic: for instance, did patent

applications fall because a decline in the amount of innovation, or rather because single

patent filings now encompassed discoveries that previously had to be protected through

multiple filings?



       The models discussed above generally do not discuss patenting by foreign

entities. (Scotchmer [2001] is an important exception.) The impact of such a policy shift

on foreign entities is likely to be very different. For a typical foreign entity, which is

likely to sell only a small fraction of its products in the country making the policy

change, the impact of the policy shift on the decision to pursue an innovation will be

much smaller. But the patent policy shift may nonetheless influence the decision to

pursue patent protection in that country.        Even though an enhancement of patent

protection is not likely to shift foreign firms’ level of innovation, after such a policy

change the companies may become much more likely to seek patent protection in that

country for their inventions. If we see a shift in foreign patent filings around the same

events, it helps reassure us that we have properly identified a set of significant policy

changes.




                                             8
3. Constructing the Data Set

       In this section, I describe the process by which the data set was created. Because

of the diversity of sources employed (a number of which have not been previously

employed in economic research), I discuss this aspect of the research at some length.



A. Defining the Sample

       I employed as my sample the sixty countries listed in the International Monetary

Fund’s International Financial Statistics [1999] with the highest total gross domestic

product (GDP) in 1997.4 This included many nations that experienced considerable

economic growth, but also others (e.g., Argentina, Iraq) that underwent substantial

reversals.



       I included these nations in the sample back until 1850 or until the country ceased

to be an independent political entity, whichever came later.        My rationale for this

approach was that most colonies did not have independent patent policies. Most did not

grant patents at all: they simply registered patents granted by their colonial overseer

without any formal review. If the colonies had patent systems, they usually closely

mirrored those of their colonizers. As a result of these omissions, this sample is not



4
 In undertaking these rankings, if the country was missing GDP data for 1997, I used the
GDP and exchange rate for the most recent year for which such data were available
(inflation-adjusting the result to insure comparability). In one case (Iraq), the volume had
no data for the past five years. In this case, a consensus estimate from press accounts was
used. In the second case (Taiwan), a country was not listed owing to questions about its
political status. In this case, data were obtained from government publications.



                                             9
balanced: the number of observations increased over time, as more nations became

independent.5



B. Identifying Patent Policy Changes

       I then identified significant changes to the amount of patent protection offered. I

determined this information using guidebooks to the world patent systems, which have

been published frequently since the early nineteenth century.              I also employed

publications of the British Patent Office (Commissioners of Patents’ Journal), the Patent

Office Society (Journal of the Patent Office Society and related titles), the publisher

Trade Activities (Patent and Trade Mark Review), and the WIPO (Industrial Property

and La Propriete Industrielle), as well as legal monographs on individual nations’ patent

systems in the collections of Harvard University and the Max Planck Institute for Foreign

and International Patent, Copyright and Competition Law. (The key data collected and

sources employed are summarized at http://www.people.hbs.edu/jlerner/PatPolSum.pdf.)



       Five principles guided my selection of events to include in the analysis. First, I

wished to focus on episodes where the government consciously set out to shift its patent

policy. I consequentially eliminated policy changes that occurred within five years of the

establishment of a nation, its restoration after a period of being a part of another state, or

5
 Determining what constituted an independent country was not always a simple matter.
In some cases, colonies underwent prolonged independence struggles, while in other
cases, countries enjoyed a great deal of independence while under the official control or
informal influence of another nation. In general, I sought to include a nation from the
date that its independence was declared (conditional on its eventually becoming a widely
recognized country). In cases where a country was divided into several political entities,
I used the patent policy (and other characteristics discussed below) from the most
economically significant portion.


                                             10
a revolution that involved a change of the form of government. I also excluded policy

changes that were designated as temporary measures during a time of war.



       Second, I wanted to be sure that the events were precisely dated.             I thus

eliminated changes where I could not determine the year of the policy shift. For instance,

some nations during the nineteenth century simply began issuing patents on chemicals,

even though legislation remained on the books for many years thereafter indicating that

these subjects were not patentable.



       Third, I eliminated changes to the breadth of patent protection. In these cases, as

noted above, the interpretation of one of my dependent variables (domestic patenting)

would be problematic. I thus did not include changes in statuary patent scope or in the

number of claims that could be included in the patent.



       Fourth, I wanted to compare the reactions to the policy changes by domestic

entities to those by foreign entities. I thus eliminated policy changes that happened at the

same time as discriminatory provisions against foreign applicants were either imposed or

relaxed.



       Finally, I wanted to insure that the changes were substantive shifts in patent

policy. I consequentially only not included shifts in the most visible and controversial

areas of patent policy. These areas were as follows:




                                            11
    •   Whether the country offered patent protection at all, either in general or for
        certain critical classes of discoveries. While by 1999, 59 out of the 60 largest
        countries had patent protection, during the nineteenth and early twentieth
        centuries patent systems were far from universal. Similarly, the decision to
        extend patent protection to chemicals, foodstuffs, and medicinals was highly
        controversial in many countries.

    •   The duration of the patents awarded to domestic applicants. Because in some
        cases, awards were measured from different starting points (e.g., application and
        award dates), I employed some assumptions in making these calculations. In
        making the computations, for 1950 and afterwards, I assumed that awards
        occurred two years after the application date (one year after publication date).
        Between 1900 and 1949, I assumed awards occurred one year after the application
        date (and publication date). Before 1900, I assumed awards occurred only a
        nominal period after application.

    •   The cost of the patent. Many nations adjusted their costs on a periodic basis,
        often to keep up with inflation. In order to insure that I just identified real policy
        shifts, I only included changes in the cost of patents if they entailed at least a
        100% increase or a 50% decrease in patent cost.6 Because in many cases,
        countries required a series of fees over the patent life, I compared the net present
        value of the payments associated with the patent of the longest duration normally
        granted, discounted back to the date of the original patent application using the
        U.S. 10-year treasury yield (or an estimated yield of government bonds in earlier
        years), and expressed in 1998 U.S. dollars.

    •   The period of time after which patents could be revoked or compulsorily licensed
        if they were not reduced to practice (“worked”) in a set period. Occasionally,
        when patentees could choose patents of different lengths, the minimum period in
        which the patent had to be worked differed. I examined the working period for
        the patent of the longest duration normally granted.

In total, I ended up with 177 events in 51 out of the 60 nations in the sample. The first

change in the sample occurred in 1852 and the last in 1998. In many cases, the policy

shift affected several elements of the patent system, or two closely related bills were

6
 In many cases, countries raised the price of a patent dramatically after a period of
hyperinflation, but the change returned the real fee back to what it was before the
inflationary episode. These changes did not appear to be real policy shifts. I eliminated
changes that followed periods of hyper-inflation or deflation (i.e., cases where the
currency depreciated by 100% against the dollar or depreciated by 50%) unless the new
cost of the patent was less than half or more than double the cost before the period in real
terms.



                                             12
passed in the same year. Consequentially, the number of distinct policy changes was

larger, a total of 271.



        The number of events and distinct policy changes occurring in each decade are

depicted in Figure 1. Because the number of countries in the sample varies, I normalized

the changes by the number of nations that were active at the beginning of the decade.

The figure indicates that there have been five waves of patent policy changes, from the

“Patent Controversy” of the 1850s and 1860s (Penrose [1951]) to the response to the

changes triggered by the 1993 Uruguay Round agreements.



C. Identifying Patenting around the Policy Shifts

        The next phase was to determine the patent applications filed around the time of

the policy changes. I identified three distinct measures of activity: patent filings in Great

Britain by residents of the country undertaking the policy change, patent applications by

domestic entities in the country undertaking the policy change, and applications by

foreign entities in that country. I chose Great Britain because its patent office has

consistently tabulated the national identity of the patent applicants since 1884 (except

during the years of World War I) and the relative constancy of its patent policy. In these

tabulations, I sought to only include traditional patent awards, eliminating various weaker

variants that nations have sometimes also offered to inventors. These included design

patents, inventors’ certificates, patents of addition, plant patents, and utility model

patents.




                                             13
       I identified this information from a variety of sources. The WIPO has tabulated

these filings since 1962 in La Propriete Industrielle and (subsequently) Industrial

Property, and Great Britain has reported filings in the Annual Report of the Comptroller

General. WIPO has also compiled older data in 100 Years Protection of Industrial

Property [1983]. Unfortunately, the WIPO data were in some cases inaccurate. In

particular, during the early years of the European Patent Office, filings through the

central office were not always properly credited to the individual countries selected. I

corrected the data through an examination of the databases and publications of the

European Patent Office and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.



       More problematic was the fact that the data were quite incomplete. In many

cases, the WIPO publications did not present any information on applications prior to

1960, or failed to divide the applications between domestic and foreign filings. (While a

few other compilations exist, such as Federico [1964], they were largely based on WIPO

data and had similar failings.) Thus, I was forced to turn to publications of the various

national patent offices to compile this information. I found the volumes in the Science

Reference Library (formerly the Patent Office Library) of the British Library. This

collection has had a policy of acquiring all patent office publications since its formation

in the 1850s. The publications that contained the necessary data were identified through

Rimmer and van Dulken [1992] and consultations with the reference librarian.




                                            14
        The data in the national publications were sometimes inconsistent. In some cases,

the tabulations employed a different interval than the calendar year that I sought to use

throughout. In these cases, I used the reporting year that corresponded most closely to

the calendar year of interest. In other cases, certain other patent awards (e.g., utility

model awards) were included in the total count of patent applications. I used the data as

long as additional awards did not appear to constitute more than 10% of the patent

applications in the total.7



        I sought to collect the data for “event window” from five years before to five

years after the policy change. In all, I was able to identify data on domestic and foreign

patent filings in the country for 145 of the 177 event windows, and British application

data for 171. (In some cases, the information was insufficient to compute the changes

from two years before the policy change to two years afterwards, as analyzed below.) I

also collected similar data for the “estimation period” from twenty to five years prior to

the event.



D. Supplemental Data

        I also collected a variety of additional information about the countries at the time

of the shifts. This information was drawn from a wide variety of sources, but most

7
 In certain cases in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, nations (including the
United States) reported the breakdown of the nationality of their patent awards, but just
the number (not the breakdown) of applications. In many instances, a large fraction of
applications were accepted, making it possible to impute the breakdown of applications
quite accurately. In these cases, if the number of applications and awards (lagged one
year) were within 25% of each other, I used the data at hand to impute the number of
applications. In particular, I assumed that the applications in a given year were divided
proportionately to the awards in the subsequent year.


                                             15
important were Banks [1999], International Monetary Fund [1999], Maddison [1995],

and Mitchell [1998]. The variables employed in this analysis included:

•   Population of the country.

•   Per capita gross domestic product. The variable was converted into current U.S.
    dollars using, if possible, a purchasing power parity-based deflator. It was then
    converted into 1998 dollars using the U.S. GDP deflator (back to 1889) or the U.S.
    consumer price index (for earlier years).

•   The coincidence of the event window and a change in either the country’s national
    borders (representing either at least 10% of its surface area or population) or a war
    within the territory of the country (lasting at least three months and affecting at least
    10% of the nation’s territory). These indicators were coded as +1 if there was a war
    in progress at the end of the period that was not present at the beginning or an
    expansion of territory. They were coded as –1 if there was a war in progress at the
    beginning of the period and not at the end or a contraction of territory.8

       I sought to match the dates of these measures as closely as possible to the patent

policy change, typically using the same calendar year.         For the nineteenth century,

however, I relaxed these requirements: I employed an observation as long as it was

within five years of the patent policy change. This was particularly true of the estimates

of gross domestic product, which were frequently only periodically available.



4. Analysis of Patent Protection

A. Summary Statistics

       I began by simply summarizing the changing level of patent applications in the

years before and after the policy shift. Panel A of Table 1 reports the changes in patent


8
 In unreported regressions, I also used some additional control variables. These included
the manner in which the effective ruler responsible for day-to-day governance of the
country was selected (direct election, indirect election, or non-elective), whether the
legislature was selected through an elective process, a ranking of the effectiveness of the
legislative body, the mixture between agricultural, industrial, and services employment,
and the legal family into which the nation’s commercial laws fell.


                                             16
applications filed from two years before to two years after the policy shift. In order to

enhance the sample size, when the necessary observation was missing, I substituted data

from either three years before or after the change or one year before or after.



       I divided the observations by the type of policy change. Most shifts (64%)

unambiguously increased patent protection.          The remainder either unambiguously

reduced patent protection (24%) or else contained both protection-enhancing and

detracting elements (12%). In view of the small sample sizes, I treated the ambiguous

and negative changes together in the reported analysis. (In unreported univariate and

regression analyses, I undertook the same analyses without the ambiguous cases. The

results were little changed.)



       Domestic and foreign patent applications both increased in countries undertaking

patent protection-enhancing shifts. The increase was larger, on both an absolute and

percentage basis, among the foreign applicants. (In the sample as a whole, the mean

number of British, domestic, and foreign patent applications during the year of the policy

change were 739, 13,296, and 14,118 respectively.) No evidence appeared of a rise in

British patent applications.



       Panel A does not, however, control for changes in the overall propensity to seek

patent protection over the period. In event studies of stock price returns, it is standard to

present returns net of an appropriate market index. I similarly sought to control for the

changing global patenting trends. Some periods, such as the depression years of the




                                             17
1930s and the two world wars, saw a dramatic decline in patent applications across all

nations, while others saw a substantial increase.



        To control for the changing patenting environment, I computed the “adjusted”

difference: the difference in the number of patent applications filed in this interval, less

the difference that would have been expected, had the applications grown at the same rate

as in other countries. To determine the growth rate in other countries, I constructed an

index using the ten nations with the longest time series of patent application data. These

nations included some where patenting has grown dramatically (e.g., the United States)

and others where it has not (for instance, Argentina). In Panels B and C, I report the

analysis using two indexes, one assigning an equal weight to each of the ten nations, and

one weighting each observation by the total patent applications filed. In each case, I

compute:

              I − I           
A+ 2 − A− 2 −  + 2 − 2 * A− 2 
               I −2           

where A+2 is the number of applications filed two years after the policy shift, A-2 is the

number of applications filed two years before, I+2 is the level of the index two years after

the policy change, and I-2 is the index two years before.9




9
 It might be wondered why I did not examine the percentage change in the number of
applications filed. In some cases, countries had a very small number of applications
before a policy change. Even a modest rise in the number of filings thus led to a huge
percentage jump in applications. While the same patterns appear in the percentage
tabulations, the presence of such extreme cases made the comparisons very noisy.



                                             18
         Once the adjustment for overall patent application growth was made, a stark

difference appeared in the case of patent protection-enhancing changes.          While the

change in foreign patenting was positive, adjusted patent applications by residents of the

country undergoing the policy change declined, whether British or domestic filings were

considered. The response of foreign patenting was much more modest in magnitude in

the case of protection-reducing and ambiguous changes. The table also reports similar

tabulations for the three most frequently encountered classes of changes: enhancements

to the subject matter covered by patent protection (56% of 177 events involved such a

change), the length of patent protection (50%), and the length of the working period

(21%).



         I also report the statistical significance of these changes. In the financial event

study literature, a standard procedure for computing test statistics for event studies has

emerged. First, the standard deviation of returns during an estimation period, which does

not overlap with the event window, is computed. Each observation is then weighted by

the inverse of the standard deviation when undertaking univariate or regression analyses

(see Brown and Warner [1980]). In this way, observations where the stock price is very

volatile are assigned less weight. In the same spirit, I computed the standard deviation of

the change in patent applications filed in the period from twenty years to five years prior

to the policy shift. I weighted both the t-tests and the regression analyses by the inverse

of the standard deviation.10 Not only did the adjusted patenting by residents of the

10
 I undertook separate calculations when examining British, domestic, and foreign
applications. When I was unable to find data on patent applications in the estimation
period, or if the nation did not extend patent protection during this period, I assigned the
observation a weight equal to that of the median event. Brown and Warner [1980] also


                                             19
country undertaking the policy change not increase after patent protection-enhancing

policy shifts, it actually fell by a significant amount. Foreign applications, however,

reacted positively to protection-enhancing changes, suggesting that we had properly

identified a set of significant policy shifts.



        Figures 2 and 3 depict graphically the average changes in patent applications

around protection-enhancing and other patent policy changes, net of the value-weighted

index. Around protection-enhancing changes, the same striking pattern appeared: patent

application by foreign entities increased dramatically, while filings by domestic entities

(whether in Great Britain or in the country undergoing the policy change) fell on an

adjusted basis.11 The pattern was much more muted in the case of the ambiguous or

patent protection-reducing changes. Domestic filings changed little and the growth of

foreign patenting was much more modest.



        One concern with the above analysis was that it might be inappropriate to use the

same index for each class of patent applications.        For instance, the propensity of

applicants to file foreign patents may have grown much more quickly than the tendency


suggest more complex ways to compute these weights, which correct for the cross-
sectional correlation of changes in the estimation period. To introduce such refinements,
I would have had to undertake much greater data collection on patenting outside the event
windows. In light of the time and expense of this effort, I did not pursue these
suggestions.
11
  The fact that these changes began in the years before the policy change may reflect lags
in the policy process. In many instances, changes were discussed for years before being
implemented, and hence at least partially anticipated. In a number of cases, in fact, there
was a significant lag between the decision to change the policy and its actual
implementation.



                                                 20
to file domestically. In this case, the adjustment process may lead to the growth of

domestic patenting being understated, and that of foreign patenting overstated.



       To address this concern, in an unreported analysis I explored the robustness of

these patterns to the use of an alternative index based on just the same type of patenting.

In other words, instead of using the index based on all applications in the ten countries to

adjust the number of applications, I employed an index based on domestic filings in the

ten nations to adjust the domestic filings, and so forth. The change had a very modest

impact on the analysis.        In some countries, such as the United States, the ratio of

domestic to foreign filings fell sharply over the twentieth century. But in others, such as

Japan, this ratio rose considerably. Thus, the effects of the change were small. For

instance, in the case of patent protection-enhancing changes, the differences in domestic

and British patenting remained negative and the foreign patenting difference remained

positive.   These shifts continued to be statistically significant, at least at the 10%

confidence level.



       In other unreported analyses, I adjusted the composition of the countries in the

indexes. For instance, I was concerned that since many of the nations undertaking policy

changes were developing ones, the index might be distorted by the presence of the most

developed nations. I recomputed the index, restricting it at all times to nations whose per

capita gross domestic product was below 75% of that of the wealthiest nation. The

results were little changed.




                                              21
B. Regression Analyses

       The univariate analysis discussed in the previous section suggested that patent

applications originating in the nation undertaking a patent policy shift (whether filed in

Great Britain or domestically) did not increase significantly in response to policy

changes. But the cross-sectional differences in the sample may nonetheless be of interest.



       The theoretical literature discussed in Section 2 offered a number of predictions

about when strengthened patent policy should be most efficacious in spurring innovation.

In particular, it suggested that protection-enhancing changes would have less impact

when patent protection was already strong, would have more of an effect when protection

was weak, and would be less effective when countries were far behind the technological

frontier. This section examines these suggestions.



       Following the finance event study literature, I estimated regressions in which the

“adjusted” growth in patenting by residents of the country undertaking the policy change

was the dependent variable. (I considered both patenting in Great Britain and in the

country undertaking the change.)      As independent variables, I employed a dummy

variable denoting whether the policy represented a patent protection-enhancing change

and one of three alternatives: a dummy denoting whether protection prior to the policy

change was particularly strong, a dummy denoting whether protection was particularly

weak, and the per capita GDP of the country relative to that of the wealthiest nation at

that time. In the reported regressions, I used the length of patent protection to designate

countries with particularly strong (those where patents extended eighteen or more years




                                            22
from the application date) or weak (those where patent life was ten years from the

application date or less) protection. Of greatest interest was the interaction of the positive

change measure with the three additional variables.



       I also employed a variety of control variables. These included the type of policy

change, the inception of a conflict on the territory of or a change in the boundaries of the

nation during the event window, the number of patent applications filed two years before

the policy change, and the population of the nation (in millions). I again weighted each

observation by the inverse of the standard deviation of changes in patent applications

during the estimation period.



       Table 2 examines patenting by the residents of the country undertaking the patent

policy change in Great Britain. The dummy variable indicating a patent protection-

enhancing policy shift was not significantly positive on a consistent basis. But in two out

of three cases, the interaction term took on the predicted sign and was significant at the

5% confidence level. In the first and second regressions, the interaction between the

dummy variable denoting strong patent protection prior to the policy change and that

denoting a protection-enhancing change was significantly negative.             In the fourth

regression, the interaction between the relative GDP measure and a protection-enhancing

change was significantly positive. This suggests that enhancing patent protection was

less effective when patent protection was already strong and in poorer countries. For

instance, in a country whose per capita GDP was three-quarters of the richest nation, a

patent policy-enhancing change stimulated 636 additional British patent applications than




                                             23
an ambiguous or negative change. In a country whose per capita GDP was about one-

quarter of that of the richest nation, such a change generated no additional patents.



       The analysis of patent applications in the country undertaking the policy change,

reported in Table 3, was disappointing. The only significant variables were two control

variables. Policy changes in larger countries tended to lead to a greater growth in

patenting, which was not surprising in light of the fact that most changes were patent

protection-enhancing. The size of the reaction declined with the number of the patent

applications at the beginning of the event period, consistent with suggestions that there

may be diminishing returns to patenting (Griliches [1990]). Given the greater noisiness

of this measure, however, the failure to discern significant patterns may not be that

surprising.



       In supplemental unreported analyses, I explored the robustness of these results.

The use of longer event windows made little difference, as did adding more detailed

controls for the nature of the policy change, the employment mixture of the country, its

political system, or its legal family. I also explored the robustness of the results to

employing an alternative definition of the initial strength or weakness of patent

protection. I used a measure based on the presence or absence of restrictive provisions on

patent holder rights (e.g., compulsory licensing provisions, prior user rights, provisions

allowing the government to revoke patents at its discretion, working periods of under

three years). Again, patent protection-enhancing changes had significantly less of an

impact on patent applications filed in Britain from countries that already had strong




                                             24
protection. I also employed the alternative indexes discussed in the previous section to

adjust the change in patent applications and estimated Heckman sample selection

regressions, which controlled for the fact that data were missing for some policy changes.

The results were little changed.



C. Addressing Concerns about Causality

        One concern with the above analysis was that patent policy changes might not be

exogenous. For instance, a nation may enhance patent protection at times when its

domestic industry is becoming particularly innovative. While the same concern has not

deterred academics from pursuing hundreds, if not thousands, of event studies using stock

price data (see, for instance, the discussion in Eckbo, Maksimovic, and Williams [1990]),

I can at least partially address this issue by exploiting the history of the patent policy.



        In order to address endogeneity problems, a standard approach is to identify an

instrumental variable.     Such a variable ought to be positively correlated with the

explanatory variable of interest, but not correlated with the potentially confounding

factor. I sought an instrument for the measure of whether the patent policy change was a

positive one or not.



        I used as an instrument another dummy variable, which indicated whether the

policy change took place in the aftermath of the Paris Convention of 1883 or the TRIPs

agreement of 1993.12       The rationale for the use of this instrument was that these


12
  I defined the aftermath as the years 1883 to 1893 and 1992 to 1998 (the end of the
sample). I included 1992, even though the agreement was signed in 1993, because a


                                               25
agreements compelled nations to make protection-enhancing changes to their patent

systems. This measure had a strong positive correlation with the indicator of protection-

enhancing policy changes.      Fully 90% of the policy changes in these years were

protection enhancing, as opposed to 57% in other periods, a difference significant at the

one percent confidence level. But because the impetus to adopt these changes was

largely exogenous to the country, the endogeneity problem should be reduced. (Of

course, some nations, such as Ecuador in the 1885, chose to resign from the International

Union rather than make the required changes, or did not join the Union in the first place.)



       Helping underscore the reasonableness of this instrument was that fact that the

initial patent policies of many nations were quite diverse, and influenced by many factors

other than economic considerations. Case studies of patent policy make clear that many

of the aspects of patent policy were determined by a wide array of actors with very

narrow agendas in mind. Furthermore, as Lerner [2001] highlights, many varied factors

influenced the initial allocation of patent policies, such the family in which the nation’s

commercial legal system originated (consistent with La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,

and Vishny [1998]).



       The results reported above continued to be robust when this instrumental variable

was used. Table 4 presents two representative regressions each from Tables 2 and 3, with

the reform period dummy now used as an instrument for the protection-enhancing

dummy. The results discussed above continued to hold: for instance, the interaction


detailed draft of the Uruguay Round agreement was released in December 1991 (Wegner
[1993]).


                                            26
between positive changes and strong protection was again significantly negative in the

British applications regression.



5. Conclusions

       This paper examined the impact of changes in patent policy on innovation.

Rather than analyzing a single case study, I studied 177 of the most significant shifts in

patent policy across sixty countries and 150 years. Adjusting for the change in overall

patenting, the impact of patent protection-enhancing shifts on applications by residents

was actually negative, whether filings in Great Britain or domestically were considered.

The cross-sectional differences in the impact of these shifts were largely consistent with

the predictions of economic theorists. These findings are consistent with earlier case

studies of individual policy changes.



       This analysis had two limitations, which suggest the need for further research.

The first of these is to understand the interaction between patenting and other forms of

technology policy. As highlighted in papers by Kremer [1998], Shavell and van Ypersele

[2001], and Wright [1983], in a number of historical instances nations have offered prizes

or recognitions to discoverers of important inventions. To what extent did these or other

policy tools—such as trade secrecy and government subsidies and procurement—change

at the same time as shifts in patent policy? On a related note, did shifts in judicial

doctrine mirror those in statutory protection, or serve to dampen their impact?




                                            27
       The second limitation relates to the crudeness of my measures of innovative

output. Due to the broad scope and long time frame of this analysis, I was required to use

patent-based measures of innovation. In an ideal world, I would have been able to

examine a wide variety of measures, including R&D spending, total factor productivity

growth, and counts of innovations. Other effects might have also been identified had I

examined changes over longer event windows, since some of the policy changes could

have taken more than five years to impact innovation. (Of course, the noisiness of the

measures would have also increased substantially.) Despite these caveats, the failure of

domestic patenting to respond to enhancements of patent protection, and the particularly

weak effects seen in developing nations, were quite striking.




                                            28
                                         References

Banks, Arthur S., 1999, Cross-National Time Series, 1815-1998 (computer database).
Binghamton, Center for Comparative Political Research, State University of New York
(Binghamton).

Bessen, James, and Eric Maskin, 2000, “Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation,”
Working Paper No. 00-01, Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

Brown, Stephen J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1980, “Measuring Security Price
Performance,” Journal of Financial Economics. 8, 205-258.

Cadot, Olivier, and Steven A. Lippman, 1995, “Barriers to Imitation and the Incentive to
Innovate,” Working Paper No. 434, Western Management Science Institute, University of
California at Los Angeles.

Chin, Judith C., and Gene M. Grossman, 1990, “Intellectual Property Rights and North-
South Trade,” in Ronald W. Jones and Anne O. Kreuger, editors, The Political Economy
of North-South Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert E. Baldwin. Cambridge, Basil
Blackwell, pp. 90-107.

Deardorff, Alan V., 1992, “Welfare Benefits of Global Patent Protection,” Economica.
59, 35-51.

Diwan, Isaac, and Dani Rodrik, 1991, “Patents, Appropriate Technology, and North-South
Trade,” Journal of International Economics. 30, 27-48.

Eckbo, B. Espen, Vojislav Maksimovic, and Joseph Williams, 1990, “Consistent
Estimation of Cross-Sectional Models in Event Studies,” Review of Financial Studies. 3,
343-365.

Federico, P.J., 1964, "Historical Patent Statistics, 1791-1961," Journal of the Patent
Office Society. 46 (February), 89-171.

Gallini, Nancy T., 1992, “Patent Policy and Costly Imitation,” Rand Journal of
Economics. 23, 52-63.

Gilbert, Richard, and Carl Shapiro, 1990, “Optimal Patent Length and Breadth,” Rand
Journal of Economics. 21, 106-112.

Ginarte, Juan C., and Walter G. Park, 1997, “Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-
National Study,” Research Policy. 26, 283-301.

Griliches, Zvi, 1990, “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
Economic Literature. 28, 1661-1707.



                                          29
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis, 2001, “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An
Empirical Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995,” Rand
Journal of Economics. 32, 101-128

Helpman, Elhanan, 1993, “Innovation, Imitation, and Intellectual Property Rights,”
Econometrica. 61, 1247-1280.

Horowitz, Andrew W., and Edwin L.C. Lai, 1996, “Patent Length and the Rate of
Innovation,” International Economic Review. 37, 785-801.

International Monetary Fund, 1999 and earlier years, International Financial Statistics.
Washington, International Monetary Fund.

Kamien, Morton I., and Nancy L. Schwartz, 1974 “Patent Length and R&D Rivalry,”
American Economic Review. 64, 183-187.

Klemperer, Paul, 1990, “How Broad Should the Scope of Patent Protection Be?,” Rand
Journal of Economics. 21, 113-130.

Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 1998, “Stronger Protection or Technological
Revolution: What is Behind the Recent Surge in Patenting?,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. 48, 247-304.

Kremer, Michael, 1998, “Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 113, 1137-1167.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998,
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy. 106, 1113-1155.

Lanjouw, Jean O., 1998, “The Introduction of Pharmaceutical product Patents in India:
‘Heartless Exploitation of the Poor and Suffering’?,” Working Paper No. 6366, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Lerner, Josh, 2001, “150 Years of Patent Protection,” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings. 92, forthcoming.

Maddison, Angus, 1995, Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992.             Paris,
Development Centre, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development.

Maskus, Keith, 2000, “Lessons from Studying the International Economics of Intellectual
Property Rights,” Vanderbilt Law Review. 53, 2219-2239.

Mazzoleni Roberto, and Richard R. Nelson, 2000, “Economic Theories About the
Benefits and Costs of Patents,” Journal of Economic Issues. 32, 1031-1052.

Mitchell, Brian R., 1998, International Historical Statistics. (3 volumes.) New York,
Stockton Press.

                                          30
Nordhaus, William D., 1969, Invention Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of
Technological Change. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Penrose, Edith, 1951, The Economics of the International Patent System. Baltimore:
John Hopkins University Press.

Rapp, Richard T., and Richard P. Rozek, 1990, “Benefits and Costs of Intellectual
Property Rights in Developing Countries,” Working Paper No. 3, National Economic
Research Associates.

Rimmer, Brenda M., and Stephen van Dulken, 1992, International Guide to Official
Industrial Property Publications. London, Science Reference and Information Service,
British Library.

Sakakibara, Mariko, and Lee Branstetter, 2001, “Do Stronger Patents Induce More
Innovation? Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms,” Rand Journal of
Economics. 32, 77-100.

Scherer, F.M., and Sandy Weisbrod, 1995, “Economic Effects of Strengthening
Pharmaceutical Patent Protection in Italy,” International Review of Industrial Property
and Copyright Law. 6, 1009-1024.

Scotchmer, Suzanne, 2001, “The Political Economy of Intellectual Property Treaties,”
Unpublished working paper, University of California at Berkeley.

Scotchmer, Suzanne, and Jerry Green, 1990, “Novelty and Disclosure in Patent Law,”
Rand Journal of Economics. 21, 131-146.

Shavell, Steven, and Tanguy van Ypersele, 2001, “Rewards versus Intellectual Property
Rights,” Journal of Law and Economics. 44, 525-547.

Waterson, Michael, 1990, “The Economics of Product Patents,” American Economic
Review. 80, 860-869.

Wegner, Harold C, 1993, Patent Harmonization. London, Sweet & Maxwell.

Williams, John D., 1994, "Patent Protection, Taxation, and the Supply and Demand for
R&D." Unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Board.

World Intellectual Property Organization, 1983, 100 Years Protection of Industrial
Property: Synoptic Tables on Patents, Trademarks, Designs, Utility Models and Plant
Varieties, 1993-1992. Geneva, World Intellectual Property Organization.

Wright, Brian D., 1983, “The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes, and
Research Contracts,” American Economic Review. 73, 691-707.



                                          31
Figure 1. Number of changes in patent policy over time. The sample consists of the sixty largest countries (by gross domestic product) at the end of
1997, observed from 1850 (or the date of inception as an independent entity) to 1999. The chart presents the number of policy reforms, as well as that of
distinct policy shifts, in each decade, normalized by the number of active countries in the sample at the beginning of the decade.




                                            1.00
   Changes in Decade per Nation in Sample




                                            0.80



                                                                        Distinct Policy Shifts
                                            0.60




                                            0.40




                                            0.20



                                                                                                                    Policy Reforms

                                            0.00
                                                   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900       1910    1920    1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990
                                                                                                        Decade
Figure 2. Patenting changes around the time of patent protection-enhancing policy changes. The sample consists of 177 changes in patent policy
between 1852 and 1998 in the sixty largest countries (by gross domestic product) at the end of 1997. The figure displays the change in the number of
patent applications filed between five years before the event and five years after the event by domestic entities filing in the country undertaking the
change, foreign entities filing in the country undertaking the change, and residents of the country undertaking the policy change in Great Britain.
These changes are shown net of a value-weighted index of patenting in the ten nations with the longest time series of application data.



                                                                      10000
   Change in Patent Applications (Adjusted by Value-Weighted Index)




                                                                       8000




                                                                       6000


                                                                                                                                           Domestic Entities in Country
                                                                                                                                           Foreign Entities in Country
                                                                       4000                                                                Domestic Entities in Great Britain




                                                                       2000




                                                                         0




                                                                      -2000
                                                                              -5   -4   -3   -2    -1       0      1       2   3   4   5
                                                                                             Years Relative to Policy Change
Figure 3. Patenting changes around the time of patent protection-reducing or ambiguous policy changes. The sample consists of 177 changes in patent
policy between 1852 and 1998 in the sixty largest countries (by gross domestic product) at the end of 1997. The figure displays the change in the
number of patent applications filed between five years before the event and five years after the event by domestic entities filing in the country
undertaking the change, foreign entities filing in the country undertaking the change, and residents of the country undertaking the policy change in
Great Britain. These changes are shown net of a value-weighted index of patenting in the ten nations with the longest time series of application data.




                                                                      10000
   Change in Patent Applications (Adjusted by Value-Weighted Index)




                                                                       8000




                                                                       6000


                                                                                                                                            Domestic Entities in Country
                                                                                                                                            Foreign Entities in Country
                                                                       4000                                                                 Domestic Entities in Great Britain




                                                                       2000




                                                                         0




                                                                      -2000
                                                                              -5   -4   -3   -2     -1       0      1       2   3   4   5
                                                                                              Years Relative to Policy Change
Table 1. Impact of a change in patent policy on patenting activity. The sample consists of 177 changes in
patent policy between 1852 and 1998 in 60 nations. Panel A displays the change in the number of unadjusted
patent applications filed from two years before the event to two years after the event by domestic entities
residents of the country undertaking the policy change in Great Britain and in the country undertaking the
change, and foreign entities filing in the country undertaking the change. In Panels B and C, these changes
are shown net of equal-weighted and value-weighted indexes of patenting in the ten nations with the longest
time series of application data. Underneath each adjusted change, the absolute t-statistic of the difference of
the change from zero is displayed. In all tests, each observation is weighted by the inverse of its standard
deviation of the annual change in patenting from 20 to five years before the policy change.

                     Panel A: Unadjusted Changes in Patenting Around Policy Changes
                                                  Residents’      Domestic Entities     Foreign
                                                 Patenting in        Patenting         Patenting
                                                United Kingdom      in Country        in Country
  Positive Patent Policy Changes                             -27            +2424              +8662
  Ambiguous/Negative Changes                               +210               +529             +1401
  Positive Changes Involving Coverage                        -63            +2233              +9739
  Positive Changes Involving Duration                        -80            +2399            +10957
  Positive Changes Involving Working Periods                 -34             -1081             +3191
        Panel B: Changes in Patenting Around Policy Changes, Adjusted by Equal-Weighted Index
                                                  Residents’      Domestic Entities     Foreign
                                                 Patenting in        Patenting         Patenting
                                                United Kingdom      in Country        in Country
  Positive Patent Policy Changes                            -101             -1617             +4979
                                                       ***[4.61]           *[1.86]          **[2.41]
  Ambiguous/Negative Changes                                -217               -525             +390
                                                       ***[3.19]             [0.34]            [1.28]
  Positive Changes Involving Coverage                        -98            +1915              +7704
                                                       ***[5.13]             [1.03]         **[2.58]
  Positive Changes Involving Duration                       -190             -4714             +5699
                                                       ***[4.68]          **[2.22]            *[1.84]
  Positive Changes Involving Working Periods                 -27             -1239             +2772
                                                          [1.33]           *[1.84]             [1.31]
        Panel C: Changes in Patenting Around Policy Changes, Adjusted by Value-Weighted Index
                                                  Residents’      Domestic Entities     Foreign
                                                 Patenting in        Patenting         Patenting
                                                United Kingdom      in Country        in Country
  Positive Patent Policy Changes                            -100               -932            +5617
                                                       ***[4.52]           *[1.69]         ***[2.85]
  Ambiguous/Negative Changes                                -137               -408             +501
                                                        **[2.40]             [0.07]            [1.65]
  Positive Changes Involving Coverage                       -111            +1781              +7963
                                                       ***[5.12]             [0.94]         **[2.57]
  Positive Changes Involving Duration                       -186             -3347             +6690
                                                       ***[4.63]          **[2.14]          **[2.36]
  Positive Changes Involving Working Periods                 -27             -1289             +2809
                                                          [1.29]           *[1.89]             [1.27]

* = Significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.
        Table 2. Weighted least squares regression analyses of patenting in Great Britain by residents of the
        countries that underwent patent policy changes around the time of the changes. The sample consists of 177
        changes in patent policy between 1852 and 1998 in the sixty largest countries (by gross domestic product) at
        the end of 1997. The dependent variable is the change in the number of patent applications filed by residents
        of the country undertaking the policy change in Great Britain from two years prior to the policy change to
        two years afterwards, net of either of a value-weighted (VW) or equal-weighted (EW) index of patenting in
        the ten nations with the longest time series of application data. The independent variables are dummy
        variables denoting whether the policy change entailed an unambiguous increase in protection and the aspects
        of patent policy that the change covered, variables denoting whether during the period the country began or
        ended a conflict on its territory or expanded or contracted its territory (with the former instance being coded
        as +1, the latter as –1, and all others as zero), the number of patent applications by domestic entities in Great
        Britain two years before the policy change, and the population of the nation at the time of the change. In
        addition, the various regressions include dummy variables denoting whether the country had a particularly
        strong or weak patent policy before the change, the nation’s per capita gross domestic policy relative to the
        leading nation at the time, and the interaction of these measures with the dummy variable indicating an
        increase in patent protection. Each observation is weighted by the inverse of the standard deviation of the
        annual change in patent applications in Great Britain from twenty to five years before the policy change.
        Absolute t-statistics in parentheses.

                                                     Dependent Variable: Change in U.K. Patent Applications Net of
                                              VW Index            EW Index             VW Index               EW Index
Positive Patent Policy Change?                 165.94 [0.87]   ***598.53 [3.24]          19.13 [0.11]           -333.42 [0.88]
Strong Protection Prior to Change?            -249.34 [0.96]        86.93 [0.35]
Weak Protection Prior to Change?                                                        273.22 [0.32]
GDP as Percent of Leading Nation                                                                           ***-1561.76 [2.92]
Strong Protection * Positive Change         **-602.57 [1.99] ***-980.07 [3.34]
Weak Protection * Positive Change                                                      -133.66 [0.14]
Relative GDP * Positive Change                                                                               **1292.27 [2.15]
Change Involving Coverage?                      50.74 [0.37]      216.92 [1.65]          32.63 [0.22]             61.80 [0.42]
Change Involving Duration?                    -199.37 [1.41]       -79.30 [0.58]       -171.04 [1.06]           -135.68 [0.91]
Change Involving Cost?                     ***1014.88 [4.42] ***1137.36 [5.12]      ***1059.91 [4.24]       ***1252.63 [5.26]
Change Involving Working Periods?            *-335.37 [1.78]     -192.88 [1.06]        -249.62 [1.22]           -117.16 [0.61]
Inception of Conflict?                         -10.97 [0.04]     -332.82 [1.09]          80.75 [0.24]           -118.82 [0.36]
Change in Territory?                      ***-1058.54 [3.37]      130.20 [0.43] ***-1042.61 [3.03]              -118.22 [0.35]
Applications Two Years before Event         ***-0.12 [11.63]   ***-0.13 [13.14]      ***-0.12 [10.13]        ***-0.12 [10.03]
Population of Nation                             0.07 [0.07]         0.27 [0.29]          -0.14 [0.14]             -0.96 [0.94]
Constant                                        21.18 [0.09]     -523.10 [2.21]        -117.27 [0.50]            428.65 [1.10]

Number of Observations                                    159                   159                    159                    159
F-Statistic                                             17.10                 23.14                  12.06                  18.08
p-Value                                                 0.000                 0.000                  0.000                  0.000
Adjusted R2                                              0.53                  0.61                   0.44                   0.54

        * = Significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.
     Table 3. Weighted least squares regression analyses of domestic patenting by residents of nations undergoing
     patent policy changes. The sample consists of 177 changes in patent policy between 1852 and 1998 in the sixty
     largest countries (by gross domestic product) at the end of 1997. The dependent variable is the change in the
     number of patent applications filed by domestic entities in the country undergoing the policy change from
     two years prior to the policy change to two years afterwards, net of either a value-weighted (VW) or equal-
     weighted (EW) index of patenting in the ten nations with the longest time series of application data. The
     independent variables are dummy variables denoting whether the policy change entailed an unambiguous
     increase in protection and the aspects of patent policy that the change covered, variables denoting whether
     during the period the country began or ended a conflict on its territory or expanded or contracted its
     territory (with the former instance being coded as +1, the latter as –1, and all others as zero), the number of
     patent applications by domestic entities two years before the policy change, and the population of the nation
     at the time of the change. In addition, the various regressions include dummy variables denoting whether the
     country had a particularly strong or weak patent policy before the change, the nation’s per capita gross
     domestic policy relative to the leading nation at the time, and the interaction of these measures with the
     dummy variable indicating an increase in patent protection. Each observation is weighted by the inverse of
     the standard deviation of the annual change in domestic patent applications from twenty to five years before
     the policy change. Absolute t-statistics in parentheses.

                                               Dependent Variable: Change in Domestic Patent Applications Net of
                                              VW Index          EW Index           VW Index             EW Index
Positive Patent Policy Change?               1862.87 [0.76]    2361.31 [0.82]    2727.11 [1.32]       2887.20 [0.59]
Strong Protection Prior to Change?          -1079.46 [0.30]    -717.08 [0.17]
Weak Protection Prior to Change?                                                -2018.17 [0.12]
GDP as Percent of Leading Nation                                                                      4630.29 [0.63]
Strong Protection * Positive Change          1657.97 [0.42]    1230.48 [0.27]
Weak Protection * Positive Change                                                 -611.87 [0.04]
Relative GDP * Positive Change                                                                         -615.17 [0.08]
Change Involving Coverage?                   1153.91 [0.63]    1311.54 [0.61]    1423.43 [0.80]       1861.75 [0.88]
Change Involving Duration?                   -373.71 [0.21]    -566.56 [0.27]     -746.30 [0.41]       -387.44 [0.19]
Change Involving Cost?                       1979.52 [0.59]    1872.51 [0.48]    1580.56 [0.48]       1226.20 [0.32]
Change Involving Working Periods?            1485.56 [0.53]    1620.48 [0.50]    1473.81 [0.53]       1758.43 [0.54]
Inception of Conflict?                      -1639.60 [0.41]   -1523.63 [0.33]   -1999.77 [0.51]      -2125.00 [0.46]
Change in Territory?                        -1231.93 [0.36]    -934.01 [0.23]   -1215.29 [0.35]         322.75 [0.08]
Applications Two Years before Event        ***-0.23 [16.53] ***-0.31 [18.95] ***-0.24 [16.65] ***-0.32 [18.64]
Population of Nation                        ***25.20 [3.05]   ***26.56 [2.74]   ***26.46 [3.22]      ***30.19 [2.94]
Constant                                    -1449.71 [0.43]   -1500.72 [0.38]   -1756.58 [0.60]      -4797.64 [0.88]

Number of Observations                                  132                  132                  132                  132
F-Statistic                                           27.83                36.82                28.05                37.29
p-Value                                               0.000                0.000                0.000                0.000
Adjusted R2                                            0.69                 0.75                 0.69                 0.75

     * = Significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.
       Table 4. Instrumental variable regression analyses of patenting in Great Britain and domestically by
       residents of nations undergoing patent policy changes. The sample consists of 177 changes in patent policy
       between 1852 and 1998 in the sixty largest countries (by gross domestic product) at the end of 1997. The
       dependent variable is the change in the number of patent applications filed in Great Britain and domestically
       by residents of the nation undergoing the policy change from two years prior to the policy change to two
       years afterwards, net of a equal-weighted index of patenting in the ten nations with the longest time series of
       application data. The independent variables are dummy variables denoting whether the policy change
       entailed an unambiguous increase in protection and the aspects of patent policy that the change covered,
       variables denoting whether during the period the country began or ended a conflict on its territory or
       expanded or contracted its territory (with the former instance being coded as +1, the latter as –1, and all
       others as zero), the number of patent applications by domestic entities in Great Britain and domestically two
       years before the policy change, and the population of the nation at the time of the change. In addition, the
       various regressions include dummy variables denoting whether the country had a particularly strong patent
       policy before the change, the nation’s per capita gross domestic policy relative to the leading nation at the
       time, and the interaction of these measures with the dummy variable indicating an increase in patent
       protection. A dummy variable denoting that the policy change took place in the ten years following the
       signing of the Paris Convention of 1883 and the preliminary version of the TRIPs agreement of 1993 is used
       as instrument for the measure of positive patent policy changes. Each observation is weighted by the inverse
       of the standard deviation of the annual change in patent applications in Great Britain and domestically from
       twenty to five years before the policy change. Absolute t-statistics in parentheses.

                                          Dependent Variable: Change in Patent Applications, Net of Equal-Weighted Index
                                            Applications in Great Britain                 Domestic Applications
Positive Patent Policy Change?          ***7737.47 [3.00]     -3342.62 [0.87]       -7243.45 [0.37]          6075.96 [0.19]
Strong Protection Prior to Change?       **4546.50 [2.28]                           -3062.68 [0.16]
GDP as Percent of Leading Nation                            **-9152.71 [2.48]                               15135.62 [0.57]
Strong Protection * Positive Change     **-6671.86 [2.48]                            1621.90 [0.07]
Relative GDP * Positive Change                             **10667.92 [2.06]                               -18925.80 [0.49]
Change Involving Coverage?               **1137.27 [2.15]      -115.15 [0.31]         202.25 [0.07]          1569.60 [0.56]
Change Involving Duration?                  133.54 [0.29]      -529.23 [1.50]       -1912.28 [0.86]          -926.64 [0.39]
Change Involving Cost?                   **2655.75 [2.12] **2128.94 [2.56]          -2480.94 [0.44]         -1792.07 [0.28]
Change Involving Working Periods?        **3322.78 [2.26]      1438.40 [1.57]       -5693.91 [0.58]         -4964.26 [0.77]
Inception of Conflict?                   *-2221.32 [1.79]      -202.12 [0.23]        -104.44 [0.02]          -627.54 [0.11]
Change in Territory?                      -1380.91 [1.17] **-2111.38 [2.14]          1875.57 [0.29]          4339.82 [0.66]
Applications Two Years before Event           -0.12 [3.52]    ***-0.08 [2.79]       ***-0.24 [9.49]         ***-0.24 [9.84]
Population of Nation                           3.45 [1.08]        -4.12 [1.55]          22.52 [1.41]           30.62 [1.64]
Constant                                     ***-7283.29       2883.99 [1.01]        8720.00 [0.47]         -3886.16 [0.16]
                                                    [2.94]

Number of Observations                                 159                  159                      132                      132
F-Statistic                                           3.08                 5.34                    11.29                    11.34
p-Value                                              0.001                0.000                    0.000                    0.000

        * = Significant at the 10% confidence level; ** = significant at the 5% level; *** = significant at the 1% level.
