                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INDUSTRY GROWTH AND CAPITAL ALLOCATION:
            DOES HAVING A MARKET- OR BANK-BASED SYSTEM MATTER?


                                              Thorsten Beck
                                               Ross Levine


                                          Working Paper 8982
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8982


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We would like to thank Franklin Allen, Nicola Cetorelli, Robert Cull, Patrick Honohan, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt,
Andrei Shleifer, Rene Stulz, and an anonymous referee. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the World Bank, its Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent.


© 2002 by Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Industry Growth and Capital Allocation:
Does Having a Market- or Bank-Based System Matter?
Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 8982
June 2002
JEL No. G0, K2, O4



                                             ABSTRACT

        Are market-based or bank-based financial systems better at financing the expansion of industries
that depend heavily on external finance, facilitating the formation of new establishments, and improving
the efficiency of capital allocation across industries? We find evidence for neither the market-based nor
the bank-based hypothesis. While legal system efficiency and overall financial development boost
industry growth, new establishment formation, and efficient capital allocation, having a bank-based or
market-based system per se does not seem to matter much.




Thorsten Beck                                                   Ross Levine
The World Bank                                                  Finance Department
                                                                Carlson School of Management
                                                                University of Minnesota
                                                                321 19th Ave. South
                                                                Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                                and NBER
1. Introduction
      Financial economists have debated the relative merits of bank-based and market-based

financial systems for over a century.1 Many authors stress the advantages that banks have over

markets in financing the expansion of existing firms, in promoting the establishment of new firms,

and in efficiently allocating capital. Others, however, emphasize the comparative merits of markets.

Historically, empirical research on the bank-based versus market-based debate has centered on

Germany and Japan as bank-based systems and the United States and Great Britain as market-based

financial systems. This work has produced illuminating insights concerning the operation of

financial systems in these countries. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to draw broad conclusions

about bank-based and market-based financial systems from only four countries. To ameliorate this

shortcoming, we have compiled a new, broad cross-country database with measures of financial

structure, i.e., the degree to which countries have bank-based or market-based financial systems.

      To assess competing views of financial structure, this paper examines the impact of financial

structure on industrial expansion, the creation of new establishments, and the efficiency of capital

allocation. We divide the debate into four views. As noted, the bank-based view highlights the

positive role of banks. For instance, Gerschenkron (1962) argues that banks more effectively

finance industrial expansion than markets in under-developed economies: powerful banks can

induce firms to reveal information and pay debts better than atomistic markets (Rajan and Zingales,

1999). Similarly, banks that are unencumbered by regulatory restrictions on their activities can

exploit economies of scale and scope in financing industry growth. Gerschenkron (1962) also

claims that state-owned banks can overcome market failures and funnel domestic savings to




                                                  1
strategically important projects. Finally, Stulz (2000) argues that banks are more effective in

providing external resources to new, innovative activities that require staged financing because

banks can credibly commit to making additional funding available as the project develops.2

       The market-based view not only stresses the positive role of markets; it highlights the

comparative advantages of markets over banks in effectively allocating capital.3 Proponents of the

market-based view emphasize that powerful banks frequently stymie innovation by extracting

informational rents and protecting established firms (Hellwig, 1991; Rajan, 1992). By acquiring

inside information about firms, powerful banks can extract informational rents from firms (Hellwig,

1991). The banks’ market power then reduces firms’ incentives to undertake profitable projects

since banks extract a large share of the profits (Rajan, 1992). Also, banks – as debt issuers – have

an inherent bias toward conservative investments, so that bank-based systems stymie innovation and

growth (Weinstein and Yafeh, 1998; Morck and Nakamura, 1999). Further, powerful banks and

banks facing few regulatory restrictions on their activities can collude with firm managers against

other outside investors and thereby inhibit effective corporate control (Hellwig, 1998; Wenger and

Kaserer, 1998). Finally, market-based proponents hold that state-owned banks are less interested in

overcoming market frictions and more interested in achieving political goals. According to this

view, state-owned banks are more likely to funnel credit to labor-intensive industries and less likely

1
  See Allen and Gale (1999), Boot and Thakor (1997), Gerschenkron (1962), Goldsmith (1969), La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Shleifer (2001), Levine (1997), Stiglitz (1985), and Stulz (2000) for analyses and more references
regarding the relative merits of bank- and market-based financial systems in fostering economic performance.
2
  Researchers advance additional arguments in favor of bank-based systems. In liquid markets, investors can
inexpensively sell their shares and consequently have fewer incentives to expend resources monitoring managers
(Bhide, 1993). Stiglitz (1985) argues that efficient markets reduce incentives for individuals to research firms because
any new information they uncover is quickly reflected in public stock prices before the individual can exploit the fruits
of the research. Bank-based systems mitigate this problem since banks reveal less information in public markets (Boot,
Greenbaum, and Thakor, 1993). Also, efficient markets can minimize the effectiveness of takeovers. Atomistic
shareholders have incentives to capture the benefits from a takeover by holding their shares instead of tendering them,
thus making takeover attempts less profitable and less useful as a control device (Grossman and Hart, 1980). Also,
corporate control through outside takeover threats could face similar limitations because insiders have greater
information than outsiders. Finally, incestuous relationships frequently flourish between management and boards of
directors, which can induce directors and management to collude against other shareholders (Allen and Gale, 1999).


                                                            2
to identify and fund truly strategic industries (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2001).

Thus, some theories stress that markets ameliorate the negative repercussions of powerful banks and

promote innovative, R&D-based industries (Allen, 1993).

         The financial services view argues that the bank-based versus market-based debate is of

second-order importance. According to this view, the first-order issue is the ability of the financial

system to ameliorate information and transaction costs, not whether banks or markets provide these

services (Levine, 1997). Furthermore, banks and markets might act as complements in providing

financial services (Boyd and Smith, 1998; Huybens and Smith, 1999).

         The law and finance view (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2000)

emphasizes the role of the legal system in determining the level of financial development. The law

and finance view holds that distinguishing countries by the efficiency of the legal system in

supporting financial transactions is more useful than distinguishing countries by financial structure.

This view argues that legal systems that protect outside investors by enforcing contracts effectively

boost financial development and thereby facilitate external financing, new firm formation, and

efficient capital allocation.

         To evaluate these four theories, we need measures of financial structure for a broad cross-

section of countries. After using a wide array of measures of financial structure, we organize our

presentation around three measures and use the others as robustness checks. The first indicator of

financial structure uses measures of the size and activity of banks and equity markets to construct an

aggregate index of the degree to which each country is comparatively market- or bank-based. The

second indicator of financial structure measures regulatory restrictions on bank activities. Using the

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b) analysis of commercial bank regulations, we construct an

aggregate index of regulatory restrictions on bank activities in securities, insurance, and real estate

3
    For a review of the literature on the positive role of markets, see Levine and Zervos (1998).

                                                               3
markets and restrictions on bank ownership of nonfinancial firms. This measure of regulatory

restrictions on bank activities gauges bank power and therefore helps distinguish between the bank-

based and market-based views in our empirical analyses. The third financial structure measure

offers a broader conception of “financial structure” that measures state-ownership. We use La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer’s (2001) measure of the percentage of assets of the ten largest

banks in each country owned by the government. A high degree of state-ownership of banks can

stimulate industrial growth in some circumstances according to the bank-based view, while the

market-based view predicts that state-ownership will foster inefficient resource allocation.

      To assess the bank-based, market-based, financial services, and law and finance views of

financial structure, we examine the impact of financial structure on industry growth, new

establishment formation, and efficient capital allocation. We use two methodologies to assess these

theories.

      First and primarily, we use a cross-industry, cross-country panel to examine the relation

between financial structure and both industry growth and new establishment formation. Using a

panel of 42 countries and 36 industries, Rajan and Zingales (1998, henceforth RZ) show that

industries that are externally dependent – industries that are naturally heavy users of external

finance – grow relatively faster in economies with higher levels of financial development. We,

however, examine whether industries that are naturally heavy users of external finance grow faster

in bank-based or market-based systems. Thus, we evaluate whether financial structure influences

the flow of capital to firms that depend heavily on external finance. Next, we decompose industry

growth to focus on that part explained by new establishment formation. We then assess the impact

of financial structure on growth in the number of new establishments. Furthermore, we extend the

RZ (1998) methodology to focus on R&D-intensive and labor-intensive industries. Some of the




                                                   4
theories described above predict that financial structure influences innovative firms differently from

other firms and that state-owned banks favor labor-intensive industries. Thus, we test whether

financial structure influences the performance of R&D-intensive and labor-intensive industries.

Finally, we use the cross-industry, cross-country data to examine the financial services and law and

finance views. Specifically, we study whether (1) overall financial development and (2) the

efficiency of the legal system influence industry growth and new establishment formation.

      The second methodology uses pure cross-country regressions to assess the impact of financial

structure on the efficiency of investment flows. We use Wurgler’s (2000) measure of the efficiency

of investment flows, which measures the extent to which a country increases investment in growing

industries and decreases investment in declining ones. We then test (a) whether the three measures

of financial structure explain cross-country variation in the efficiency of investment flows, and (b)

whether the overall level of financial development and legal system development explain the

efficiency of investment flows. We use both the cross-industry, cross-country methodology and the

pure cross-country regressions to provide empirical evidence on the bank-based, market-based,

financial services, and law and finance views of financial structure.

      The results give no support to either the market-based or bank-based views. Industries that

depend heavily on external finance do not grow faster in either bank-based or market-based

financial systems. Furthermore, measures of regulatory restrictions on banks and the extent of

state-owned banks in the economy do not explain variations in industrial performance. When we

decompose the industry growth rates into the growth in the number of establishments and the

growth in the average size of establishments, we again find that there is not a robust relation

between any of our measures of financial structure and the rate of new establishment formation.

Furthermore, we do not find a strong link between financial structure and the performance of either




                                                   5
R&D-based or labor-intensive industries. Finally, financial structure does not explain cross-country

differences in the efficiency of investment flows after controlling for financial development.

      The results support both the financial services and the law and finance views. Industries that

depend heavily on external finance grow faster in economies with higher levels of overall financial

development. Industries that depend heavily on external finance also grow comparatively faster in

economies in which the legal system effectively protects investors. Moreover, overall financial

development and the legal environment explain cross-country variation in the growth in the number

of establishments in externally dependent industries. In sum, while financial structure per se does

not importantly explain industrial performance, overall financial development and the legal

environment are critically important for industry growth and the efficiency of capital allocation.

      The results are robust to a battery of sensitivity checks. Specifically, we find no evidence for

the view that bank-based systems are particularly important for industrial growth or new

establishment creation in less-developed economies. Also, this paper’s results hold when using

alternative measures of financial structure, financial development, and external dependence.

      This paper is importantly different from two recent papers on financial structure and

economic growth. Levine (2000) shows that financial structure is not a good predictor of growth in

a cross-country growth framework: neither bank-based nor market-based financial systems are

closely associated with economic growth. He, however, examines Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

growth. He does not examine whether financial structure influences new establishment creation,

industry expansion, or capital allocation, which is this paper’s focus. Furthermore, Demirgüç-Kunt

and Maksimovic (2000) use firm-level data and also show that financial structure is not a robust

predictor of economic growth. Again, however, they do not examine whether financial structure




                                                   6
influences new establishment formation, industry expansion, and capital allocation, which are three

channels highlighted by the theoretical literature discussed above.

      The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the econometric

model that we use to evaluate the comparative ability of the (1) bank-based, (2) market-based, (3)

financial services, and (4) law and finance to explain industrial expansion, new establishment

creation, and the efficiency of capital allocation. Section 3 presents the data. Section 4 provides the

empirical results. Section 5 presents sensitivity analyses and Section 6 concludes.




2. Methodology

      This paper empirically assesses the impact of financial structure on industry growth, new

establishment formation, and capital allocation across industries. First and foremost, we use a panel

data set of cross-country and cross-industry observations to examine the relation between financial

structure and both industry growth and the creation of new establishments. Second, we use pure

cross-country regressions to analyze the impact of financial structure on the efficiency of

investment flows across industries in each country. In conducting these analyses, we provide

empirical evidence on the bank-based, market-based, financial services, and law and finance views

of financial structure. The rest of this section explains (a) the panel estimation techniques and (b)

the cross-country regressions.



2.1. Panel methodology: cross-industry, cross-country regressions

      RZ (1998) argue that industries that are naturally heavy users of external finance should

benefit disproportionately more from greater financial development than industries that are not

naturally heavy users of external finance. They note that financial intermediaries and markets help


                                                   7
overcome market frictions that drive a wedge between the price of external and internal finance.

Better functioning financial systems lower the cost of external finance, which disproportionately

fosters the growth of industries that rely heavily on external finance. Using data on a panel of 42

countries and 36 industries, RZ (1998) show that industries that rely more heavily on external

finance grow faster in countries with better financial systems. Furthermore, RZ show that the effect

of financial development on the industrial growth runs mostly through growth in the number of

establishments rather than through growth in the average size of establishments.

      To examine the bank-based, market-based, financial services, and law and finance views of

financial structure, we use and extend the methodology developed by RZ (1998). We first examine

whether industries that are naturally heavy users of external finance grow faster in bank-based or

market-based financial systems. As noted, we focus on three measures of financial structure: (a) a

measure of the comparative size and activity of markets and banks, (b) a measure of regulatory

restrictions on banks, and (c) a measure of state-ownership of banks. We construct these measures

so that higher values imply larger and more active markets, more regulatory restrictions on banks,

and larger government ownership of banks, respectively. Second, we decompose industry growth

to assess the impact of financial structure on that part accounted for by growth in the number of

establishments. Third, we extend the RZ (1998) methodology to focus on R&D-intensive and

labor-intensive industries rather than on externally dependent industries. This extension is

important since some theories of financial structure suggest that financial structure will influence

innovative firms differently from other firms and that state-controlled banks will tend to allocate

capital disproportionately to labor-intensive industries. Thus, we assess whether R&D-intensive

and labor-intensive industries grow faster in bank-based or market-based financial system using our

three measures of financial structure. Finally, we examine the financial services and law and




                                                   8
finance views by examining the impact of (1) overall financial development and (2) contract

enforcement efficiency on industrial growth and new establishment formation.

      Econometrically, we use the following regression to assess the impact of financial

development and financial structure on industry growth.


      Growthi ,k = ∑α j Country j + ∑ β l Industry l + γSharei ,k + δ 1 ( External k * FDi ) +
                    j                       l                                                     (1)
                 δ 2 ( External k * FS i ) + ε i ,k ,

where Growthi,k is the average annual growth rate of value added or the growth in the number of

establishments, in industry k and country i, over the period 1980-90. Country and Industry are

country and industry dummies, respectively, and Sharei,k is the share of industry k in manufacturing

in country i in 1980. Externalk is the measure of dependence on external finance for industry k as

measured for a sample of U.S. companies over the period 1980-89. FDi and FSi are indicators of

financial development and financial structure for country i, respectively. We interact the external

dependence of an industry (External) with both (a) a measure of overall financial development (FD)

and (b) an index of the degree of market-based versus bank-based, regulatory restrictions on banks,

or state-ownership of banks, i.e., an index of financial structure (FS). We do not include financial

development or financial structure on their own, since we focus on within-country, within-industry

growth rates. The dummy variables for industries and countries correct for country and industry

specific characteristics that might determine industry growth patterns. We thus isolate the effect

that the interaction of external dependence and financial development/structure has on industry

growth rates relative to country and industry means. By including the initial share of an industry we

control for a convergence effect: industries with a large share might grow more slowly, suggesting a

negative sign on γ. This effect does not correspond exactly to the convergence concept known from

cross-country growth regressions. We include the share in manufacturing rather than the level, since


                                                        9
we focus on within-country, within-industry growth rates. As in RZ, γ enters significantly negative

in most regressions.

      We use this same framework to assess whether R&D-intensive and labor-intensive industries

grow faster in bank-based or market-based financial systems using our three measures of financial

structure. To do this, we replace External by measures of industrial labor-intensity and R&D-

intensity. Thus, we can assess whether market-based financial systems, banks with few regulatory

restrictions on their activities, or financial systems characterized by high levels of government

ownership of banks have a particularly strong impact on R&D-intensive or labor-intensive

industries.

      The different hypotheses imply different predictions about the sign and significance of δ1 and

δ2. The market-based view predicts that industries that are dependent on external finance or that are

R&D-intensive grow faster in economies with market-oriented financial systems and higher levels

of financial development, thus implying δ1>0 and δ2>0, when using the financial structure measure

of the comparative size and activity of stock markets. As noted above, proponents of the market-

based view also believe that state-owned banks and banks that do not face many regulatory

restrictions on their activities will exert a negative influence on resource allocation and growth.

Thus, when using the measure of state-ownership of banks, the market-based view predicts that

δ2<0, but it predicts that δ2>0 when using the measure of regulatory restrictions on banks.

      The bank-based view predicts that industries that are dependent on external finance or that are

R&D-intensive grow faster in economies with (a) bank-oriented financial systems, (b) banks that

face few regulatory restrictions on their activities, and (c) higher levels of financial development.

This prediction implies that δ1>0 and δ2<0, when using (i) the financial structure measure of the

comparative size and activity of stock markets relative to banks or (ii) the measure of regulatory



                                                  10
restrictions on banks. Furthermore, some proponents of the bank-based view stress that state-owned

banks boost industrial growth in externally dependent industries. This view implies δ2>0, when

using the state-ownership of banks measure. Finally, some theories stress that state-owned banks

favor the growth of labor-intensive industries, implying δ2>0.

      The financial-services view predicts that industries that depend heavily on external finance

grow faster in economies with a higher level of overall financial development, but financial

structure per se does not matter. Thus, the financial-services view predicts that δ1>0 and δ2=0.

      The law and finance view predicts that industries that depend heavily on external finance

grow faster in economies that protect the rights of outside investors more efficiently, but financial

structure per se is not important. If we replace FDi with an indicator of the efficiency of the legal

system, the law and finance view predicts that δ1>0 and δ2=0.

      We run Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) regressions to address the issue of endogeneity of

financial development and financial structure. By using appropriate instruments, we control for

simultaneity bias and reverse causality. We will use the legal origin and the religious composition

of countries as instrumental variables for the level and structure of financial sector development.

Legal systems with European origin can be classified into four major legal families (Reynolds and

Flores, 1996): the English common law and the French, German, and Scandinavian civil law

countries. Most countries have acquired their legal systems through occupation and colonialism, so

that the legal origin can be regarded as exogenous. Furthermore, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

Shleifer and Vishny (1997, 1998) have shown that the legal origin of a country materially

influences its legal treatment of creditors and shareholders, its accounting standards and the

efficiency of contract enforcement. Since these regulatory and informational characteristics

determine the efficiency of financial intermediaries and markets, we regard the legal origin of



                                                   11
countries as good instruments for financial development. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and

Vishny (1999) also show that the dominant religion of a country influences institutional

development. Where possible we also run regressions using only legal origin as instrumental

variables, with very similar results.



2.2. Cross-country methodology: investment flow efficiency

      We also explore the importance of financial structure for the efficient allocation of capital.

Wurgler (2000) computes an investment elasticity measure that gauges the extent to which a

country increases investment in growing industries and decreases investment in declining ones. He

shows that countries with a higher level of financial development increase investment more in

growing industries and decrease investment more in declining industries than financially

underdeveloped countries. He uses data for 65 countries for the period 1963-95.

      In this paper, we examine the impact of financial structure on the elasticity of investment.

Specifically, we assess whether financial structure influences the efficiency of investment flows

across industries or whether it is the overall level of financial development and the legal system that

determine the efficiency of investment flows. We have data for 39 countries and use the following

cross-country regression to assess the different views:

            Elasticity i = δ0 + δ1FD i + δ2FS i + εi,                                                (2)

where Elasticity is the elasticity of investment flows and measures the degree to which a country

increases investment in growing industries and decreases it in declining industries. FD is an

indicator of financial development, FS is an indicator of financial structure, ε is the error term and i

indicates the country. The four different views of financial structure make the same predictions

about the signs of δ1 and δ2 in the Elasticity regressions as they do in the panel growth regressions



                                                    12
specified above. We run these regressions using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) due to the low

number of observations. However, Two-Stage Least Squares, with the legal origin and religious

composition as instruments, produces similar conclusions.




3. Data

      This section describes (i) the indicators of financial structure, financial development, and the

legal system, (ii) the dependent variables – industry growth of value added and of the number of

establishments and investment elasticity -, and (iii) the industry characteristics - external

dependence, labor-intensity, and R&D-intensity. The data are for 42 countries and 36 industries. All

industries are in manufacturing. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics and correlations for the

cross-country variables. We do not include correlations for the industry characteristics (external

dependence, labor intensity and R&D intensity), since they have no cross-country variance. While

labor-intensity is not correlated with either external dependence or R&D-intensity, external

dependence and R&D-intensity are positively correlated. The two dependent panel variables are

positively and significantly correlated.


3.1. Indicators of financial structure, financial development, and the legal system


3.1.1. Indicators of financial structure

      To examine the relation between financial structure and industrial expansion, new

establishment formation and capital allocation, we need measures of financial structure. Since there

is no widely accepted empirical definition of financial structure, we use a wide array of different

measures. Specifically, we construct measures of (i) the comparative size and activity of stock




                                                   13
markets and banks, (ii) the regulatory restrictions on banks, and (iii) the extent of state-ownership of

banks. We use further measures of financial structure in the sensitivity analysis.

       Our first indicator, Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of two variables that

measure the comparative activity and size of markets and banks. Each of the underlying variables is

constructed so that higher values indicate more market-based financial systems. The first variable

(Structure-Activity) equals the log of the ratio of Value Traded to Bank Credit. Value Traded equals

the value of stock transactions as a share of national output. It is frequently used as an indicator of

stock market liquidity. 4 Bank Credit equals the claims of the banking sector on the private sector as

a share of GDP. Levine and Zervos (1998) find a robust link from both Value Traded and Bank

Credit to subsequent economic growth. The second variable (Structure-Size) equals the log of the

ratio of Market Capitalization to Bank Credit. Market Capitalization is defined as the value of listed

shares divided by GDP, and is a measure of the size of stock markets relative to the economy.5 We

use data for Structure-Aggregate averaged over the period 1980-89 for the panel analysis and

averaged over 1980-95 for the cross-country regressions.6 We also construct alternative measures of

financial structure, controlling for the ownership concentration of listed firms and isolating private

banks, and discuss these results in the sensitivity section below.



4
  Levine and Zervos (1998) point out a potential pitfall of Value Traded. If forward-looking stock markets anticipate
large corporate profits and therefore higher economic growth, this will boost stock prices and therefore boost Value
Traded. Thus, a positive relation between Value Traded and growth might reflect a spurious correlation due to this
price effect. This price effect, however, does not arise in our model, since we focus on within-country, within-industry
growth rates. If markets anticipate higher growth in one industry, the resulting larger value of Value Traded would be
the same for all industries in this country. Moreover, when we use the turnover ratio, which equals value traded divided
by market capitalization, we get the same results. Turnover does not suffer from this price effect because stock prices
enter into the numerator and denominator.
5
  We will only report results with Structure-Aggregate. A previous version of this paper reports results with Structure-
Activity and Structure-Size, which are very similar to the results using Structure-Aggregate. Correlations between these
three measures are over 0.65 and significant at the 1%-level.
6
  The underlying measures of stock market and banking sector development are listed in Appendix Table A1. Note that
we do not have data for stock market development available for a large number of countries before 1980. Although the
dependent variable in the cross-country regressions is measured over 1963-95, we therefore have to restrict the time
period of financial structure and development data to the period 1980-95.


                                                          14
      Structure-Aggregate provides a measure of the comparative role of banks and markets in the

economy. The underlying measures of bank development and stock market liquidity exert a strong

influence on economic growth.7 Furthermore, Demirgüç -Kunt and Levine (2000) show that

countries with strong shareholder rights and high accounting standards tend to have higher values of

Structure-Aggregate. Thus, key legal and regulatory differences match-up with this financial

structure indicator that we use to assess the relation between industrial performance and the degree

to which countries are bank-based or market-based.

      The second financial structure indicator that we use measures regulatory restrictions on bank

activities. Restrict aggregates measures that indicate whether bank activities in the securities,

insurance, and real estate markets and ownership and control of nonfinancial firms are unrestricted

(1), permitted (2), restricted (3) or prohibited (4). The aggregate indicator has therefore a possible

maximum variation between four and 16, with higher numbers indicating more restrictions on bank

activities and nonfinancial ownership and control. Restrict is computed in 1999 and is taken from

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b). As shown by Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001c) for a smaller

sample of countries, however, Restrict has changed extraordinarily little over the last 20 years.

Lower values of Restrict indicate a financial system in which banks face fewer restrictions and are

therefore potentially more powerful. Compared to Structure-Aggregate, Restrict focuses on the

policy environment that determines the structure of the financial system, specifically, the activities

of banks relative to other financial institutions.

      The third measure of financial structure focuses on government ownership of banks. Instead

of focusing on bank- or market-based financial systems, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer

(2001) suggest a broader conception of “financial structure” that includes ownership of banks. We


7
 For evidence on the impact of financial intermediation on growth, see Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000). For evidence
on the impact of stock markets on growth, see Levine and Zervos (1998) and Rousseau and Wachtel (2000).


                                                        15
therefore use their measure of State Ownership that equals the percentage of assets of the ten largest

banks in each country owned by the government. Specifically, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and

Shleifer (2001) compute the government’s share of ownership of each of the ten largest banks in

each country. They also have the total assets of each bank. Thus, they multiply government’s share

of ownership by the total assets for each bank. They sum this over the ten largest banks and divide

by the total assets of those banks to compute the percentage of assets of the ten largest banks owned

by the government. They compute this in 1995 and 1985. We use the average of these two

observations in our regressions.

      Table 1 presents the ranking of countries according to our three indicators of financial

structure. The three measures of financial structure frequently give quite different country rankings.

Furthermore, although many countries fit our pre-conceived categorization as bank-based or

market-based, some of the country-rankings are counter-intuitive

      Structure-Aggregate makes the intuitively attractive classification that New Zealand, Great

Britain, and the U.S. are market-based financial systems, while Germany and France have low

values of Structure-Aggregate. Structure-Aggregate also identifies Japan as a market-based

financial system because it has a large, active market. Based on Structure-Aggregate, Brazil and

Mexico are also classified as market-based but this is not because they have large, active stock

markets. Rather, they are classified as market-based because they have very under-developed

banks. Similarly, Nigeria and Bangladesh are identified as bank-based because their stock markets

are practically nonexistent, not because they have well-developed banking systems.

      Restrict offers some intuitively attractive classifications. Until very recently, the U.S.

imposed large restrictions on its banks' activities. In contrast, Germany and France impose very few

restrictions on their banks. However, contrary to common grouping of Germany and Japan as




                                                   16
having similar financial structure, Japan imposes more restrictions on its banks than the U.S. (in

1999). Also, contrary to common groupings, Great Britain imposes as few restrictions on its banks

as Germany.

      Table 2 indicates that there is not a significant correlation between Structure-Aggregate and

Restrict. While Structure-Aggregate identifies New Zealand as the most market-based financial

system, Restrict classifies it as the country with the least restrictions on banks. Great Britain and

Canada have high values of Structure-Aggregate, but they impose few restrictions on their banks.

      The correlations in Table 2 suggest that bank-based financial systems also tend to be

dominated by state-owned bank. The countries with no state-ownership in the ten largest banks –

Canada, Japan, South Africa, Great Britain, and the U.S. are also identified by Structure-Aggregate

as market-based financial systems. Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Costa Rica, the countries with the

highest share of state-owned banks in our sample, are also among the most bank-based financial

systems (countries with the lowest Structure-Aggregate values). Countries whose banking systems

are dominated by state-owned banks also tend to impose more restrictions on their banks. Egypt,

Bangladesh, and Israel have both high state ownership of banks and large restrictions on banks’

activities, while Great Britain, Canada, and Spain have few state-owned banks and impose few

restrictions on their banks.

      These tables show that different measures of financial structure give different country

rankings and produce some anomalous rankings. Therefore, some could argue that these results

imply that distinguishing countries by financial structure is not very useful. We take a different

approach before drawing such a conclusion. We consider a wide array of financial structure

indicators and assess whether any of these indicators is useful in explaining industrial growth, new

establishment formation, or the efficiency of investment flows.




                                                   17
3.1.2. Indicators of financial development

      The financial services view argues that the bank-based versus market-based discussion is of

second order and that it is the overall level of financial development that matters most for industry

expansion, new establishment creation and capital allocation. We therefore need a measure of the

degree to which national financial systems assess firms, monitor managers, facilitate risk

management, and mobilize savings. There is no single, fully satisfactory measure of financial

development. Based on work by Levine and Zervos (1998) and Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000),

we use Finance-Aggregate, which equals the first principal component of two underlying measures

of financial development. The first underlying measure (Finance-Activity) is a measure of the

overall activity of the financial intermediaries and markets. It equals the log of the product of

Private Credit (the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector divided by GDP)

and Value Traded (the value of total shares traded on the stock market exchange divided by GDP).

Private Credit includes credits by both bank and nonbank intermediaries. Recent work shows that

both Private Credit (Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000; Beck, Levine, and Loayza, 2000) and Value

Traded (Levine and Zervos, 1998) exert large influences on economic growth. The second

underlying measure of financial development (Finance-Size) is a measure of the overall size of the

financial sector and equals the log of the sum of Private Credit and Market Capitalization. We

aggregate data over the period 1980-89 for the panel analysis and over the period 1980-95 for the

cross-country regressions. In the main text, we will focus on Finance-Aggregate. The other

measures of overall financial development (Finance-Activity and Finance-Size) confirm our results.

The correlations between these three indicators are at least 0.9 and significant at the 1%-level.




                                                  18
      Table 2 indicates that financially developed economies tend to be more market-based

(Structure-Aggregate), have fewer regulatory restrictions on bank activities (Restrict), and have less

state-ownership of banks (State Ownership). There are, however, exceptions. For example, Japan

and the United States have highly developed financial systems, but severely restricted bank

activities in 1999.



3.1.3. The legal environment

      The law and finance view emphasizes the role of the legal system in shaping financial

development and thus economic growth (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 2000).

To measure the legal environment, we experiment with an assortment of indicators of the efficiency

of the legal system. We focus our presentation on an indicator of overall legal system efficiency.

      Judicial Efficiency is an assessment of the efficiency and integrity of the legal environment,

produced by the country-risk rating agency Business International Corporation. This indicator is

averaged over 1980-83 and ranges from one to ten, with higher numbers indicating higher levels of

judicial efficiency. We use the 1980-83 period to avoid problems of simultaneity bias.

Furthermore, Judicial Efficiency is less correlated with GDP per capita than other measures of the

efficiency of the legal environment, such as Rule of Law, an assessment of the law and order

tradition of a country that ranges from one to six and is made available by the International Country

Risk Guide (ICRG). However, we confirm all our results, using Rule of Law, measured in 1982.

      We also examined the specific laws protecting creditors and minority shareholders (La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998). Including these variables, however, reduces our

sample and does not improve the explanatory power of the regressions significantly beyond that

produced by including Judicial Efficiency. Moreover, when we include the measures of creditor




                                                  19
rights and minority shareholder rights, we draw the same conclusions about the impact of the

overall legal environment on industry growth, new establishment formation, and efficient capital

allocation.

      The correlations in Table 2 indicate that Judicial Efficiency is positively correlated with

Finance-Aggregate and Structure-Aggregate and negatively correlated with State Ownership.

Countries with more efficient legal systems experience higher levels of financial development, more

market-based systems, and less state-ownership of banks.


3.2. Industry growth rates and investment elasticity

      Our dependent variables in the country-industry panel regressions are the average annual

growth rate of real value added and the growth in the number of establishments over the period

1980-90. We use establishments, since there are no cross-country data available on firms. An

establishment is defined as a “unit that engages, under a single ownership or control, in one, or

predominantly one, kind of activity at a single location.” The growth in the number of

establishments is defined as the log difference of the number of establishments in 1990 and 1980.

We use the data obtained by RZ from the Industrial Statistics Yearbook database put together by the

United Nations Statistical Division (1993).

      For the cross-country regressions we use the elasticity of investment to industry value added,

as estimated by Wurgler (2000) for 28 industries in 65 countries over the period 1963-95. Using

data from the Industrial Statistics Yearbook database he regresses the annual growth rates of

industry fixed capital formation on annual growth rate of industry value added, for each country in

the sample:

              Ln(Ii,c,t/Ii,c,t-1) = α + βLn(Vi,c,t/Vi,c,t-1) + Ui,c,t,                              (3)




                                                            20
where I is gross fixed capital formation, V is value added, i indexes manufacturing industry, c

indexes country, and t indexes year. The slope coefficient β is the elasticity used in this paper.

      The correlations in Table 2 indicate that countries that have developed financial systems,

impose fewer restrictions on their banks, have less state-ownership of banks, and have more

efficient judicial systems tend to allocate their capital more efficiently.


3.3. External dependence, labor-intensity and R&D-intensity

      The industry-level data on external dependence are from RZ (1998). The underlying

assumption in RZ – and our work -- is that for technological reasons some industries depend more

heavily on external finance than others. Scale economies, gestation period or intermediate product

intensity might constitute some of these technological reasons. Unfortunately, we can only observe

the actual use of external finance, but not the demand for it. If financial markets were relatively

frictionless, the actual use of external finance would represent the equilibrium of supply and

demand. For countries with very well developed financial systems, RZ note that external funds will

be supplied very elastically to large firms, so that the actual use of external finance would primarily

reflect the demand for external finance. Assuming that the variance of the need of external finance

across industries persists across countries we can thus use the actual external dependence of

industries as observed in a country with a very well developed financial system as a proxy for the

“natural” dependence of industries on external finance. As in RZ, we use the United States to

compute the natural external dependence and then we confirm our results using Canadian data to

compute the natural external dependence of industries.

              The data are from Standard and Poor's Compustat for U.S. firms in 36 industries. This

  database contains only publicly listed firms. A firm's dependence on external finance is defined as

            the share of investment that cannot be financed through internal cash flows; or as capital


                                                   21
 expenditures minus cash flow from operations divided by capital expenditures. Both numerator and

  denominator are averaged over the 1980s to smooth temporal fluctuations. The industry values are

   calculated as medians rather than means to thus prevent outliers from dominating the results. We

have data for 36 industries, varying from Tobacco, an industry with no demand for external finance,

                                    to Drugs, the industry with the highest need for external finance.

      We also consider two other industry characteristics, labor-intensity and R&D-intensity. We

calculate both measures for the U.S. over the sample period 1980-89. We calculate U.S. labor-

intensity data by dividing wages and salaries paid to employees by value added, and obtain this data

from the UNIDO database on three-digit industries over the period 1980-89. We have data

available for 30 industries, ranging from Tobacco, the least labor-intensive industry, to Ship

Building, the most labor-intensive industry. The R&D-intensity variable equals the share of R&D

expenses in value added for U.S. industries over the period 1980-89 and was obtained from the

OECD’s Main Industrial Indicators database. Unfortunately, we have data available for only ten

industries, ranging from metal products, the last R&D-intensive industry, to Office and Computing,

the most R&D-intensive industry. The reduction in observations occurs because of a different

industry split in the OECD than in the RZ data.


4. Results

      The results in panel A of Table 3 indicate that industries requiring more external finance grow

faster in financially more developed economies, but financial structure does not have a significant

impact on industrial growth patterns. Unlike RZ we include the indicators of financial sector

development in logs instead of levels to allow for the nonlinearity in the relation between financial

development and growth illustrated by Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000). Since U.S data are used to

calculate our measure of external dependence, the U.S. is dropped from all regressions. The


                                                  22
positive coefficient on the interaction term of Finance-Aggregate and external dependence enters

significantly at the 1%-level. The coefficient on the interaction of Structure-Aggregate and external

dependence enters insignificantly. The number of establishments in financially dependent

industries also grows faster in well-developed financial systems, but financial structure again does

not enter significantly. The results are consistent with the financial services view, but inconsistent

with the market-based and bank-based views.

      Table 3 also shows that financial structure (Structure-Aggregate) does not influence growth in

labor-intensive or R&D-intensive firms. Due to data availability, the R&D regressions only employ

about one-third of the observations in the external dependence regressions. Overall, financial

development does not enter these regressions significantly either.

      The results in panel B of Table 3 confirm the results by Wurgler (2000) and show that

financial development is positively linked with the elasticity of industry investment to value added.

However, financial structure (Structure-Aggregate) does not explain a significant amount of the

cross-country variation in the efficiency of investment flows. These results support the financial

services view but are inconsistent with predictions by the market-based and bank-based views.

      Table 4 confirms the absence of a strong relation between financial structure and industrial

growth patterns across countries. Here we use the indicator of regulatory restrictions on banks,

Restrict. The interaction of external dependence with Restrict enters insignificantly in both the

industry growth and new establishment regressions. Also, the interactions of Restrict and both

labor-and R&D-intensity do not enter significantly. Finally, Restrict is negatively associated with

capital allocation efficiency as illustrated in panel B of Table 4. It enters with a p-value of 0.06,

providing weak support for the view that systems with fewer restrictions on banks allocate capital

more efficiently.




                                                   23
      Table 4 also confirms the strong positive relation between overall financial development and

industrial performance. New establishments are created more easily in financially more developed

economies as the interaction of external dependence and Finance-Aggregate enters with a p-value of

0.001. The interaction of external dependence and Finance-Aggregate enters positively, with a p-

value of 0.053, in the regression of industry growth. Furthermore, overall financial development

exerts a positive impact on the formation of new establishments in R&D-intensive industries (the

interaction of Finance-Aggregate and R&D-intensity enters positively, with a p-value of 0.03). This

result provides limited support for the hypothesis that new establishments in R&D-intensive

industries are created more easily in well-developed financial systems. Finally, Finance-Aggregate

enters significantly positive in the regression of investment flow efficiency. These findings are

consistent with the financial services view.

      Table 5 confirms the importance of overall financial development, but does not provide

evidence of a positive role for state-owned banks in spurring industrial performance and efficient

capital allocation. The interaction of Finance-Aggregate with external dependence enters positively

in the industry growth regression with a p-value of 0.066. It also enters positively in the new

establishments regression with a p-value of 0.01. Furthermore, the interaction term of R&D-

intensity with financial development enters positively and significantly with a p-value of 0.058 in

the new establishments regression. This result provides some support for the hypothesis that new

establishments in R&D-intensive industries are established more easily in well-developed financial

systems. State Ownership does not enter significantly in any of the regressions. The cross-country

regression of investment flow efficiency confirms the previous results; while financial development

enters significantly and positively, State Ownership does not enter significantly.




                                                  24
       The results in Table 6 provide evidence in favor of the law and finance view and show that

externally dependent industries grow faster and new establishments are more easily created in

economies with efficient legal systems. The interaction term of Judicial Efficiency with external

dependence enters significantly in the regressions of industry growth and the growth in the number

of establishments. When we use interaction terms with legal origin as regressors instead of Judicial

Efficiency, they are jointly significant, which further confirms the law and finance view.

Furthermore, we get very similar results when we use Rule of Law, measured either over the period

1982-89 or in 1982. As before, financial structure enters insignificantly. The cross-country

regressions indicate that capital is allocated more efficiently in economies with more efficient

judicial systems, while financial structure has no effect on the efficiency of capital allocation. We

also run regressions using labor intensity and R&D intensity as industry characteristics. None of

the financial structure indicators or Judicial Efficiency enters significantly in any of the regressions.

Results are reported in Appendix Tables A2 and A3.

       In sum, these results indicate that the overall level of financial development and its legal

determinants help externally dependent industries grow faster and help the start-up of new

establishments in these industries. The cross-country regressions indicate that capital is more

efficiently allocated in countries with well-developed financial systems and more efficient legal

systems. 8 We find limited evidence that financial development helps the start-up of new

establishments in R&D-intensive industries. Taken together, these findings support the financial

services and the law and finance views. We do not find robust evidence in support of the market- or

bank-based views. We do not find any evidence that state-ownership has an independent effect on


8
 While productivity growth rates are not available on the industry level for our sample, cross-country regressions of
productivity growth on financial development and financial structure, controlling for other growth determinants,
confirm our results. While financial development enters significantly positive, financial structure does not. See Levine
(2000).


                                                          25
industry performance beyond its negative effect on financial development as shown by La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001). We do not find any evidence that financial development or a

specific financial structure favors labor-intensive industries.


5. Robustness tests

       This section assesses the robustness of the core results to alternative measures of financial

structure, financial development and external dependence, as well as alternative hypotheses. These

results are available on request in Appendix B.

       First, we used the underlying indicators of financial structure and development, Structure-

Activity, Structure-Size, Finance-Activity, and Finance-Size. Using these measures confirms our

results. While financial structure does not explain the expansion, creation of new establishments in

externally dependent industries, and capital allocation across industries, financial development and

the efficiency of the legal system do explain industrial performance.9

       Second, we adjust our indicators of financial development and structure to take into account

cross-country variance in the ownership concentration of listed firms. More concentrated

ownership can decrease the importance of external finance raised through stock markets. We

compute modified stock market and financial market indicators. Specifically, we multiply Value

Traded and Market Capitalization by one minus the median ownership of the largest three

shareholders in the largest ten companies. Data are from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and

Vishny (1997) and for some countries these numbers are calculated using less than ten companies.

We then re-compute the indicators of financial structure and development and re-do all of the

analyses. The correlation between Structure-Aggregate and the modified indicator is 0.97.

Adjusting for ownership concentration of listed firms in this way does not change our main




                                                   26
conclusions. However, Restrict now enters significantly negative in the cross-country regressions

indicating that financial systems that impose fewer restrictions on their banks allocate capital more

efficiently. Further, State Ownership enters significantly negative in the cross-country regressions

indicating that state-ownership of banks hurts the efficiency of capital allocation.

           Third, we construct alternative measures of financial development and structure based only

on data for privately owned banks (and therefore excluding the assets of state-owned banks). Using

the data by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001) on the share of state-ownership in the

banking sector, we construct two new measures of (1) credit to the private sector by privately

owned deposit money banks and (2) credit to the private sector by privately owned financial

intermediaries. Specifically, we multiply the measures discussed above by one minus the share of

state-owned banks. The correlations between our two new measures and the original ones are 88%

and 92%, respectively. We then recalculate all our indicators of overall financial development and

financial structure using these measures. Although the government share refers only to commercial

and development banks, we assume that the nonbank financial sector presents a similar ownership

structure for each country. These new measures confirm our earlier findings: Neither bank- nor

market-based systems, systems with specific bank regulations or ownership structure have a robust

link with the growth patterns of externally dependent industries, the creation of new establishments,

or capital allocation. The results strongly support the law and finance view. In sum, these

additional measures of financial development and structure do not alter the paper’s findings.

           Fourth, recognizing that there is not a universally accepted definition of bank-based versus

market-based, we isolate those countries with extremely bank-based or market-based systems.

Perhaps, very “unbalanced” financial systems hurt industrial performance. Unbalanced-Bank

equals one if Bank Credit is greater than the sample median and Value Traded is less than the

9
    These results are available in an earlier working paper version of this paper.

                                                              27
sample median, and zero otherwise. Austria, Chile, Denmark, Finland, and Portugal are classified as

having unbalanced bank-based systems. Unbalanced-Market equals one if Value Traded is greater

than the sample median and Bank Credit less than the sample median, and zero otherwise.

Australia, Brazil, India, New Zealand, and Sweden are classified as having unbalanced market-

based systems. Finally, Unbalanced equals one if either Unbalanced Bank or Unbalanced Market

equals one, and zero otherwise. The results provide some weak evidence for the proposition that

having very unbalanced financial system hurts industrial performance. The results indicate that

while externally dependent industries do not grow faster in market-or bank-based financial systems,

new establishments are more easily formed in balanced financial systems. The results further

indicate that labor-intensive industries grow faster in balanced financial systems. None of the other

interaction terms with Unbalanced enters significantly. The cross-country regressions confirm that

capital is more efficiently allocated in financially developed economies, while “unbalancedness”

has no impact on the efficiency of capital allocation.

       Fifth, we assess the law and finance view using two alternative measures of financial

structure proposed by Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic (2000). Specifically, we regress Value

Traded on Rule of Law, the British legal origin dummy, the inflation rate and the La Porta, Lopez-

de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) measure of the extent to which the law protect minority

shareholders.10 The residuals of this regression reflect the component of stock market development

not predicted by the legal and macroeconomic environment. Similarly, we regress Bank Credit on

Rule of Law, the British legal origin dummy, the inflation rate and the La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

Shleifer and Vishny (1998) measure of the extent to which the law protects firm creditors. Positive

residuals from these two regressions, which we call Excess-Market and Excess-Bank, indicate stock

market and banking sector development that goes beyond the predicted development. We then




                                                  28
include interaction terms of external dependence, labor-intensity, or R&D-intensity with both

residual series in our regressions. A positive coefficient on either interaction term would indicate

that industries with specific characteristics grow faster in countries in which the stock market or

banks are larger than predicted by the legal or macroeconomic environment. The results indicate

that externally dependent industries do not grow faster, establishments in these industries are not

created faster, and capital is not allocated more efficiently in financial systems with banks or stock

markets that are larger than predicted. These results support the law and finance view.

           Sixth, we assess whether the impact of financial structure on industrial growth and new

establishment formation depends on the level of economic development. Gerschenkron (1962),

Boot and Thakor (1997), Boyd and Smith (1998), and Rajan and Zingales (1999) all suggest that

bank-based systems maybe particularly important for economic performance in under-developed

economies with poorly functioning institutions. Then, as countries develop and institutions

improve, equity markets play an increasingly important and necessary role. To assess this view

empirically, we modify the basic equation by adding an extra term that interacts three variables:

external dependence, financial structure, and a dummy variable that takes on the value zero for all

countries classified by the World Bank as high or upper-middle-income and one otherwise (“low-

income”). The summation of the coefficients on (a) the “simple” interaction term and (b) the extra

interaction term of external dependence, financial structure, and the dummy variable for low-

income countries gives the impact of financial structure on industry growth in low-income

countries. We find no support for the view that bank-based systems are particularly important for

industrial growth or new establishment formation in developing economies. The simple interaction

term of external dependence and financial structure does not enter significantly at the 5%-level.

Moreover, the summation of (a) the coefficient on the simple interaction term and (b) the coefficient

10
     Boyd, Levine, and Smith (2001) show that inflation tends to reduce stock market liquidity and banking sector activity.

                                                             29
on the interaction term of external dependence, financial structure, and the low-income dummy is

insignificant.

      Seventh, we assess the robustness of the results using three alternative measures of external

dependence. The three alternative measures of external dependence are significantly correlated with

our principal measure of external dependence at the 1%-level, with correlation coefficients being at

least 60%. RZ show that the demand for external finance is highest during the early years of a

company. Using a sample of young firms to calculate the dependence on external finance might

therefore give a more appropriate picture of the need for external finance. Therefore, we first use

the dependence on external finance of firms that went public during the previous ten years. Using

the external dependence of young firms does not alter our main result: financial structure does not

robustly explain industrial growth patterns, the creation of new establishments, or capital allocation.

However, when using young firms to define external dependence, there are some specifications in

which overall financial development and Judicial Efficiency enter insignificantly. This paper’s

conclusions are robust to using the second alternative measure of external dependence that is

calculated over the period 1970-79. If countries other than the U.S. use older technologies, the

external dependence as measured over the 80s might not appropriately reflect external financing

needs in other countries. Also, since the U.S. was “more” bank-based in the 70s than in 80s, using

this historic measure of external dependence has another advantage. It allows us to test the

sensitivity of our results to a bias that might have been introduced by using the external dependence

of industries measured for a sample of firms in a market-based economy. Our results are similar to

the ones obtained with our principal measure of external finance, as measured over the 80s. The

third alternative measure of external dependence is calculated for a sample of Canadian firms,

which RZ note is the only other country for which firm-level flow of funds are available. We




                                                  30
confirm our results concerning financial structure. However, using the Canadian data, our results

concerning the law and finance view and the financial services view are weakened. These results

might be partly explained by the fact that we have data for only 27 industries in the Canadian

sample, whereas there are at least 36 industries in the text specification. Furthermore, the sample

size drops from 1222 to 918.

      Thus, with some qualifications, the robustness checks confirm the text’s main conclusions: (1)

industries that are heavily dependent on external finance do not grow faster in bank-based or

market-based financial system, (2) externally dependent industries do, however, tend to grow faster

in countries with better-developed financial systems and especially in economies that efficiently

protect the legal rights of outside investors, and (3) overall financial development and the legal

protection of investors facilitate the creation of new establishments and improve the efficiency of

capital allocation.




6. Conclusions

      This paper examines the bank-based, market-based, financial services, and law and finance

theories of financial structure. More specifically, we address the following questions: Do industries

that depend heavily on external finance or are R&D-intensive grow faster in bank-based or market-

based systems? Are new establishments in these industries more likely to be created in a bank- or

market-oriented financial system? Is capital allocated more efficiently in a specific financial

structure? Alternatively, is it the overall level of financial development or the legal system that

explains industrial growth patterns, the emergence of new establishments, and the allocation of

capital across countries?




                                                  31
      The results support the financial services and law and finance views. Industries that are heavy

users of external finance grow faster in countries with higher overall levels of financial

development and in countries with efficient legal systems. Moreover, the findings show that the

overall level of financial development along with effective contract enforcement mechanisms foster

new establishment formation and more efficient capital allocation. In contrast, we find no support

for either the bank-based or the market-based views. Measuring whether a country is bank-based or

market-based does not help explain industrial growth patterns or the efficiency of capital allocation.

In sum, the results are broadly consistent with the view that distinguishing countries by overall

financial development and legal system efficiency is more useful than distinguishing countries by

whether they are relatively bank-based or market-based.

      Since the results confirm the financial services and law and finance theories, the results send a

strong message to policy makers. There is no evidence for using policy tools to tip the playing field

in favor of banks or markets. Instead policy maker should focus on legal reforms that foster the

development of financial intermediaries and markets.




                                                  32
                                          REFERENCES

Allen, F., 1993. Stock markets and resource allocation. In: Mayer, C., Vives, X. (Eds.), Capital
Markets and Financial Intermediation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Allen, F., Gale, D., 1999. Comparing Financial Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Barth, J. R., Caprio, G. Jr., Levine, R., 2001a. The regulation and supervision of banks around the
world: a new database, In: Integrating Emerging Market Countries into the Global Financial
System, forthcoming.

Barth, J. R., Caprio, G. Jr., Levine, R., 2001b. Bank regulation and supervision: what works best?
Unpublished working paper. University of Minnesota.

Barth, J. R., Caprio, G. Jr., Levine, R., 2001c. Banking systems around the globe: do regulations
and ownership affect performance and stability? In: Mishkin, F.S. (Ed.), Prudential Supervision:
What Works and What Doesn’t. University of Chicago Press,Chicago.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N., 2000. Finance and the sources of growth. Journal of Financial
Economic 58, 261-300.

Bhide, A., 1993. The hidden costs of stock market liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics 34, 1-
51.

Boot, A.W.A., Greenbaum, S. J., Thakor, A. V., 1993. Reputation and discretion in financial
contracting. American Economic Review 83, 1165-83.

Boot, A.W.A. and Thakor, A., 1997. Financial system architecture. Review of Financial Studies 10,
693-733.

Boyd, J.H., Smith, B.D., 1998. The evolution of debt and equity markets in economic development.
Economic Theory 12, 519-60.

Boyd, J.H., Levine, R., Smith, B.D, 2001. The impact of inflation on financial sector performance.
Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 221-48.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2000. Financial structures across countries: stylized facts. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2146.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2000. Funding growth in bank-based and market-based
financial systems: evidence from firm level data. Unpublished working paper. The World Bank.

Gerschenkron, A., 1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. A Book of Essays.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Goldsmith, R.W., 1969. Financial Structure and Development. Yale University Press, New Haven.



                                                 33
Grossman, S., Hart, O., 1980. Takeover bids, the free-rider problem, and the theory of the
corporation. Bell Journal of Economics 11, 42-64.

Hellwig, M., 1991. Banking, financial intermediation, and corporate finance. In: Giovanni, A.,
Mayer, C. (Eds.), European Financial Integration. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England, 35-63.

Hellwig, M., 1998. On the economics and politics of corporate finance and corporate control.
Unpublished working paper. University of Mannheim.

Huybens, E., Smith, B., 1999. Inflation, financial markets, and long-run real activity. Journal of
Monetary Economics 43, 283-315.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2001. Government ownership of commercial banks.
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. Legal determinants of external
finance. Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1998. Law and finance. Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1999. The quality of government.
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 2000. Investor protection and
corporate governance. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-29.

Levine, R, 1997. Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda. Journal of
Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Levine, R., 2000. Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better? Unpublished
working paper. University of Minnesota.

Levine, R., Loayza, N., Beck, T., 2000. Financial intermediation and growth: causality and causes.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 31-77.

Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1998. Stock markets, banks, and economic growth. American Economic
Review 88, 537-58.

Morck, R., Nakamura, M., 1999. Banks and corporate control in Japan. Journal of Finance 54, 319-
40.

Rajan, R. G., 1992. Insiders and outsiders: the choice between informed and arms length debt.
Journal of Finance 47, 1367-1400.



                                                   34
Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review
88, 559-86.

Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1999. Financial systems, industrial structure, and growth. Unpublished
working paper. University of Chicago.

Reynolds, T.H., Flores, A.A., 1996. Foreign Law Current Sources of Codes and Legislation in
Jurisdictions of the World, Fred B. Rothman & Co., Littleton, CO.

Rousseau, P.L., Wachtel, P., 2000. Equity markets and growth: cross-country evidence on timing
and outcomes, 1980-1995. Journal of Business and Finance, forthcoming.

Stiglitz, J. E., 1985. Credit markets and the control of capital. Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 17, 133-52.

Stulz, R.M., 2000. Financial structure, corporate finance, and economic growth. Unpublished
working paper. Ohio State University.

United Nations Statistical Division, 1993. Industrial Statistics Yearbook, Vol. 1. United Nations,
New York.

Weinstein, D. E.. Yafeh, Y., 1998. On the costs of a bank-centered financial system: evidence from
the changing main bank relations in Japan. Journal of Finance 53, 635-672.

Wenger, E., Kaserer, C., 1998. The German system of corporate governance: a model which should
not be imitated. In: Black, S.W., Moersch, M. (Eds.), Competition and Convergence in Financial
Markets: The German and Anglo-American Models. North –Holland Press, New York, 41-78.

Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of Financial Economics
58, 187-214.




                                                  35
Table 1: Country Classification of Financial Structure

              Structure-                                                                                       State                                   Finance-
Country       Aggregate              Country                         Restrict          Country               Ownership                   Country       Aggregate
New Zealand      1.46                Zimbabwe***                       14              Canada***               0.00                      Japan               1.73
Singapore        1.42                Marocco*                          13              Japan***                0.00                      Singapore           1.51
South Africa     1.39                Egypt***                          13              South Africa*           0.00                      USA                 1.44
Great Britain    1.38                Israel***                         13              Great Britain***        0.00                      Netherlands         1.18
Australia        1.18                Japan***                          13              USA***                  0.00                      South Africa        1.08
USA              1.10                Bangladesh*                       12              Cyprus**                0.00                      Great Britain       0.96
Japan            1.07                Mexico***                         12              Trinidad and Tobago**   1.54                      Germany             0.95
Canada           1.06                Turkey***                         12              Spain***                1.98                      Malaysia            0.95
Malaysia         1.05                USA***                            12              Ireland**               4.48                      Sweden              0.94
Brazil           1.03                Jordan*                           11              Netherlands***          9.20                      Australia           0.92
Sweden           0.83                Chile***                          11              New Zealand***         11.73                      Canada              0.92
Israel           0.76                Brazil*                           10              Malaysia***            12.20                      Korea               0.70
Jordan           0.73                Venezuela*                        10              Denmark***             13.12                      France              0.69
Belgium          0.63                Colombia***                       10              Panama**               17.08                      Jordan              0.67
Mexico           0.62                India***                          10              Australia***           17.65                      Norway              0.59
Korea            0.57                Italy***                          10              Singapore*             22.41                      Israel              0.53
Netherlands      0.54                Malaysia***                       10              Chile***               22.63                      Spain               0.49
Zimbabwe         0.40                Pakistan***                       10              Sweden***              25.55                      Austria             0.43
Peru             0.32                Kenya**                           10              Jordan*                26.03                      New Zealand         0.38
Denmark          0.07                Korea*                             9              Belgium***             27.59                      Finland             0.25
Germany          0.02                Nigeria*                           9              Zimbabwe***            30.04                      Italy               0.13
Philippines      0.00                Belgium***                         9              Finland***             30.65                      Portugal            0.12
Chile           -0.06                Greece***                          9              Philippines***         30.82                      Chile               0.08
India           -0.07                Portugal***                        9              Peru***                34.56                      Denmark             0.07
Norway          -0.11                Sweden***                          9              Korea*                 35.06                      Belgium            -0.15
Finland         -0.30                Trinidad and Tobago**              9              Germany***             36.36                      Brazil             -0.32
Spain           -0.30                Singapore*                         8              Ecuador**              37.20                      Philippines        -0.35
Italy           -0.34                South Africa*                      8              Tunisia**              39.12                      India              -0.36
France          -0.45                Australia***                       8              Brazil*                42.82                      Venezuela          -0.41
Colombia        -0.63                Denmark***                         8              France***              46.18                      Greece             -0.46
Sri Lanka       -0.73                Norway***                          8              Kenya**                48.13                      Zimbabwe           -0.80
Pakistan        -0.73                Peru***                            8              Marocco*               50.45                      Pakistan           -0.84
Greece          -0.92                Cyprus**                           8              Italy***               50.70                      Egypt              -0.93
Venezuela       -0.98                Ireland**                          8              Nigeria*               52.20                      Colombia           -0.97
Egypt           -1.18                Panama**                           8              Turkey***              56.46                      Mexico             -1.02
Turkey          -1.19                Canada***                          7              Austria***             57.01                      Sri Lanka          -1.28
Austria         -1.35                Spain***                           7              Portugal***            58.02                      Morocco            -1.36
Costa Rica      -1.46                Finland***                         7              Norway***              59.22                      Turkey             -1.50
Morocco         -1.49                Sri Lanka***                       7              Venezuela*             60.67                      Peru               -1.50
Portugal        -1.49                Philippines***                     7              Colombia***            64.54                      Costa Rica         -1.66
Nigeria         -1.52                France***                          6              Israel***              64.64                      Nigeria            -1.76
Bangladesh      -2.30                Netherlands***                     6              Mexico***              67.81                      Bangladesh         -2.06
                                     Austria***                         5              Greece***              77.82
                                     Germany***                         5              Sri Lanka***           85.70
                                     Great Britain***                   5              Egypt***               89.76
                                     New Zealand***                     4              India***               90.77
                                                                                       Costa Rica*            90.92
                                                                                       Pakistan***            91.86
                                                                                       Bangladesh*            95.00

Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of Structure-Activity [log(Total value traded / commercial banks claims on the private sector)] and
   Structure-Size [log(Market capitalization / commercial bank claims on the private sector)]
Restrict measures regulations restricting banks from engaging in securities market activites, insurance, real estate transactions, and
   owning nonfinancial firms. Higher values indicate more regulatory restrictions. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b).
State Ownership is the percentage of assets of the ten largest banks owned by the government. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001).
Finance-Aggregate is the first principal component of Finance-Activity [log(Total value traded as share of GDP times financial intermediary claims on the private sector
   as share of GDP)] and Finance-Size [log(Market capitalization plus financial intermediary claims on the private sector as share of GDP)]


The data for Structure-Aggregate and Finance-Aggregate only include data for the industry-country panel regressions (1980-89), while data for Restrict and
State Ownership include data for both the industry-country panel regressions and cross-country regressions.
* included in the industry-country panel regressions
** included in the cross-country regressions
*** included in both the industry-country panel and the cross-country regressions
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Correlations

                                                                            Summary Statistics

                                                                               Standard
                                            Mean             Median            Deviation          Maximum            Minimum         Observations

Industry Growth                             3.34              2.89               9.84              100.00              -44.74               1258
Establishment Growth                        1.41              0.83               8.02               94.37              -41.42               1111
External dependence                         0.32              0.23               0.41               1.49                -0.45                36
Labor intensity                             0.39              0.41               0.11               0.57                0.13                 30
R&D intensity                               12.75             5.09               14.85              45.40               1.37                 10
Industry Elasticity                         0.53              0.56               0.27               0.99                0.06                 39
Structure-Aggregate                           0               0.01               1.00               1.46                -2.30                42
Restrict                                    9.07              9.00               2.41               14.00               4.00                 46
State Ownership                             38.52             35.06              29.04              95.00               0.00                 49
Finance-Aggregate                             0               0.13               1.00               1.73                -2.06                42
Judicial Efficiency                         7.87              7.50               1.84               10.00               4.00                 41


                                                                            Correlations across countries

                                        Structure                               State             Finance             Judicial            Industry
                                        Aggregate            Restrict         Ownership          Aggregate           Efficiency           Elasticity

Structure-Aggregate                           1

Restrict                                   -0.177                1
                                          (0.268)
State Ownership                            -0.730              0.307                1
                                          (0.001)            (0.051)
Finance-Aggregate                           0.712             -0.341             -0.715                1
                                          (0.001)            (0.029)            (0.001)
Judicial Efficiency                         0.517             -0.303             -0.476             0.649                 1
                                          (0.001)            (0.054)            (0.002)            (0.001)
Industry Elasticity                         0.290             -0.455             -0.576              0.53              0.496                  1
                                          (0.108)            (0.009)            (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.004)

p-values are reported in parentheses


Industry growth is the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
Establishment growth is the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980 for each industry in each country. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
External dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal funds for U.S. firms in the same industry between 1980-89. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
Labor intensity is wages and salaries paid to employees divided by value added, calculated for a sample of U.S. firms over the period 1980-89, using UNIDO data.
R&D intensity is the share of R&D expenses in value added for U.S. industries over the period 1980-89, using data from the OECD's Main Industrial Indicators database.
Industry elasticity is the elasticity of industry fixed capital formation to value added, computed over the 1963-95 period. Source: Wurgler (2000)
Finance-Aggregate is the first principal component of Finance-Activity [log(Total value traded as share of GDP times financial intermediary claims on the private sector
   as share of GDP)] and Finance-Size [log(Market capitalization plus financial intermediary claims on the private sector as share of GDP)]
Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of Structure-Activity [log(Total value traded / commercial banks claims on the private sector)] and
   Structure-Size [log(Market capitalization / commercial bank claims on the private sector)]
Restrict measures regulations restricting banks from engaging in securities market activities, insurance, real estate transactions, and
   owning nonfinancial firms. Higher values indicate more regulatory restrictions. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b).
State Ownership is the percentage of assets of the ten largest banks owned by the government. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001).
Judicial Efficiency is a measure of the efficiency of the legal system. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998)
Table 3: Financial Development, Bank- vs. Market-Based Systems, and Industry Performance


A. Cross-country, Cross-Industry                                                                                                                                                                              B. Cross-Country

                                       External dependence                                                  Labor intensity                                                  R&D intensity                    Industry Elasticity


                                    Industry      Establishment                                     Industry       Establishment                                   Industry       Establishment                           Industry
                                     Growth1         Growth2                                         Growth1          Growth2                                       Growth1          Growth2                              Elasticity3


Interaction                           -2.595            0.011          Interaction                    -7.133            -1.946         Interaction                   -0.138            -0.059             Structure-        0.003
(external dependence                 (0.116)           (0.992)         (labor intensity x            (0.243)           (0.711)         (R&D intensity x             (0.297)            (0.566)            Aggregate        (0.948)
x Structure-Aggregate)                                                 Structure-Aggregate)                                            Structure-Aggregate)


Interaction                           4.302             2.753          Interaction                     1.568            2.944          Interaction                    0.146             0.117             Finance-          0.159
(external dependence                 (0.002)           (0.009)         (labor intensity x            (0.787)           (0.579)         (R&D intensity x             (0.208)            (0.182)            Aggregate        (0.007)
x Finance-Aggregate)                                                   Finance-Aggregate)                                              Finance-Aggregate)


Observations                          1222              1082           Observations                     990               884          Observations                    329               298              Observations        39


The p-values for heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.

1. Dependent variable equals the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing

in 1980 and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total

population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

2. Dependent variable equals the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing in 1980

and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total

population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

3. Dependent variable is the elasticity of industry fixed capital formation to value added, computed over the 1963-95 period. Source: Wurgler (2000)


Finance-Aggregate is the first principal component of Finance-Activity [log(Total value traded as share of GDP times financial intermediary claims on the private sector
   as share of GDP)] and Finance-Size [log(Market capitalization plus financial intermediary claims on the private sector as share of GDP)]
Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of Structure-Activity [log(Total value traded / commercial banks claims on the private sector)] and
   Structure-Size [log(Market capitalization / commercial bank claims on the private sector)]

External dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal funds for U.S. firms in the same industry between 1980-89. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

Labor intensity is wages and salaries paid to employees divided by value added, calculated for a sample of U.S. firms over the period 1980-89, using UNIDO data.

R&D intensity is the share of R&D expenses in value added for U.S. industries over the period 1980-89, using data from the OECD's Main Industrial Indicators database.
Table 4: Financial Development, the Power of Banks, and Industry Performance


A. Cross-country, Cross-Industry                                                                                                                                                         B. Cross-Country

                               External dependence                                             Labor intensity                                             R&D intensity                 Industry Elasticity


                             Industry Establishment                                      Industry Establishment                                    Industry Establishment                                 Industry
                              Growth1    Growth2                                          Growth1    Growth2                                        Growth1    Growth2                                    Elasticity3


Interaction                    0.170           0.170         Interaction                   1.859           -0.315        Interaction                   0.015          0.020         Restrict               -0.032
(external dependence (0.679)                  (0.508)        (labor intensity             (0.269)         (0.783)        (R&D intensity             (0.525)          (0.277)                               (0.061)
x Restrict)                                                  x Restrict)                                                 x Restrict)


Interaction                    2.713           3.030         Interaction                  -0.608           0.932         Interaction                   0.060          0.096         Finance-                0.134
(external dependence (0.053)                  (0.001)        (labor intensity x           (0.900)         (0.810)        (R&D intensity x           (0.314)          (0.030)        Aggregate              (0.007)
x Finance-Aggregate)                                         Finance-Aggregate)                                          Finance-Aggregate)


Observations                    1190           1082          Observations                   964             884          Observations                  322             298          Observations              37


The p-values for heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.

1. Dependent variable equals the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing

in 1980 and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total

population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

2. Dependent variable equals the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing in 1980

and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total

population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

3. Dependent variable is the elasticity of industry fixed capital formation to value added, computed over the 1963-95 period. Source: Wurgler (2000)


Finance-Aggregate is the first principal component of Finance-Activity [log(Total value traded as share of GDP times financial intermediary claims on the private sector
   as share of GDP)] and Finance-Size [log(Market capitalization plus financial intermediary claims on the private sector as share of GDP)]
Restrict measures regulations restricting banks from engaging in securities market activities, insurance, real estate transactions, and
   owning nonfinancial firms. Higher values indicate more regulatory restrictions. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b).

External dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal funds for U.S. firms in the same industry between 1980-89. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

Labor intensity is wages and salaries paid to employees divided by value added, calculated for a sample of U.S. firms over the period 1980-89, using UNIDO data.

R&D intensity is the share of R&D expenses in value added for U.S. industries over the period 1980-89, using data from the OECD's Main Industrial Indicators database.
Table 5: Financial Development, Ownership Structure, and Industry Performance


A. Cross-country, Cross-Industry                                                                                                                                                                 B. Cross-Country

                                  External dependence                                               Labor intensity                                               R&D intensity                  Industry Elasticity


                               Industry     Establishment                                   Industry      Establishment                                   Industry         Establishment                     Industry
                                Growth1        Growth2                                       Growth1         Growth2                                       Growth1            Growth2                        Elasticity3


Interaction                      0.002            0.030          Interaction                   0.370             -0.093        Interaction                   0.005             0.004        State             -0.002
(external dependence            (0.980)          (0.462)         (labor intensity             (0.233)          (0.595)         (R&D intensity              (0.271)            (0.269)       Ownership         (0.327)
x State Ownership)                                               x State Ownership)                                            x State Ownership)


Interaction                      2.375            3.290          Interaction                   3.532             -0.321        Interaction                   0.130             0.130        Finance-           0.133
(external dependence            (0.066)          (0.001)         (labor intensity x           (0.595)          (0.945)         (R&D intensity x            (0.196)            (0.058)       Aggregate         (0.032)
x Finance-Aggregate)                                             Finance-Aggregate)                                            Finance-Aggregate)


Observations                     1222              1082          Observations                   990               884          Observations                   329               298         Observations         39


The p-values for heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.

1. Dependent variable equals the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing

in 1980 and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total

population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

2. Dependent variable equals the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing in 1980

and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total

population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

3. Dependent variable is the elasticity of industry fixed capital formation to value added, computed over the 1963-95 period. Source: Wurgler (2000)


Finance-Aggregate is the first principal component of Finance-Activity [log(Total value traded as share of GDP times financial intermediary claims on the private sector
   as share of GDP)] and Finance-Size [log(Market capitalization plus financial intermediary claims on the private sector as share of GDP)]
State Ownership is the percentage of assets of the ten largest banks owned by the government. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001).

External dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal funds for U.S. firms in the same industry between 1980-89. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

Labor intensity is wages and salaries paid to employees divided by value added, calculated for a sample of U.S. firms over the period 1980-89, using UNIDO data.

R&D intensity is the share of R&D expenses in value added for U.S. industries over the period 1980-89, using data from the OECD's Main Industrial Indicators database.
Table 6: Financial Structure, External Dependence, the Legal Environment, and Industry Performance

A. Cross-country, Cross-Industry                                                                                                                                                               B. Cross-Country

                                 Structure-Aggregate                                                    Restrict                                               State Ownership                 Industry Elasticity


                             Industry      Establishment                                    Industry      Establishment                                    Industry   Establishment                        Industry                     Industry                     Industry
                              Growth1         Growth2                                        Growth1         Growth2                                        Growth1      Growth2                           Elasticity3                  Elasticity3                  Elasticity3

Interaction (external          -1.173            0.096         Interaction (external           -0.021           0.274          Interaction (external        -0.042          0.009         Structure          0.031       Restrict        -0.031       State           -0.002
dependence x                  (0.551)           (0.929)        dependence x                   (0.965)          (0.310)         dependence x                (0.618)         (0.832)        -Aggregate        (0.460)                      (0.081)      Ownership      ( 0.175)
Structure-Aggregate)                                           Restrict)                                                       State Ownership)

Interaction (external          1.265             1.061         Interaction (external           0.873            1.295          Interaction (external        0.577           1.157         Judicial           0.075       Judicial         0.068       Judicial         0.064
dependence x                  (0.012)           (0.006)        dependence x                   (0.089)          (0.001)         dependence x                (0.325)         (0.004)        Efficiency        (0.001)      Efficiency      (0.001)      Efficiency      (0.010)
Judicial Efficiency)                                           Judicial Efficiency)                                            Judicial Efficiency)


Observations                    1190             1082          Observations                     1190             1082          Observations                 1190            1082          Observations         37        Observations       36        Observations       37

The p-values for heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.
1. Dependent variable equals the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing
in 1980 and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total
population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
2. Dependent variable equals the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing in 1980
and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total
population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
3. Dependent variable is the elasticity of industry fixed capital formation to value added, computed over the 1963-95 period. Source: Wurgler (2000)

Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of Structure-Activity [log(Total value traded / commercial banks claims on the private sector)] and
   Structure-Size [log(Market capitalization / commercial bank claims on the private sector)]
Restrict measures regulations restricting banks from engaging in securities market activities, insurance, real estate transactions, and
   owning nonfinancial firms. Higher values indicate more regulatory restrictions. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b).
State Ownership is the percentage of assets of the 10 largest banks owned by the government. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001).
Judicial Efficiency is a measure of the efficiency of the legal system. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998)
External dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal funds for U.S. firms in the same industry between 1980-89. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
Table A1: Country Ranking According to Indicators of Financial Intermediary and Stock Market Developm

                      Value                                         Market                              Private                   Bank
Country              Traded           Country                     Capitalization        Country         Credit    Country         Credit
Japan                 44.23           Singapore                     116.59              Japan           150.28    Japan           95.63
USA                   27.70           South Africa                  116.28              USA             120.63    Germany         82.33
Singapore             26.39           Japan                          67.23              Netherlands     115.63    Singapore       78.93
Great Britain         24.28           Great Britain                  60.52              Singapore       93.97     Austria         77.95
Germany               15.91           Malaysia                       57.99              Sweden          93.83     France          76.28
Korea                 14.97           USA                            51.43              France          90.69     Portugal        69.76
Netherlands           12.94           Jordan                         46.09              Germany         89.84     Netherlands     67.23
Israel                12.51           Canada                         41.96              Norway          84.93     USA             65.69
Canada                11.61           New Zealand                    40.98              Austria         83.91     Spain           64.21
Australia             10.62           Australia                      36.61              Australia       81.23     Finland         57.17
Malaysia              9.71            Netherlands                    31.80              Canada          74.75     Jordan          52.87
Sweden                8.46            Sweden                         31.10              Malaysia        71.94     Malaysia        52.12
South Africa          5.96            Israel                         26.75              Spain           70.40     Great Britain   51.86
Jordan                5.83            Chile                          21.62              South Africa    69.85     Italy           49.29
New Zealand           5.49            Belgium                        20.69              Portugal        69.76     South Africa    48.12
Brazil                4.75            Denmark                        17.31              Korea           66.33     Israel          46.90
France                4.51            Germany                        16.73              Jordan          59.31     Chile           45.88
Spain                 4.28            Finland                        15.13              Finland         57.17     Canada          44.63
Norway                3.70            Korea                          15.13              Great Britain   51.86     Denmark         42.52
India                 3.13            Spain                          13.64              Venezuela       50.34     Norway          42.51
Italy                 3.04            France                         13.52              Italy           49.29     Korea           42.27
Belgium               2.81            Norway                         10.65              Chile           47.81     Sweden          41.84
Mexico                2.71            Italy                          10.29              Israel          46.90     Australia       34.85
Denmark               2.57            Brazil                          9.36              Greece          45.39     Belgium         27.14
Finland               2.57            Philippines                     7.24              Denmark         42.52     Greece          25.68
Austria               2.23            Zimbabwe                        7.12              New Zealand     37.92     Venezuela       25.58
Philippines           1.92            Sri Lanka                       6.98              Philippines     30.98     Egypt           24.09
Chile                 1.44            India                           5.21              India           28.30     India           24.01
Portugal              0.99            Venezuela                       5.10              Egypt           28.18     Pakistan        23.79
Zimbabwe              0.85            Greece                          5.09              Belgium         27.14     Philippines     23.25
Pakistan              0.56            Portugal                        4.89              Colombia        25.14     New Zealand     22.10
Peru                  0.37            Austria                         4.73              Pakistan        23.79     Sri Lanka       18.41
Greece                0.29            Costa Rica                      4.41              Brazil          23.57     Costa Rica      16.77
Colombia              0.28            Pakistan                        4.36              Morocco         21.01     Morocco         16.29
Venezuela             0.25            Mexico                          4.32              Zimbabwe        20.62     Nigeria         14.88
Egypt                 0.20            Peru                            3.96              Costa Rica      18.58     Turkey          14.19
Turkey                0.17            Egypt                           3.77              Sri Lanka       18.41     Bangladesh      13.96
Sri Lanka             0.11            Nigeria                         3.63              Nigeria         17.45     Colombia        13.29
Morocco               0.09            Colombia                        3.05              Turkey          15.22     Brazil          12.67
Costa Rica            0.02            Morocco                         1.89              Bangladesh      13.96     Zimbabwe        11.37
Nigeria               0.02            Turkey                          1.74              Mexico          12.21     Mexico           9.66
Bangladesh            0.02            Bangladesh                      0.98              Peru            10.97     Peru             6.30

Value Traded is the total value of stocks traded divided by GDP
Market Capitalization is the value of stocks outstanding divided by GDP
Private Credit is claims on private sector by financial intermediaries divided by GDP
Bank Credit is claims on private sector by commercial banks divided by GDP


All data are averages over 1980-89.
Table A2: Financial Structure, Labor Intensity, the Legal Environment, and Industry Performance

Cross-country, Cross-Industry

                                 Structure-Aggregate                                                     Restrict                                                    State Ownership


                             Industry       Establishment                                     Industry      Establishment                                    Industry     Establishment
                              Growth1          Growth2                                         Growth1         Growth2                                        Growth1        Growth2

Interaction (labor             -3.352            6.471          Interaction (labor              1.256            -1.550         Interaction (labor             0.262           -0.280
intensity x                   (0.579)           (0.150)         intensity x                    (0.487)          (0.186)         intensity x                   (0.366)         (0.141)
Structure-Aggregate)                                            Restrict)                                                       State Ownership)

Interaction (labor             -1.227            -2.827         Interaction (labor              -1.499           -1.883         Interaction (labor             -0.183          -2.782
intensity x                   (0.556)           (0.089)         intensity x                    (0.436)          (0.207)         intensity x                   (0.944)         (0.138)
Judicial Efficiency)                                            Judicial Efficiency)                                            Judicial Efficiency)


Observations                     964               884          Observations                     964               884          Observations                        964         884

The p-values for heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.
1. Dependent variable equals the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing
in 1980 and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total
population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
2. Dependent variable equals the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing in 1980
and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total
population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of Structure-Activity [log(Total value traded divided by claims on private sector by commercials banks)] and
    Structure-Size [log(Market capitalization divided by claims on private sector by commercials banks)]
Restrict measures the degree to which regulations restrict banks from engaging in securities market activities, insurance, real estate transactions, and
   owning nonfinancial firms. Higher values indicate more regulatory restrictions. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b).
State Ownership is the percentage of assets of the 10 largest banks in each country owned by the government. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001).
Judicial Efficiency is a measure of the efficiency of the legal system. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998)
Labor intensity is wages and salaries paid to employees divided by value added, calculated for a sample of U.S. firms over the period 1980-89, using UNIDO data.
Table A3: Financial Structure, R&D Intensity, the Legal Environment, and Industry Performance

Cross-country, Cross-Industry

                                 Structure-Aggregate                                                     Restrict                                                    State Ownership


                             Industry       Establishment                                     Industry      Establishment                                    Industry     Establishment
                              Growth1          Growth2                                         Growth1         Growth2                                        Growth1        Growth2

Interaction (R&D               -0.076            0.061          Interaction (R&D                0.013            0.018          Interaction (R&D               0.002           0.001
intensity x                   (0.419)           (0.369)         intensity x                    (0.615)          (0.355)         intensity x                   (0.484)         (0.810)
Structure-Aggregate)                                            Restrict)                                                       State Ownership)

Interaction (R&D               0.038             -0.005         Interaction (R&D                0.021            0.029          Interaction (R&D               0.030           0.020
intensity x                   (0.220)           (0.826)         intensity x                    (0.468)          (0.175)         intensity x                   (0.365)         (0.366)
Judicial Efficiency)                                            Judicial Efficiency)                                            Judicial Efficiency)


Observations                     322               298          Observations                     322               298          Observations                        322         298

The p-values for heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.
1. Dependent variable equals the growth rate in real value added for 1980-90 for each industry in each country. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing
in 1980 and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total
population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)
2. Dependent variable equals the log difference in the number of establishment between 1990 and 1980. All regressions also include the industry's share of total value added in manufacturing in 1980
and country and industry dummies. All regressions are TSLS. We use the British, French and German legal origin dummies and the share of Catholic, Muslim and Protestant population in total
population as instruments for financial development and financial structure. Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998)

Structure-Aggregate is the first principal component of Structure-Activity [log(Total value traded divided by claims on private sector by commercials banks)] and
    Structure-Size [log(Market capitalization divided by claims on private sector by commercials banks)]
Restrict measures the degree to which regulations restrict banks from engaging in securities market activities, insurance, real estate transactions, and
   owning nonfinancial firms. Higher values indicate more regulatory restrictions. Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a,b).
State Ownership is the percentage of assets of the 10 largest banks in each country owned by the government. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2001).
Judicial Efficiency is a measure of the efficiency of the legal system. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998)
R&D intensity is the share of R&D expenses in value added for U.S. industries over the period 1980-89, using data from the OECD's Main Industrial Indicators database.
