                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EVALUATING WELFARE REFORM IN THE UNITED STATES


                                           Rebecca M. Blank


                                          Working Paper 8983
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8983


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




This paper was commissioned by the Journal of Economic Literature . Thanks are due to Lucie Schmidt and
to Elizabeth Scott for excellent research assistance, and to Jeffrey Grogger, Charles Michalopoulos, Robert
Moffitt and an anonymous referee for comments and advice. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Rebecca M. Blank. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States
Rebecca M. Blank
NBER Working Paper No. 8983
June 2002
JEL No. I



                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper reviews the economics literature on welfare reform over the 1990s. A brief summary
of the policy changes over this period is followed by a discussion of the methodological techniques
utilized to analyze the effects of these changes on outcomes. The paper then critically reviews the
econometric and experimental literature on caseload changes, labor force changes, poverty and income
changes, and family formation changes. A growing body of evidence suggests that the recent policy
changes have influenced economic behavior and well-being in a variety of ways. One particular set of
“new-style” welfare programs seems to show especially promising results, with significantly increased
work and earnings and reduced poverty.




Rebecca M. Blank
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
440 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
Tel: 734-763-2258
Fax: 734-763-9181
blank@umich.edu
                                                                                                       3


        Over the 1990s the United States fundamentally changed the structure of its

public assistance programs to low-income families. These policy changes have, in turn,

generated a growing body of economic research that has evaluated their effects. This

article reviews the major changes in U.S. welfare programs over the 1990s and critiques

some of the key methodological approaches and results in areas where a substantial

economic research literature has accumulated. I particularly focus on areas where the

new research contributes to long-standing debates.

        It is worth noting that the U.S. policy changes have been much discussed in other

countries and the evaluation literature from the U.S. may be increasingly relevant to

policy debates elsewhere. For instance, in 1996, Canada gave provinces greater

discretion over their social assistance programs, similar to changes the U.S. As we shall

discuss below, Canada enacted a very interesting demonstration program in the 1990s

(the Self Sufficiency Project), designed to move women on welfare into work. In 1999,

Great Britain enacted the Working Families Tax Credit, a generous tax credit for low-

income working families, similar to the U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit program. Some

communities in Germany are imposing time limits on the receipt of public assistance

(Feist and Schöb, 1998). In contrast to earlier decades, when the different design and

lower generosity of U.S. social welfare programs led U.S. policies to be dismissed as

irrelevant or aberrant by other westernized nations, during the 1990s many of these

countries watched the U.S. welfare experiments with great interest.1




1
 Not discussed here are social insurance programs such as Social Security or Unemployment Insurance,
around which there has also been a great deal of trans-Atlantic conversation.
                                                                                                                  4


               I. Federal Changes in U.S. Welfare Programs Over the 1990s

         The U.S. enacted major welfare reform legislation in August, 1996. The Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) passed with a

relatively high degree of bipartisan support. President Bill Clinton had, however, vetoed

two earlier versions of this bill and it remained controversial. Several of his senior

advisors resigned in protest when he signed PRWORA into law.2

         The major provisions of PRWORA included:

•   Devolution of greater program authority to the states. PRWORA replaced the
    federal Aid to Families with Dependent Children Program (AFDC) – the primary
    cash assistance program for low-income families -- with the Temporary Assistance
    for Needy Families (TANF) block grant. This essentially removed almost all federal
    eligibility and payment rules, giving states much greater discretion in designing their
    own cash public assistance programs. This also eliminated a federal entitlement to
    cash assistance. States could choose which families they supported.

•   Changes in financing. TANF replaced a matching fund arrangement under AFDC, in
    which federal funding moved up or down with state funding. The TANF block grant
    was fixed and the contribution for each state was determined by the federal AFDC
    matching grant contribution in the years prior to PRWORA. States were required to
    maintain at least 75 percent of their previous state spending levels on AFDC in order
    to receive the full block grant.3

•   Ongoing work requirements. By 2002, at least 50 percent of all recipient families and
    90 percent of two-parent families were required to be working or in work preparation
    programs, although states were given great discretion to design and implement these
    programs. The law treated caseload reductions as similar to work, however. Thus, a
    state which reduced its caseload by 50 percent would meet its work requirement,
    regardless of how many current or former recipients were actually employed.

•   Incentives to reduce non-marital births. There was more rhetoric than program in the
    legislation in this area, but three of the four stated goals of PRWORA involved
    reducing non-marital births and encouraging marriage. States that reduced out-of-
    wedlock child bearing without raising abortion rates qualified for special bonuses.

2
  For a detailed description of the events leading up to this legislation, see Weaver (2000). For further
discussion about the provisions of PRWORA see Blank (1997b) or Blank and Ellwood (2002). Moffitt
(1999b) discusses the factors behind PRWORA’s passage. Moffitt (forthcoming) provides a more detailed
summary of the changes from AFDC to TANF.
3
  Not included in this paper is any discussion of the public finance literature that investigates the potential
impact of block grants on welfare funding. For a good overview of these issues, see Chernick (1998).
                                                                                              5




•   Five year maximum time limit. PRWORA set a lifetime limit of 60 months on the
    receipt of TANF-funded aid. States could exempt up to 20 percent of their caseload
    from this limit, could set shorter time limits if they chose, or could continue funding
    assistance to families entirely out of state funds after 60 months.

Although this paper will focus less on these issues, PRWORA also imposed additional

limits on eligibility for Food Stamps and Supplemental Security Income (SSI, the cash

assistance program to low-income aged and disabled individuals) among certain

populations. Legal immigrants who arrived after August 1996 were largely denied access

to TANF and to these other programs; the impact of this policy change will grow over

time as an increasing share of U.S. immigrants will have arrived post-PRWORA.

Finally, PRWORA made changes designed to encourage greater paternity establishment

and more payment of child support by absent parents.

       While the 1996 legislation has received the most public attention, it was preceded

by a variety of earlier and significant changes. Growing dissatisfaction with AFDC had

led an increasing number of states to seek waivers from the AFDC rules. These waivers

were mostly designed to allow states to more stringently enforce work requirements for

welfare recipients. Such waivers had started under President Ronald Reagan, but the

Clinton Administration actively encouraged more expansive state-wide waiver programs.

As a result, by the time PRWORA passed, 27 states had major state-wide waivers in

place. Most of these states designed new TANF-funded welfare programs that were

closely based on their waiver experiments, although virtually all waiver states used their

new discretion under PRWORA to make additional program changes.

       All of these waiver programs had to be seriously evaluated by the states that

implemented them. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), which
                                                                                                         6


approved and administered the waivers, typically required some form of random-

assignment evaluation. Over time, this generated a body of literature about welfare-to-

work programs that was crucial in convincing people that such programs could have

positive effects on earnings and labor supply and negative effects on welfare spending.

Along with reform of traditional cash welfare programs, there were also major changes in

federal legislation affecting low wage jobs and workers over the 1990s. The minimum

wage rose from $3.35 at the end of 1989 to $5.15 in 1997. By 2000, this left real

minimum wages 10.8 percent above their levels in 1989.

        Even more important, one of the first legislative proposals from the Clinton

administration to receive Congressional approval in 1993 was a major expansion of the

Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). The EITC operates as a refundable tax credit through

the federal tax system to subsidize low wage workers in low income families. Figure 1

describes the EITC subsidy as of 2000. Nonworkers receive no subsidy. Low income

low wage workers with one child (two or more children) are initially subsidized at a rate

of 34 percent (40 percent). Over some income range they receive a flat subsidy of $2353

($3888), and as their income increases further this is taxed away at a rate of 15.98 percent

(21.06 percent). This subsidy offsets federal income tax obligations (including taxes that

fund the Social Security and Medicaid programs) and results in subsidies (checks from

the government) for workers whose EITC subsidy is greater than their tax obligations.4

        The combination of increased minimum wages and increased EITC subsidies

meant that the real earnings plus wage subsidy (in 2000 dollars) received by a woman

with one child working full time at the minimum wage rose from $10,568 in 1989 to


4
  More detail on the EITC is available in U.S. House of Representatives (2000, p808-813). For a history of
the EITC, see Ventry (2000).
                                                                                                            7


$12,653 in 2000, a 19.7 percent increase. For a similar woman with two or more

children, real earnings and subsidies rose from $10,568 in 1989 to $14,188 in 2000, a

34.3 percent increase. These changes should have greatly increased the work incentives

for low-wage single mothers with children.

         Two other federal legislative changes also deserve mention. First, from the mid-

1980s on, access to public health insurance became increasingly delinked from

participation in cash public assistance programs. By 1999, all children in families whose

income was below 100 percent of the poverty line were eligible for Medicaid, the

publicly-funded health insurance program for low-income persons.5 In addition, women

who left welfare for work were eligible for one year of transitional Medicaid coverage.6

Because many eligible children did not appear to be accessing Medicaid, in 1997

Congress funded a $24 billion, 5-year program known as the Children’s Health Insurance

Program (CHIP), providing incentives and funding to states to expand health care usage

and health insurance access among low-income children.

         There were also substantial changes in subsidies for child care assistance.

PRWORA abolished a plethora of older programs and created a single Child Care and

Development Block Grant. States were also allowed to use a certain share of their TANF

funds for child care. In addition, there were expansions in the Child Care Tax Credit for

lower middle income families.7



5
  Since 1983, all pregnant women and children age 5 or less in families with incomes below 133 percent of
the Federal poverty line have access to Medicaid; 23 states use a higher cutoff point. Older children, born
after September 1983, in families below 100 percent of the poverty line are also covered by Medicaid; 26
states set a higher cutoff point for eligibility for these older children (Ku, Ullman and Almeida, 1999). For
more detail on Medicaid and how it operates, see Gruber (forthcoming).
6
  Thirteen states extend this for more than one year.
7
  Loprest, Schmidt and Witte (2000) discuss these changes in more detail. For a summary of the research
on the impacts of child care subsidies, see Blau (forthcoming) and Anderson and Levine (2000).
                                                                                                         8


        Combined, these changes constitute a revolution in public assistance programs

within the United States over this past decade. Federal dollars available to support

working low income families increased from $11.0 billion in 1988 to $66.7 billion in

1999.8 Dollars paid in cash welfare support to (largely nonworking) families headed by

non-elderly, non-disabled adults rose from $24 billion in 1988 to $27 billion in 1992,

then fell to $13 billion by 1999 (all numbers in 2000 dollars). This suggests that the work

incentives imbedded in the public assistance system should have increased markedly over

this period: cash assistance became far less available, welfare recipients were pushed

much harder to find employment and leave the rolls, the returns to low wage work rose,

and the availability of work supports (child care and health insurance) increased to low

income families.

        Not unimportant, these changes took place at the same time as a major economic

boom. The U. S. unemployment rate fell to 5 percent in April, 1997, and remained at or

below this level until October 2001. Most places experienced worker shortages in the

years following the passage of the 1996 legislation, making employers more willing to

hire ex-welfare recipients. Wages among less skilled workers started to rise in 1995, for

the first time since the late 1970s (Blank and Schmidt, 2001). This meant that the

macroeconomy reinforced and supported the direction of legislative change over the

1990s. In many ways, the late 1990s were the best time imaginable to enact and

implement work-oriented welfare reform.




8
 Blank and Ellwood (2002, Figure 1). This includes dollars spent on the EITC, child care assistance to
poor and near-poor families, and Medicaid and CHIP expenditures on low-income children and adults who
are not receiving cash assistance. It does not include money spent on job training or job placement
assistance, or cash benefits paid to working families.
                                                                                                    9


                                              II. The State Response

           Describing the Federal changes provides only half of the picture. After the

passage of PRWORA each state began to design and enact its own TANF-funded

program.9

           Historically, analysis of public assistance programs has focused on two

parameters: benefit levels and benefit reduction rates (BRRs). Figure 2 shows the income

available to a low-wage family under a typical welfare program. A maximum benefit

level, G, is available to non-workers. Workers earn an hourly wage rate w. As hours of

work (and earnings) increase, benefits are taxed away at a rate t (the BRR). Ongoing

historical discussion has focused on the trade-offs of higher benefits (raising G provides a

stronger safety net but discourages work and raises program costs) and higher BRRs

(raising t reduces the return to low levels of work but leads to lower program costs). The

Negative Income Tax experiments of the 1970s were largely experiments involving

different levels of G and t (Burtless, 1986; Ashenfelter and Plant, 1990).

           Frustration with the work disincentives imbedded in traditional welfare programs

led President Reagan to promote welfare-to-work programs in the early 1980s.

Mandatory job search or job placement programs would replace the endless effort to

tinker with the contradictory incentives imbedded in a given level of G and t, by forcing

welfare recipients to work regardless of the resulting loss in benefit income. A strong

version of work requirements is a so-called “workfare” program, which mandates a

certain level of work in a publicly provided job as a condition of ongoing welfare receipt.

A less extreme requirement might mandate participation in a job preparation or job



9
    For a description of the structure of means-tested programs prior to 1996, see Blank (1997a).
                                                                                             10


search program. A wide variety of states have experimented with different versions of

work requirements over the past 20 years.

       Initially using waivers and later using their authority under PRWORA, states have

transformed the nature of public assistance programs. While benefit levels and BRRs

remain important parameters, states are increasingly using a wide variety of additional

program design components to promote work and to reduce caseloads. What follows is a

brief description of these changes. What will be clear is that both the number of possible

program parameters available to states has increased markedly, and that different states

are choosing very different combinations of these parameters. Hence, the variance across

states in their TANF-funded programs is enormous and still growing.

       Benefit Levels. States have always been able to choose their own maximum

benefit levels for non-workers. This part of the system has changed little. Most states

over the 1990s made only small legislative changes in their benefit levels, even after the

passage of PRWORA. In fact, the overwhelming trend in benefit levels in the 1990s has

been inflation erosion in benefits (a trend visible since the early 1970s). Table 1 indicates

that the median benefit level (in $2000) fell from $480/month for a family of three to

$379 between 1990 and 2000. Most of this decline was due to inflation erosion. Similar

changes occurred across the distribution of benefit levels, as Table 1 indicates.10

       As cash assistance becomes less broadly available, benefit levels are of decreasing

importance. The steady decline in benefit levels, however, should increase work

incentives over this period.

       Benefit Reduction Rates. Under AFDC, BRRs were set by federal law (although a

few states received waivers to experiment with alternative BRRs in the early 1990s).
                                                                                            11


BRRs had been raised significantly in the early 1980s, and many AFDC recipients faced

almost 100 percent tax rates on their earnings.

           A major change post-PRWORA is that many states have chosen lower BRRs, in

order to encourage work (and to a lesser extent, as a way of supplementing income

among low-wage workers). Free to set their own rules, many states have also chosen to

have BRRs rise at some point after a woman goes to work, so her public assistance

subsidy is reduced over time even if her earnings do not increase.

           Table 2 is based on calculations of the cumulative cash welfare benefits available

over the first 24 months of work by a welfare recipient with two children whose earnings

are $6/hour (slightly above the minimum wage of $5.15 per hour) and who works part-

time (30 hours/week) or full-time (40 hours/week). The first two columns show the

cumulative cash benefits that a welfare recipient family would have expected to receive

in each state in January 1996 (all numbers adjusted to 2000 dollars) if the mother went to

work under the old AFDC program. The second two columns show the cumulative cash

benefits that a family would have expected to receive in 2000 if the mother went to work

under each state’s TANF program.

           The AFDC program provided little cash support to workers. Almost half the

states in 1995 would have paid no cash benefits to a part-time worker.11 Only 13 states

would have provided any support to a full-time worker.

           By 2000, BRRs had fallen in almost all states, dramatically changing these

results. Almost all states provide some support to the mother who enters part-time work

in 2000; in 28 states this support exceeds $1000 over the first 24 months of work. Half

10
     The standard deviation in benefits across states changed little over these 10 years.
                                                                                                            12


the states also provide some cash supplement to the woman who enters full-time work,12

with the median state paying $299 in cumulative cash benefits over the first 24 months.

Sixteen states pay more than $1000 in benefits over these first 24 months.13

         A change in the BRR is equivalent to a change in the effective wage rate (see

Figure 2). Because this imbeds both income and substitution effects, it is theoretically

ambiguous whether work incentives should rise or fall. Most labor economists assume

that substitution effects dominate income effects for low wage workers. This suggests

that lower BRRs should increase work incentives. Moffitt (1992) notes the remarkable

historical inelasticity of responsiveness among welfare recipients to changes in BRRs,

however, which suggests that the work incentive effect of lowering BRRs in the mid-

1990s might not be large. On the other hand, the changes in BRRs implemented in the

1990s were often made in conjunction with strong work requirements. As the discussion

of financial incentive programs in Section VIII below indicates, the combination of lower

BRRs and work mandates may have a quite powerful combined effect.

         Note that lower BRRs may have other effects as well. In the presence of time

limits, lower BRRs keep welfare recipients on welfare longer and encourage families to

“use up” their time. If clients are aware of time limits and worried about using up their

public assistance eligibility, this will further increase their incentives to work and may

lead them to leave welfare even while still eligible for some benefits in order to preserve

future months’ welfare eligibility.


11
   Differences across the states in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 are entirely due to differences in AFDC
benefit maximums across states; all states are subject to identical (federally determined) BRRs.
12
   Cumulative benefits equal 0 for a woman earning $6/hour if BRRs are very high (and in some states they
are 100 percent, so benefits are reduced $1 for $1 of earnings) and/or if benefit levels are very low (so that
one “works one’s way off welfare” more quickly).
13
   More detailed information on these earnings disregard calculations are available from the author upon
request.
                                                                                                         13


         Welfare-to-Work Programs. Virtually all states have tried to expand their

welfare-to-work programs starting in the early 1980s. Since the passage of PRWORA,

states are mandating participation in job search assistance and work preparation among a

much higher share of their caseload. By 1999 states reported that 38.3 percent of their

caseload was engaged in work or job activities, up from 20.4 percent in 1994.14

         The exact meaning of “welfare-to-work” varies substantially across states. In the

early 1990s, many states ran both job placement and job training programs. By the late

1990s, the focus of most state programs was “work first”, aimed at getting recipients into

a job as soon as possible. Hence, most programs focus on narrow job preparation skills

(interviewing, getting along on the job, organizing child care) and job search assistance.

Relatively little money is currently being spent on longer-term training, a somewhat

controversial fact in many states.15

         These work programs should increase work incentives, both by improving

employment-related skills and by establishing job search as an expected activity for

welfare recipients. Indeed, a number of states have focused on changing the “culture” of

their public assistance offices, retraining and reorganizing staff so that their primary goal

is to encourage work rather than to provide monthly assistance (Gais, et. al., 2001).

         Sanctions. To enforce job search and work requirements, states have

implemented a variety of sanction policies aimed primarily at penalizing individuals who

do not respond to work requirements (most commonly, these are individuals who miss


14
   The 1994 data is from U.S. House of Representatives (2000, Table 7-25). The 1999 data is from U.S.
DHHS (2000, Table 3:1).
15
   See discussion of this issue by Strawn, Greenberg, and Savner (2001). Job training or education among
adults can be counted as a work activity, but cannot count toward the first 20 hours/week of required work
participation.
An exception is teen mothers under age 18, who are required to participate in education activities unless
they hold a high school degree.
                                                                                                          14


required job preparation or job search sessions). Sanctions involve a reduction in welfare

benefits, but states vary in how much they reduce benefits and for how long. Pavetti and

Bloom (2001) classify 25 states as “strict”, including a number of states that impose

permanent full benefit losses on the families of noncompliant individuals. They classify

13 states as “lenient,” imposing only temporary and partial reductions.

        If low BRRs are the “carrot” for participating in welfare-to-work programs

(providing ongoing subsidies to those who can only find low wage jobs), then sanctions

are the “stick.” All states have some form of sanctioning policy, which is to say that no

state relies only on positive work incentives to get people employed.

        Time Limits. While all states are subject to the 60 month federal time limit for

individuals using TANF-related funds, they can also set shorter time limits, or can

provide state funding beyond 60 months.16 Seventeen states have time limits of less than

60 months for some families, 26 states use the 60 month federal time limit, and 8 states

have not imposed time limits which mandatorily end all benefits.17 For instance, several

of these states impose time limits on adult recipients but continue benefits for children

(Pavetti and Bloom, 2001).

        Time limits should have two work-inducing effects. First, they should provide

incentives for recipients who might need welfare in the future to leave welfare as rapidly

as possible, in order to preserve future eligibility.18 This requires a thorough

understanding of the fact that “the clock is ticking” and some states have been better at

reminding recipients of this. There is some evidence that many recipients misunderstand


16
   States are allowed to exempt up to 20 percent of their caseload from the 60-month time limit.
17
   As in Tables 1 and 2, Washington, D.C.c is included as the 51st “state”.
18
   For example, Swann (2000) develops a model indicating that time limits will have larger effects when
welfare recipients are forward looking.
                                                                                              15


where they are on their time clock (Bloom, 1999). Second, once time limits are imposed,

ex-recipients can no longer use cash assistance as a back-up to work.

       Time limits have not yet been widely imposed; the first recipients did not begin

to hit the 60 month limit in most states until late 2001 or early 2002. As noted before,

there are somewhat perverse interactions between time limits and lower BRRs. In

addition, there is also evidence that time limits and sanctions interact in interesting ways.

Sanctions tend to affect the same less responsive and often more disadvantaged

population that is likely to hit time limits. This suggests that time limits may not have a

very large effect if many individuals will have already been removed from eligibility

through sanctions (Pavetti and Bloom, 2001).

       Diversion. With no national entitlement to public assistance, states can deny

assistance to individuals. Many states have implemented eligibility determination

processes that encourage some applicants to be diverted from cash public assistance. Ten

states impose work search requirements on applicants prior to eligibility (i.e., applicants

must show that they’ve applied for a certain number of jobs as a condition of eligibility).

Twelve states provide short-term cash payments as an alternative to public assistance

eligibility, designed to meet some immediate need of the applicant which will then allow

her to return to work. Nine states use both techniques in order to divert applicants from

welfare, while 20 states make no effort at diversion.19

       Work Support Subsidies. With more attention to moving welfare recipients into

work, states have also recognized the need to help families with work-related expenses.

States have greatly increased their expenditures on work support programs, primarily

child care subsidies. Between 1993 and 2000, federal funds available to the states for
                                                                                                       16


child care subsidies rose from $9.5 billion to $18 billion, an 89 percent increase.20 States

are also helping to fund work transportation expenses, or job search expenses. Indeed,

more money is currently going into work support, including child care and transportation

subsidies, wage subsidies, as well as cash payments to working families, than into cash

assistance to non-working families (Gais, et. al., 2001).

        While this review focuses primarily on the changes outlined above to cash

assistance and work-related programs, it is worth noting that these changes have had a

substantial impact on the utilization of other non-cash public assistance programs as well.

AFDC was historically the gateway program through which families were also certified

for Food Stamps or Medicaid. As access to cash assistance has fallen, Food Stamp usage

has fallen as well. 21 Working poor families seem to find it particularly difficult to access

Food Stamps. Offices are often open only during daytime hours and persons must

regularly report to the office in person to maintain eligibility. The complexity of

calculating Food Stamp amounts for working individuals, whose Food Stamp benefit

level will change from month to month as their earnings vary, often creates incentives for

caseworkers to try and get workers off the Food Stamp rolls. Arcane rules about the

resale value of a car and other assets limits can also restrict eligibility. The net result is a

program with very low participation among eligible families with a working adult head,

despite the declared goal of Food Stamps to provide assistance to all low-income

families. For instance, in 1999 only 43 percent of eligible persons with earnings were

receiving Food Stamps, while 70 percent of eligible nonearners were participating


19
   For one of the few discussions of state diversion strategies, see Maloy, et. al. (1999).
20
   Provided by Ron Haskins, based on calculations with data from the Congressional Research Service.
21
   For further discussion of the problems with Food Stamp access post-PRWORA, see Greenstein and
Guyer (2001) and Zedlewski (2001).
                                                                                                        17


(USDA, 2000). Of course, this may merely reflect an effort to structure the program so

that only the most needy among the eligible will actually participate, consistent with the

argument in Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982).22 Efforts are currently underway to reduce

these barriers to Food Stamp participation among working families.



                     III. Changes in Behavior and Well-Being Over the 1990s

        At the same time as major changes in program structure occurred during the

1990s, there were also stunning changes in behavior. Strong adjectives are appropriate to

describe these behavioral changes. Nobody – of any political persuasion – predicted or

would have believed possible the magnitude of change that occurred in the behavior of

low-income single-parent families over this decade.

        Caseload Changes. The most-discussed change over the 1990s was a remarkably

rapid decline in caseloads between 1994 and 2000, illustrated in Figure 3. The vertical

line indicates passage of the 1996 legislation. Between 1994 and 2000, caseloads

declined by 56.5 percent. Furthermore, these declines occurred everywhere in the nation,

with every state experiencing strong reductions in their welfare rolls.

        Three things should be noted about the data underlying Figure 3. First, the rapid

caseload decline after 1994 was preceded by an unexpectedly strong increase in caseloads

in the early 1990s. Despite a relatively mild economic slowdown, caseloads rose 27

percent between 1990 and 1994. This rise in caseloads was one of the driving forces

behind the desire of state governors to implement more radical welfare reform. Ideally,

any theory that explains the caseload decline of the late 1990s should also explain the


22
  As these numbers indicate, takeup rates among eligibles in means-tested programs are typically far below
one. For a discussion of takeup in the Food Stamp and the AFDC program, see Blank and Ruggles (1996).
                                                                                           18


caseload rise of the early 1990s. As discussed below, most researchers have focused on

the decline in caseloads without paying attention to the earlier rise.

       Second, caseloads start to decline well before the enactment of the 1996

legislation, suggesting that legislation was not solely responsible for the caseload decline.

Third, the caseload decline in the late 1990s far exceeds anything in previous decades.

Despite relatively strong economic growth from 1983 to 1989, there is little evidence of

any change in caseload levels over that time period. This suggests that the economy

alone cannot explain caseload changes in the 1990s. The strong economic growth of the

1960s is actually correlated with a rise in caseloads. Most observers ascribe this to

increased take-up of welfare programs among the eligible following the launch of

President Lyndon Johnson’s War on Poverty (Moffitt, 1992). This at least suggests that

take-up changes might be important in the 1990s as well.

       Labor Force Participation Changes. Changes in caseloads by themselves are not

very informative, and immediately lead to questions about the behavior and income of

those who are no longer receiving welfare. In particular, one of the major goals of the

1996 legislation and the policy changes that preceded it was to increase work effort

among welfare recipients. As it turns out, work effort soared over this time period among

single mothers with children.

       Figure 4 presents labor force participation rates among women by marital status

and presence of children from 1989 through 2000. Unmarried women without children

work at a high and unchanged level throughout this time period. Married women, both

with and without children, show steady increases in labor force participation over the

1990s, at a slightly slower rate than in earlier decades.
                                                                                                       19


        In sharp contrast, single mothers with children show little change in their labor

force participation rates through the 1980s and into the mid-1990s. But between 1994

and 1999 their labor force participation rises by 10 percentage points. Among single

mothers with children under the age of six, labor force participation rates rise by 5

percentage points. In short, at exactly the same time as caseloads start to fall, work effort

rises substantially among exactly the population most affected by the caseload declines.

This provides at least prima facae evidence that the caseload declines were associated

with increases in work. Other available data supports the idea that women are moving

from welfare to work at a high rate. Among those who report receiving public assistance

income in the previous year, the share reporting themselves employed in March of the

following year rises from 19.8 percent in 1990 to 44.3 percent in 2000.23

        Even among women who remain on welfare, work effort rises strongly. This may

reflect both the greater effort to move welfare recipients into work, as well as the lower

benefit reduction rates that continue subsidies to working women as their earnings rise.

Among women on welfare, the share with earnings rises from 6.7 percent in 1990 to 28.1

percent by 1999.24

        Increases in work not only increase earnings and add to immediate family income,

but may also build labor force experience that leads to higher wages over time. Gladden

and Taber (2000) indicate that even among low-skilled women wages increase with

experience.



23
   Calculated by the author from March Current Population Survey data. Bishop (1998) also provides
detailed information on labor supply increases among never-married women in the 1990s.
24
   This is all the more remarkable in light of the amazing inelasticity of work effort among welfare
recipients in previous decades, discussed by Moffitt (1992). The 1990 data is from U.S. House of
Representatives (1998, Table 7-19); The 1999 data is from U.S. DHHS (2000, Table 3:3.c).
                                                                                                       20


        Changes in Income and Poverty. Declines in public assistance usage and

increases in labor market involvement may or may not signal income increases, since

reductions in welfare benefits will offset increases in earnings. Hence, there has been a

great deal of interest in whether incomes have risen among less-skilled single mothers.

        The official U.S. poverty data suggest unambiguous improvements in poverty

among single-mother families, as Table 3 indicates. The share of all families in poverty

declines from 11.9 in 1992 (the end of the recession in the early 1990s) to 8.6 percent in

2000, below the previous historic low of 8.8 percent in 1974.25 Given the strong

economy, this is perhaps a disappointingly small decline in poverty. Poverty among

single-mother families declines more rapidly however, from 35.4 percent in 1992 to 24.7

percent in 2000, a new historic low. Poverty rates among single mother families headed

by blacks and Hispanics were also at historic lows in 2000. This suggests that, at least in

the short run, changes in social policy did not worsen the economic situation of poor

households. The decline in poverty is far less, however, than the reduction in public

assistance caseloads. As a result, the share of working poor in the U.S. population rose,

as some women left public assistance for employment but remained poor.

        Unfortunately, U.S. poverty rates provide only partial information on well-being

(Citro and Michael, 1995).26 Table 4 provides information on poverty gaps among

families with children between 1993 and 1999, showing how far average family income

is below the poverty line among poor families. Row one shows the poverty gap based

only on pre-transfer income among families. Row two includes social insurance benefits


25
   All official poverty rate data can be found at www.census.gov.
26
   Alternative poverty calculations can be found in U.S. Department of Commerce (1999), with updated
numbers for 1998 at www.census.gov/poverty/povmeas/expov.tabe.html. These calculations also show a
strong decline in poverty among female-headed families over the 1990s.
                                                                                             21


(Social Security, disability and workers compensation), row three adds means-tested

benefits (cash and in-kind), and row four calculates poverty gaps based on total income

net of taxes. The bottom part of the table shows the percentage reduction in the poverty

gap as the definition of income is sequentially expanded.

           Between 1993 and 1999 substantial increases in earnings resulted in a declining

poverty gap when looking only at pre-transfer cash income. With increases in earnings

come reductions in means-tested benefits, however. Social Insurance reduces the poverty

gap by a relatively constant 16 to 18 percent over these years. Means-tested benefits,

however, reduce the poverty gap 44 percent in 1993, but only 34 percent in 1999,

reflecting the declining caseloads. Over time, the federal tax system expands to further

reduce poverty gaps, largely because of the growth in the EITC. The net result is a slight

rise in poverty gaps based on after-tax income over the 1990s, from $1447 to $1524. Of

course, since fewer persons are in poverty by the end of this period, it is hard to state

whether the net effect is to raise or lower well-being. A more disadvantaged group may

remain poor over this period, resulting in a rising poverty gap.

           Table 5 presents information on a set of tabulations recently completed by the

Center on Budget and Policy Priorities,27 which calculate the average income of female-

headed households by quintile. The results in Table 5 indicate that incomes among

women in the top 80 percent of the income distribution of female-headed families

(quintiles 2 through 5) rose unambiguously over the 1990s, including increases post-

1996. This is consistent with evidence from other surveys that do similar data tabulations

(Primus, et. al., 1999; Haskins, 2001; Gabe, 2001, Jencks, Swingle, and Winship, 2001).



27
     These data are currently unpublished, but available upon request from Wendell Primus.
                                                                                            22


       There is other evidence that some group of disadvantaged women lost income in

the mid-1990s. Haskins (2001) discusses evidence of a rise in deep poverty (the number

of persons at less than 50 percent of the poverty line) in the mid-1990s. The very poorest

quintile of single-mother families experienced an increase in income in the first half of

the 1990s, but little overall income growth post-1996. This is not surprising, as

underlying calculations indicate that means-tested income among this population fell by

more than $1500, while earnings rose by less than $1000. In higher quintiles, earnings

gains were much stronger than the loss in means-tested income. Zedlewski, et. al. (2002)

also document rises in deep poverty between 1996 and 1998 among families with

children.

       Somewhat contrasting evidence comes from data on consumer expenditures,

which shows increases in consumption spending through the 1990s, even among very

low-income single mothers with children (Haskins, 2001; Meyer and Sullivan, 2001).

Jencks, et. al., (2001) indicate that food-related problems declined between 1995 and

1999 for single mothers as rapidly as among other poor groups. In short, the available

evidence suggests that most single mothers gained ground in the 1990s, but there is a

group of the poorest single mother families who have made only minimal gains over the

1990s and some at the very bottom who might have lost ground.

       All of these income calculations should be viewed with some skepticism. First, a

substantial minority of those leaving welfare appear to be unemployed at some later point

(Brauner and Loprest, 1999). We have little evidence on how these women are

surviving, but the best guess is that they are relying more upon boyfriends or other family

members for income. While this may be a viable short-term strategy, over time such
                                                                                               23


arrangements may fall apart and are unlikely to provide long-term economic stability for

either the women or their children.

       Second, few of these studies actually measure disposable income. While the

studies cited above take into account the EITC and some other non-cash transfers, they

do not fully calculate tax rates on earners. They typically impute EITC receipt and their

data on housing, Food Stamps or medical assistance is not complete. They provide little

information on income sharing with other individuals or families. Furthermore, none of

these calculations take account of increased expenses associated with work, particularly

out-of-pocket child care expenses. There is a need for research that provides a more

complete picture of the changes in the actual economic well-being of less-skilled single-

mother families and their children over the 1990s, in the midst of major policy and

behavioral changes.



                            IV. Research and Evaluation Challenges

       Estimating the effects of the program changes described above creates real

evaluation challenges. One must control effectively enough for all other environmental

influences to produce a credible estimate of a policy effect. This is particularly difficult

in a world where many things are changing at the same time, as happened in the 1990s.

       Past work evaluating the AFDC program tended to describe the welfare

environment for an individual by controlling for state benefit levels and (occasionally) for

effective state BRRs. Since most eligibility rules were uniformly set by the federal

government, state variation in benefit levels was the dominant feature describing welfare

generosity and access across states.
                                                                                             24


       Post-1996, it is much more difficult to characterize the policy environment for

each state. State welfare policies vary along multiple program dimensions, and the

precise nature of the bundle matters since different program components may interact

with each other. For instance, one may need to control for the interaction of BRRs and

sanctions, rather than just controlling for each separately. Not all of the program

elements described above are easily coded, and there is little guidance in the research to

date showing the most effective way to measure and code some of the newer policies like

time limits, sanctions or diversion activities. In some cases only a few states have

adopted particular policies or combinations of policies. For data sets with state level

observations, this can make it difficult to estimate precise policy effects.

       With individual-level data, it is much more difficult to identify the specific

program rules facing any individual. Data sets like the Current Population Survey

provide no information on whether an individual is required to participate in a welfare-to-

work program, whether they have been sanctioned, how close they are to reaching their

time limits, what type of subsidies for child care or other work supports they might be

receiving from TANF dollars, or whether they receive EITC funds. In short, most of our

data sets are designed to collect information on cash welfare assistance, appropriate for

the old world of AFDC but not very useful in the new world of TANF where cash public

assistance levels are less and less descriptive of state welfare programs.

       For all of these reasons, it has become much harder to study the impact of welfare

programs or their specific components on individual behavior. The complexity and

diversity in state programs means that an increasing amount of analysis focuses on data

from a single state, creating problems of comparability and generalizability. Closely
                                                                                             25


linked to this focus on single states, there has been a substantial increase in the use of

administrative data to analyze welfare-related questions. Administrative data typically

provide more detailed information on the parameters of the welfare system that impact

any individual, including their use of multiple programs, their work requirements, their

accumulated timing of welfare receipt, and so on. More and more researchers are

linking information from multiple administrative data sets. For instance, welfare receipt

records might be linked with unemployment insurance records to determine quarterly

earnings after leaving welfare.

        Most researchers have tried to measure the direct effects of the enactment of

waivers and the implementation of TANF. This is complicated not only by the data

problems mentioned above, but also by other evaluation difficulties.

       First, waivers were not implemented by a random set of states. States with higher

unemployment rates were more likely to request major welfare waivers (Schoeni and

Blank, 2000). This means that waivers cannot be used as a simple “natural experiment”

in which results in waiver states are compared with results in non-waiver states.

       Second, the coincidence and the interaction of the economic expansion and the

implementation of welfare reform creates problems. The strong economic boom and the

passage of PRWORA occur simultaneously and it is difficult to separately identify their

causal effects. This is even more true if the two events interact with each other. For

instance, states may have been able to change their cash public assistance programs to

work-oriented support programs more quickly and more thoroughly because they did not

have to worry about job availability issues. Most people who could be placed in a job

search assistance program were able to locate a job. Conversely, the strong push that
                                                                                           26


increased the supply of less skilled women into the labor market may have changed the

demand side of the labor market in some places, for these women and for other less

skilled workers (Bartik, 2000). For all of these reasons, separating economic effects

from policy effects promises to be difficult in the mid-1990s.

       Third, multiple policy changes were being implemented at the same time, and

these policy changes almost surely interacted with each other in a reinforcing way. The

large increases in the EITC subsidies occurred just before welfare reform was passed and

at the same time as minimum wage increases in the mid-1990s. As noted above, child

support subsidies were restructured at the same time as welfare was reformed. This

makes it difficult to separately identify individual policy effects. For instance, Blank

(2000) argues that it was the combined interaction between multiple policy changes and a

booming economy that led to the unexpectedly large caseload declines and labor force

participation increases.

       Fourth, the implementation of state TANF programs is particularly difficult to

evaluate because it occurred at about the same time in all states. Within a nine-month

period from September 1996 through July 1997, all states began implementing their new

TANF plans. This is in contrast to major state waivers, which were approved over a four

year period in 27 states, allowing a researcher to identify the effects of these waivers

from the differences in when they were implemented across states.

       Finally, almost ignored in the economics literature, there is often a difference

between enacted program rules and actual implementation practices. This may be

particularly true for a major program change that is being implemented quickly. Because

staff are not fully trained in the new systems or because staff may disagree with some of
                                                                                                           27


the new program changes, what’s actually done “on the ground” could differ substantially

from the formal description of state programs (Meyers, Glaser, and MacDonald, 1998;

Gais, et. al., 2001).

         A multiplicity of empirical approaches have been used to study the welfare policy

changes of the 1990s. Three of the most common are summarized here, with a brief

discussion of their pros and cons.28

         Random Assignment Experiments. For more than two decades, researchers have

studied labor market interventions with random assignment experiments. In these cases,

an experimental group is randomly chosen from among those eligible for a program and

this group receives the services and program benefits. An alternative control group is

refused entrance into the program and operates in an environment (presumably)

unaffected by the program. If randomization is done correctly, the only difference

between the two groups should be that one group receives the program treatment and one

does not. That means that simple outcome differences between the groups can be used as

a measure of program effects.

         Experimental evaluation of welfare-to-work programs has occurred since the mid-

1980s and became quite sophisticated by the 1990s. During the 1980s these experimental

evaluations focused solely on welfare-to-work programs. The use of waivers in the

1990s allowed states to implement more extensive reforms involving other program

changes beyond welfare-to-work efforts. Because the Department of Health and Human

Services required experimental evaluations of waiver programs, a body of results are now

available from pre-1996 state programs analyzing the impact of more complex welfare


28
  In addition to these three approaches, there is a great deal of more descriptive work, much of it involving
the collection of new data, including a variety of ethnographic studies in particular neighborhoods.
                                                                                                     28


reforms with multiple components – welfare-to-work training, time limits, sanctions,

family caps, etc -- on AFDC receipt and earnings.29 The federal mandate for

experimental evaluations of waiver programs ended when TANF was implemented and

there have been no experimental evaluations of TANF programs post-1996.

        These experimental evaluations are viewed as highly credible, since they come as

close to a controlled research environment as possible. When experiments are

appropriately designed, there is no better methodology available. Indeed, the widespread

acceptance of the positive results of welfare-to-work evaluations in the 1980s were a

major reason why policymakers supported work-oriented welfare reform in the 1990s.

        These experiments have limitations as a way to study the welfare reforms of the

1990s, however. First, when multiple program changes are occurring, it is difficult to

study the separate effects of individual program changes in an experimental way. Hence,

the policy implications of experimental results were more interpretable in narrowly

implemented welfare-to-work programs (which changed only one or two program

parameters) than in broad waiver programs (which typically involved multiple program

changes). For instance, it is not possible to separately identify the effect of time limits

from other welfare-to-work components in existing experimental evaluations from the

early 1990s; the experimental results identify the aggregate effect of all program changes

together rather than the specific effect of each individual program change. Similarly, it is

not possible to use experimental evaluations to study the impact of a legislative change

(such as TANF) where multiple changes are implemented throughout the state at the

same time.


29
  See Gueron and Pauly (1991) and Friedlander and Burtless (1995) for a summary of much of the earlier
research, and Bloom and Michalopoulos (2001) for a summary of some of the key 1990s research.
                                                                                                        29


        Second, experiments should be designed so that the program effects cannot

influence the control group. With all of the simultaneous policy changes occurring in the

1990s, however, it was hard to prevent some contamination. Word circulated among

welfare recipients – including the control group – about mandatory work requirements or

upcoming time limits. This might lead the control group to respond to these rumors, even

though they were formally unaffected by the changes.

        Third, experimental studies are expensive and time-intensive. They almost

always require collecting additional survey data, both at baseline (when the control and

experimental groups are defined) and at multiple follow-up study points. Because their

implementation takes skill and often requires some administrative reorganization within

welfare programs to separate the control and experimental groups, they put additional

demands on administrators and front-line workers. In the midst of all the other changes

occurring in welfare offices, few states wanted to invest either the funds or the time

necessary for experimental evaluations over the late 1990s.30 The locations that did

participate in earlier experimental evaluations during the 1990s are not a random sample

of all states or welfare offices. For instance, we have a number of excellent evaluations

done in north midwestern states and fewer evaluations done in the traditional “deep

south” states. This can call into question the generalizability of the experimental

evidence.

        Fourth, these experimental studies are not well-designed to study “entry effects.”

An experimental program may not induce the same discouraging effect on welfare usage


30
  A variety of waiver evaluations were ongoing and continued into the post-1996 period. Post-TANF,
many governors pointed to the declines in caseloads and the implementation of welfare reform as a major
success. This could have made them more reluctant to authorize serious evaluations that might reduce their
ability to garner political credit from these changes.
                                                                                                          30


that might result from a permanent welfare reform, hence caseload change may be

underestimated. Even if some families are discouraged by the experiment from ever

applying for welfare at all, this effect is typically not measured in most experiments.31

         For all of these reasons, the experimental evidence on the effects of welfare

reform is highly useful where it looks at the impact of specific program components in

particular types of welfare programs. But the experimental evidence tells us relatively

little about the overall effects of TANF implementation in states in the mid-1990s.

         Leavers’ Studies. A substantial amount of research time and money has been

devoted to following persons as they left welfare in recent years. A number of

organizations and individuals launched so-called “leavers’ studies” soon after the

implementation of the 1996 legislation. The primary intent was to analyze the behavior

and well-being of those who lose welfare benefits (either voluntarily or involuntarily) in

the post-reform era.

         Leavers’ studies answer a very specific policy question, namely, “How are people

faring who used to receive public assistance but are no longer on the rolls?” The interest

in this question has been strong, particularly as caseloads have declined so precipitously

in most states.

         Most of these studies use a combination of administrative data and new survey

data. Persons on welfare at a specific point in time are tracked and surveyed at some later

point, to ask about their employment, family, and income situation. This survey

information may be combined with other administrative data to investigate program

receipt of Food Stamps, Medicaid, or other support programs, to measure recidivism

31
  An alternative version of entry effects occurs if a program induces additional welfare participation. This
seems less relevant to the welfare reforms of the 1990s, which tended to focus on moving people directly
                                                                                                         31


(return to cash public assistance), or to verify employment using Unemployment

Insurance program data on earnings and employment. These studies can provide quite

detailed information on the behavior of ex-welfare recipients.

         Like experimental evaluations, leavers’ studies can be complex, costly, and time-

consuming. It is often difficult to locate and survey ex-welfare recipients, and a number

of not-very-credible leavers’ studies have low (and presumably quite selective) response

rates. Working with administrative records, particularly records across multiple

programs, requires matching individual identifiers and dealing with complex data

problems. As a result, the quality of leavers’ studies varies greatly. Since most leavers’

studies are state-specific, it is often difficult to compare them as different researchers

focus on different outcomes or use different methodologies in different states.

         The biggest limitation to leavers’ studies is that they provide very little

information about policy effects. Unlike an experimental evaluation, it is impossible to

separate those who would have left welfare even under AFDC from those additional

leavers due to the new welfare program design. This means leavers’ studies tell us

almost nothing about the effects of new programs.32

         Furthermore, leavers’ studies by design focus on a limited population--those who

were once on welfare. Some studies ignore those who remain on welfare longer, a group

of some concern. None of these leavers’ studies say anything about those who might

have come onto AFDC pre-1996 but who chose not to come onto TANF post-1996.

Evidence suggests that both entry into welfare has fallen and exits from welfare have



into jobs; in contrast, the reforms of the 1980s often had substantial education and training components.
32
   An exception is Cancian, et. al. (2002), who compare pre-reform leavers with post-reform leavers in the
state of Wisconsin. While this is a superior methodology, even these estimates are contaminated by other
changes (such as the booming economy) which occur at the same time as reform.
                                                                                             32


risen (Mueser, et. al., 2000). To the extent that those who are diverted from receiving

welfare are differently selected from those who come on but leave faster, the leavers’

studies cannot be interpreted as evidence on the general well-being of persons affected by

welfare reform. One might expect leavers to be somewhat less employable and more

disadvantaged than those who have options that allow them to choose not to enter welfare

in the first place.

        In short, leavers’ studies provide little information about the overall effects of

welfare reform. At best they tell us something descriptive about how a specific

population of ex-welfare recipients is faring, but it is difficult to interpret anything causal

about policy (or any other explanatory variable) from these studies.

        Econometric evaluations. A growing body of literature uses a combination of

national and administrative data to study the impact of policies. Typically, these studies

use data on a key dependent variable – such as caseloads or labor force participation --

from multiple years and regress it against controls for economic factors and policy

factors. Some studies also include controls for demographics and political changes.

Much of this work is based on state panel data. For instance, state caseload data might be

regressed against state unemployment rates, state AFDC/TANF benefit levels, and

dummy variables that signal the implementation of a state waiver. Alternatively, some of

this research utilizes individual data on welfare participation or work behavior for

multiple years.

        A typical regression equation based on state panel data is as follows:

(1)     Yst = α s + β t + δPst + γX st + ε st .
                                                                                                              33


where Yst is the dependent variable (say AFDC/TANF caseloads) in state s in year t. The

vector αs represents the set of estimated state fixed effects for all s states, βt represents a

set of year fixed effects for all t years (sometimes there are also state-specific time trends

included), Pst is a set of policy-specific parameters and δ is its related coefficient vector,

while Xst is a set of all other included variables with γ its related coefficient vector. Xst

typically includes state unemployment rates and may include other state economic and

demographic variables. Equation (1) is usually estimated with a weighted least squares

estimation procedure, with weights based on state population.33

         Policy variables are typically represented as dummy variables that equal zero

prior to the implementation of a specific policy (a waiver or a TANF program), and equal

1 in each year thereafter.34 Hence, the policy coefficients measure the average change in

Y after the policy change, controlling for all other variables. The state effects remove

long-term state-specific differences and allow one to interpret the coefficients as the

effect of changes in the independent variables over time within a given state. The year

effects remove any common changes occurring in all states in the same year (and hence

remove the effects of policies that are implemented everywhere at once, such as an EITC

change or a minimum wage change).

         Identifying the true effects of policy on the dependent variable Y requires several

things: First, policies must be accurately and completely coded; second, there must be a

way to identify the policy effects separately from the other variables; and third, there

must be no omitted variables correlated with the policy changes to bias the policy

33
  Even if individual level data is available some researchers aggregate this to the state level, arguing that
the variables of interest (policy differences within and across states) vary only at the state level. In a few
cases, authors interact policies with individual-level characteristics, in which case utilizing individual-level
data is a necessity.
                                                                                                            34


coefficients. Most researchers use relatively sparse specifications, hoping that state and

year fixed effects and state-year time trends will control for the large number of omitted

variables that inevitably haunt these econometric exercises.

         As discussed below, most of this work has focused on AFDC/TANF receipt,

looking at caseload changes over time as the dependent variable. Some papers look also

at changes in labor force participation over time, and a few papers use earnings, income,

poverty, fertility or marriage rates as the dependent variable.

         These econometric studies confront a variety of problems. First, identifying the

policy effects can be a problem. The effects of welfare waivers are reasonably well

identified, since different states adopted these waivers at different points in time. The

effects of TANF implementation are much less well-identified. As noted above, virtually

all states implement TANF at about the same point in time. Most papers try to use the

differences in timing over 1996-97 to identify an effect, but the standard errors of these

estimates are high.35 Some papers try to identify effects by combining waivers and

TANF, coding a dummy variable that equals one if a state has a major waiver in effect or

if it has adopted a TANF program. This has the odd effect of forcing waivers and TANF

programs to have identical effects, almost surely not justified given how much more

extensive were the changes involved with state TANF plans.

         Even if identification were easier, this research merely estimates the aggregate

effect of these changes, without differentiating between the very different set of waiver or

TANF program components adopted by different states. Hence, some researchers have

34
  In the year the policy is enacted, the dummy variable is typically equal to the fraction of months that the
policy is in effect.
                                                                                                          35


tried to code the adoption of specific program components rather than the adoption of a

single policy change.36 Unfortunately, the identification problems with this approach are

severe. As noted above, it is not clear how to code some policy changes (and we have

only limited information post-1996 on what specific states are doing in certain policy

areas). Furthermore, some individual policies are adopted by so few states (and only in

the few years post-1996) that there is not enough information to estimate a reliable

coefficient. The result is that much of the econometric literature focusing on individual

policy components finds insignificant or even perverse coefficients.

         Finally, there have been substantial specification arguments in this literature.

Most papers have chosen to utilize a simple panel data framework with fixed effects,

perhaps including lags on a few key variables (like unemployment rates). A few papers,

however, have chosen more complex specifications, including lagged dependent

variables, a greater number of lags on key independent variables, and/or more extensive

fixed effects. These choices matter because the more complex specifications typically

find smaller or less significant policy effects. Those who like these latter papers tend to

argue that the more complex specifications better mirror reality and are more reliable.

Those who find these latter papers less persuasive (including myself) tend to argue that

they are overspecified, with extensive lag structures that leave little scope for measuring




35
   See the discussion of identification problems in Schoeni and Blank (2000). They try an alternative way
to estimate TANF effects based on a difference-in-difference estimates, pre- and post-1996 and between
more and less educated women.
36
   Rather than controlling for the implementation of waivers, for instance, this could mean controlling for
the type of sanctions approved in the waiver, the presence and length of time limits, the implementation of
a family cap, or the nature of the work mandates in the state.
                                                                                                     36


policy effects based on simple dummy variables. In addition, the combination of a

lagged dependent variable with state fixed effects produces inconsistent estimates.37

        A seminal contribution to this specification argument was provided by Klerman

and Haider (2001), who point out that there is no clear theoretical justification provided

for any of the specifications used in earlier papers. They note that the stock of welfare

cases is the result of flows into and out of welfare. They model the dynamic process of

entering and leaving welfare and derive an estimable model of aggregate caseload change

from this. They show that even if the entry rate and the continuation rate are functions

only of contemporaneous economic conditions, per capita caseloads will be a non-linear

function of lagged economic conditions equal to the longest period individuals are on aid.

Hence, only particular lagged specifications are correct. They also indicate the

conditions under which including a lagged dependent variable is appropriate.

        Klerman and Haider’s work provides a more believable and persuasive

specification than earlier papers, and suggests that much of the other research estimating

the determinants of per capita caseload levels has been misspecified. Klerman and

Haider prefer a model which estimates welfare entry and exit flows, rather than net

caseload levels. Unfortunately, estimating this specification requires flow data, which

does not appear to be reliably available at the national level. (Klerman and Haider

estimate their model on California data only, where they believe they have reliable data.

This makes it hard to generalize their results and compare them to other work.) Klerman

and Haider’s results from this co-called “stock-flow model” are closer to those of the

simpler specifications in the role that it ascribes to the economy over the 1990s.

37
   See the discussion of these specification issues in Grogger, Karoly and Klerman (2002) or Blank
(2001b). For a more positive reading of these results, see Bell (2001) or Ziliak (2002). Moffitt
                                                                                           37


         Ultimately, econometric models – however limited – will probably provide the

best evidence we are likely to have available on the overall effects of welfare reform.

Such models are almost surely less reliable in providing evidence on individual program

components; when available, experimental evidence on specific program changes is

probably more believable. Future research should focus on better ways of utilizing

econometrics to identify individual welfare program components.

         For instance, Grogger (2000, 2002, forthcoming) takes a clever approach with

time limits. He notes that families with young children should be more affected by time

limits than families with older children (since families with young children have a longer

period of future potential welfare eligibility). Hence, he interacts state time limit

information with information on the ages of children in a household, and finds

substantially larger effects among families with younger children, as hypothesized.

Similar creativity in teasing out the effects of other specific program components would

be useful.

         The remainder of this paper summarizes the research findings from papers that

use the above methodological approaches. I organize this review by the dependent

variable in the paper.



                                           V.       Caseloads

         The most voluminous literature on welfare reform in the past decade has focused

on caseload changes. Interestingly, prior to the mid-1990s, there was virtually no

published literature in economics journals looking at movements in caseloads over time,38


(forthcoming) also provides a summary of this literature.
38
  An exception is Moffitt (1987).
                                                                                              38


but the number of more recent articles is growing rapidly. The primary interest in this

research literature is to explore the steep caseload decline that started in the mid-1990s,

with particular attention to separating out the effects of economy from policy.

       Almost all of the literature on caseloads fits into the third methodology described

above, and utilizes regression analysis on some sort of panel data over time. (Some

evidence from experimental studies on the impact of specific program choices on welfare

usage is discussed in Section VIII below.) Different papers focus on different variables,

and the discussion below focuses sequentially on the effects of economic variables and of

aggregate policy variables on caseloads. I briefly discuss the (few) papers which focus

on caseload flows rather than caseload levels, followed by a discussion of research that

distinquishes the effects of specific policy components on caseloads. I close this section

with a short discussion of the literature on food stamp caseloads.

       Table 6 provides a list of the papers to date that use regression analysis to

investigate the effects of welfare reform during the 1990s, indicating the dependent

variable, data source, primary included variables, and a few key conclusions. In most of

these papers, caseloads are the dependent variable, although a few of them (discussed

below) look at employment, income, and family structure changes as well. Part A of

Table 6 lists the papers using data prior to the implementation of TANF, which primarily

focus on the effects of state waivers. As we discuss below, some of these papers focus on

the implementation of any waiver, while others try to differentiate between the policy

components in different waivers. Part B lists the papers that utilize data post-TANF and
                                                                                                       39


that estimate the effects of TANF as well as waivers. Part C lists the papers that use flow

data on exits from or entries onto welfare, rather than stock data on caseloads.39

        Aggregate Caseloads and the Economy. The majority of papers utilize annual

state panel data, based on administrative records, to study movements in total

AFDC/TANF caseloads, using some variant of equation (1). The typical economic

variable is the state unemployment rate, although a few papers use state income or wage

information as well. This is due to data convenience as much as anything else -- state

unemployment rates are one of the few readily available annual state-level economic

variables. Given the sensitivity of less-skilled workers to movements in unemployment

(Hoynes, 2000), this is often assumed to be reasonable characterization of the economic

environment.40

        The majority of papers find relatively similar effects of unemployment on

caseloads, not surprising since these papers tend to use similar methodologies and data

sets. For instance, Council of Economic Advisers (1997, 1999), Levine and Whitmore

(1998), Wallace and Blank (1999), and Blank (2001a) all find that a 1-point rise in

unemployment tends to increase caseloads by about 5 to 7 percent. Blank (2001a)

suggests that these effects are larger for the small part of the caseload composed of

married couples than among single mothers.

        Most of these papers attempt to see how much of the caseload change over the

mid-1990s can be ascribed to economic changes. For instance, Council of Economic

Advisers (1999) indicates that changes in unemployment explain 26 to 35 percent of the

39
  I do not include papers based on data from one state only in Table 6. A number of good state-specific
research exists, such as MaCurdy, Mancuso, and O’Brien-Strain (2002) for California. I also omit studies
that are based on a single cross-section rather than panel data (such as Mead, 2000.)
                                                                                                       40


caseload change in 1993-96, but only 8 to 10 percent of the caseload change in 1996-98.

These estimates range widely across studies, and are highly affected by the years over

which they are estimated and by the specification. Specifications utilizing lagged

dependent variables and/or first differences (Ziliak, et. al., 2000; Figlio and Ziliak, 1999)

tend to find larger effects due to economic changes.41

        It also appears that the responsiveness of caseloads to unemployment has

increased over time (Moffitt, 1999a; Council of Economic Advisers, 1999). This means

that studies based on more recent and shorter panels (such as Ziliak, et. al., 2000) are

more likely to find larger unemployment effects. While the reasons for this change are

unclear, it is consistent with a welfare system that is doing more and more to emphasize

work. This reduces the dependence of welfare recipients on cash benefits, and increases

their dependence upon job availability.42

        Several of the papers that utilize data post-1996 and compare the TANF era with

the AFDC era indicate that unemployment effects on caseloads are smaller post-1996

than pre-1996 (Council of Economic Advisers, 1999; Wallace and Blank, 1999; Schoeni

and Blank, 2000; O’Neill and Hill, 2001). Post-1996, public assistance programs had a

harder edge and put more attention into enforcing time limits, sanctions, and diversion

policies. Given this policy environment, it may not be surprising that the economy

mattered less to caseload changes during this time. Alternatively, the very strong

economy of the late 1990s might have been expected to have a greater effect than the

more sluggish economy of the early 1990s, in which case this is a surprising finding.

40
   This assumption is typically made without real evidence. As discussed below, other economic variables
also appear to be important over the past two decades in explaining caseloads.
41
   Klerman and Haider (2001) indicate that these specifications should bias the economic effects upward.
                                                                                                         41


        A few studies have gone beyond attention to state unemployment rates and

utilized a richer set of economic variables. Several studies include information on state-

specific minimum wages (Council of Economic Advisers, 1999; Grogger, 2000), on

employment/population ratios (Ziliak, et. al, 2000) or on state income levels (Schoeni and

Blank, 2000). Several studies have tried to characterize the shifts in relative wages and in

industry mix that occur over the 1980s and 1990s. Blank (2001a) calculates state-specific

average wage levels as well as 50th percentile/10th percentile wage level ratios within

each state and year. Bartik and Eberts (1999) utilize data on the education requirements,

wage premiums, and low-wage employment implied by the industry mix in each state and

year. In most cases, these additional variables are significant and suggest that more than

the unemployment rate matters in affecting caseloads. Blank (2001a), however, indicates

that the estimated unemployment effect is relatively unchanged by the inclusion of

demographic or political variables.

        Virtually all research agrees that state economies had a significant effect on

caseloads, and that caseloads rise in bad economic times and decline in good times. Most

of the research suggests, however, that economic changes alone cannot explain the

majority of caseload movements over the 1990s; policy variables also matter.

        Aggregate Caseloads and Overall Policy Effects. Policy shifts are typically

characterized by dummy variables that “turn on” when a policy is implemented in the

state. Early papers focused particularly on the effects of state waivers. More recent

papers have also tried to investigate the impact of TANF implementation. The




42
  Bartik and Eberts (1999) suggest this might be due to declining demand for less skilled labor, which
could make joblessness increasingly difficult to escape for low-wage workers.
                                                                                                        42


identification problems discussed in the previous section make the latter particularly

difficult to estimate.

          Most of the literature finds that state waivers implemented in the first half of the

1990s had a significant and negative effect on caseloads.43 For instance, one of the

earliest studies finds that the implementation of major statewide waivers explains about

13 to 31 percent of state caseload change between 1993 and 1996 (Council of Economic

Advisers, 1997). While the magnitude of impact varies somewhat across studies, similar

results are found in Levine and Whitmore (1998), Wallace and Blank (1999), and Blank

(2001a). Moffitt (1999a) and Schoeni and Blank (2000) use somewhat different data than

other studies, aggregating individual data into state-year observations on AFDC

participation by women’s age and education level. Both of these papers also find

significant negative waiver effects on AFDC participation, with particularly strong

effects among less educated women, consistent with the expected impact of welfare

reform.

          Fewer studies have looked at the impact of TANF implementation (Part B of

Table 6). Council of Economic Advisers (1999) and Schoeni and Blank (2000) both

indicate that TANF appears to have a larger effect on caseloads than did waivers.44 This

is consistent with the evidence cited above that shows that economic factors had smaller

effects post-TANF, suggesting that the policy changes of the mid-1990s were a major

cause of declining caseloads.



43
   As discussed above, these waivers were not randomly implemented across states. Once one controls for
differences in state unemployment rates, non-waiver states and waiver states show similar caseload trends
prior to the implementation of waivers (Schoeni and Blank, 2000)
44
   Wallace and Blank (1999) and Grogger (2000) find TANF effects that are similar in magnitude to
waivers, but both papers only have data through 1998. This is before the full effects of state TANF
programs might have been felt.
                                                                                            43


       A few studies find almost no effects of policy, although most of these are

focusing on the waiver period and not the post-TANF period (Ziliak, et. al., 2000; Figlio

and Ziliak, 1999). These studies, as discussed above, tend to use more complex

specifications. The shorter time period in Ziliak, et. al. (2000) also makes it more

difficult to separately identify policy and economy effects. Other specification issues

matter as well, including the choice of fixed effects. For instance, Schiller (1999)

includes no fixed effects and (not surprisingly) finds stronger state policy-related effects.

O’Neill and Hill (2001) do not include year fixed effects and as a result their estimated

coefficient on the TANF dummy variable over the late 1990s is much larger than in other

studies.

       Despite evaluation and methodological problems, the bulk of the research

literature suggests that the policy changes over the 1990s were important to the rapid

caseload decline. This evidence remains unsatisfying, however, for a variety of reasons.

First, most of these papers focus on aggregate policy changes (the adoption of a major

state waiver or the implementation of a TANF plan) rather than on specific policy

components. For instance, some aspects of these waivers (time limits and stricter

sanctions) might have been expected to reduce caseloads. Other aspects (lower benefit

reduction rates) might have increased caseloads. I discuss the efforts to characterize and

measure the impact of policy specifics below.

       Second, it remains very difficult in any of this literature to separate economic and

policy effects, given the extent to which these were interacting with each other over the

late 1990s. The combination of extremely strong economic growth with rapid policy

change means that both effects were reinforcing each other.
                                                                                                         44


        Third, while these papers focus on welfare-related policies, they are less useful in

measuring the additional impacts of other policy changes over this time period. Because

of the nature of the models (typically including year fixed effects) the impact of changes

in the EITC or minimum wage on caseloads are difficult to evaluate. No one has yet put

together the appropriate data to measure the impacts of changes in child support policy,

child care subsidies, or health insurance. To the extent that these other changes are

interacting with the measured policies over time, estimates of the measured policies may

be biased up or down.

        While there remains a very strong interest in the question “what has been the

effect of the policy changes of the 1990s on caseloads (and other variables as well)?” it

remains a difficult question to answer in an entirely credible manner. Future research in

this area, with better data or better identification strategies, will be received with interest.

        Caseload Entry and Exits. Aggregate caseload changes are the result of an

underlying dynamic process in which individuals are choosing to enter welfare and

choosing how long to stay on it. In other areas, looking at these underlying dynamic

processes has produced new insights about net changes.45 A few papers, listed in Table

6, part C, have tried to investigate the underlying flows in and out of public assistance.

        This is hard to do because there does not exist good national flow data on

AFDC/TANF entry and exit. While states have reported welfare entries and exits for

many years, this data has severe problems. It is inconsistently reported across states

(states define entries and exits differently) and some entries and exits appear not to be

reported. For instance, if one aggregates entries and exits over the 1980s and 1990s in


45
  For instance, the literature on employment and unemployment has benefited by looking at flows in and
out of the labor market and in and out of employment.
                                                                                                      45


many states, there is little evidence of the significant rise in caseloads that is visible in the

aggregate caseload data, suggesting either that entries are consistently undercounted or

exits are overcounted.46

        Klerman and Haider (2001) provide a model of dynamic flows in and out of

welfare, and relate them to the net caseload. As discussed above, they also critique

previous econometric estimates as misspecified, based on their model. They utilize

county-level entry and exit data from the state of California only, which they believe to

be accurate, to estimate the determinants of entry and exit. Their results on the role of

unemployment in caseload changes based on flow models are quite similar to those

estimated in much of the literature using stock models, and indicate that the economy

accounts for less than half of the caseload change in the mid-1990s.

        Mueser, et. al. (2000) take a somewhat similar approach. They use administrative

data on welfare recipients from five major metropolitan areas to create their own entry

and exit rate calculations. Using data over a number of years in the mid-1990s, they

estimate that about two-thirds of the decline in welfare is due to higher exits from

welfare, while about one-third is due to lower entry. Consistent with the literature on

aggregate caseloads, both state economic conditions and policy changes affect welfare

exits. Welfare entry appears less affected by the economy.

        Finally, Hofferth, Stanhope and Harris (2001) estimate the probability of exiting

welfare using longitudinal data from the PSID between 1989 and 1996. Although the

time period is quite short (particularly to measure the impact of policy changes that



46
  Discussions with staffers at HHS suggest that the primary problem is likely to be that entries are
undercounted. In particular, in many states a woman who has recently been on welfare and who returns to
the rolls appears not to be counted among the new entrants.
                                                                                                             46


largely occurred in 1994 and 1995) they find significant effects of waivers, particularly

on the probability of exiting AFDC to work.47

         Further work focusing on the underlying dynamics of caseload changes would be

useful. This will require the creation of new and better flow data. In particular, it would

be highly interesting to be able to estimate the impact of specific policy choices on entry

and exit rates within states.

         The Effects of Policy Components. A number of the econometric investigations of

caseload changes attempt to measure the impact of specific policy components. That is,

these studies go beyond simple dummy variables that code the implementation of any

waiver or any TANF plan and try to code the specific nature of the policy change.

Because the available data on state policies is limited, these studies typically limit

themselves to looking at 6 or 7 specific policies.48 For instance, one might code when a

state enacted time limits (some states received waivers to do this, some states enacted

them as part of their TANF plan, some states have no time limits but have declared they

will continue funding families out of state funds after 60 months).

         On the one hand, this literature goes inside the “black box” of policy changes and

does not treat “welfare reform” as a single variable. On the other hand, efforts to analyze

the effects of specific policies have at least two major problems. First, only a partial set

of policies are typically analyzed. For instance, if states that implement lower benefit

47
   This paper utilizes relatively simple duration models. A companion paper (2002) looks at recidivism
(returns to AFDC) among AFDC leavers. But given the short time frame in which to observe the effects of
policies enacted in 1994-95 on recidivism, it is not surprising that there are few significant effects estimated
for waivers.
48
   Most typically, policy coding includes the implementation of time limits, a family cap, benefit reduction
rates, age-of-child work exemptions, the timing of work requirements, sanctions and benefit reduction
rates. Not included in any of these studies is information on diversion policies, the nature of job-
preparation activities, or the availability of child care subsidies or other work supports. Of course if the
                                                                                                            47


reduction rates also provide more generous child support to those who go to work, then

including one policy (BRRs) without the other (child support supplements) will produce a

biased estimate. An example is found in Kaushal and Kaestner (2001) whose only policy

variables are measures of time limits and family caps. This has the effect of attributing

all of the effects of welfare reform to these two variables. Second, the number of states

that have implemented specific policies is very limited in many of these studies. Many

studies use data only through 1996, which allows them to code the policy specifics of

waivers only. Few enough states received waivers for specific policies that there is a

fundamental lack of identification in many of these studies. Evidence of this is seen in

the regular occurance of perverse signs on some of these policy variables.49

         Among the studies that look at policy specific effects are CEA (1997, 1999),

Ziliak, et. al. (2000), Moffitt (1999), Schiller (1999), and Kaushal and Kaestner (2001).

(For more information on these studies, see Table 6.) It is hard to produce a summary set

of conclusions for this work. With different specifications and slightly different data

periods, different studies get different results on quite similar variables. Not all of these

results make sense, for instance, CEA (1999) finds that family caps increase caseloads;

Ziliak, et. al. (2000) finds that strong work incentives increase caseloads. It is difficult to

draw strong conclusions about the impact of specific policies from this literature.

         Three papers are somewhat more persuasive. Grogger (2000) notes that families

with younger children should be more affected by time limits, since they are more likely

to be constrained by such limits. He interacts the adoption of state time limits with age of



implementation of these other (nonincluded) policies are correlated with the implementation of some of the
included policies, this can bias the measured effects.
49
   Most of the specific variables also end up being insignificant in most of the estimates. Of course, this is
consistent with a lack of identification, but it is also consistent with a lack of policy effects.
                                                                                               48


youngest child in the family and finds consistently greater and more negative effects of

time limits on families with younger children. He estimates that 12 percent of the

decline in welfare caseloads in the mid 1990s might be due to time limits. Even this

paper, however, should be read with some skepticism since there are omitted policies that

might be correlated with time limits. Grogger (forthcoming) extends this work, showing

that time limits also increased work more among women with young children and

Grogger (2002) indicates the effect occurs in other data sets.

       Hofferth, Stanhope, and Harris (2001) investigate the effects of specific waiver

policies, using data from 1989-96 from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics to look at

welfare exits. While their results on the determinants of “any exit from welfare” result in

largely insignificant coefficients on specific policies, their results on the determinants of

“exit from welfare that results in work” are more conclusive. They find that stricter work

requirements and fewer exemptions for mothers with young children are positively

correlated with welfare-to-work exits, while lower benefit reduction rates are negatively

correlated. The lack of a complete set of welfare-related policies causes omitted variable

problems with this study as well.

       There is still much room for further research that uncovers the effects of specific

policies through controlled estimation techniques. It would be helpful to have a fuller

specification of state policies, longer time periods to observe the full effect of these

policies (especially in the post-TANF era), variation in policy within states over time to

provide stronger identification of effects, and better ways to identify the effects of these

policies on the groups which they most impact. Experimental evidence on the effect of a

few specific policy choices is discussed in Section VIII below.
                                                                                           49


           Food Stamp Caseloads. While most of the literature has focused on

AFDC/TANF caseloads, one might also be concerned about access to other means-tested

programs as well. As women leave cash public assistance programs for work, they

should maintain their Food Stamp eligibility if their overall incomes remain low. Hence,

rapid declines in Food Stamp caseloads in the mid 1990s were viewed with concern by

many.

           Food Stamp caseloads have tracked AFDC caseloads quite closely since the late

1970s. This is not surprisingly, since over 80 percent of AFDC recipients also received

Food Stamps (U.S. House of Representatives, 2000, Table 15-3). Although Food Stamps

have been historically available to all low-income families and individuals, take-up rates

have been quite low among the non-elderly, non-AFDC population.50 This suggests the

historical importance of AFDC as a “gateway” program into Food Stamps.

           Like AFDC, Food Stamp caseloads increased from 1990-94, peaked in 1994, and

then began to decline rapidly. They fell 37.5 percent from 1994-2000. While their rate

of decline was similar to the decline in AFDC/TANF in the 1994-98 period, it began to

slow and Food Stamps fell much less in 1998-2000 than did TANF caseloads.

           Despite the expectation that many families should maintain Food Stamp

eligibility, Zedlewski (2001) indicates that almost two-thirds of welfare leavers leave

Food Stamps as well. Even among very low income families leaving welfare (i.e., those

whose income is below 50 percent of the poverty line), only about half continue to

receive Food Stamps although all of these families should still be eligible. Schirm (2001)




50
     Ohls and Beebout (1993, Table III.1).
                                                                                                            50


indicates that there has been a clear decline in Food Stamp take-up rates among eligibles,

from 71 percent in 1994 to 59 percent in 1998.51

         There have been few econometric studies of Food Stamp declines. Wallace and

Blank (1999) estimate Food Stamp caseload determinants, using a model identical to that

which they use with AFDC/TANF determinants. They find Food Stamp caseloads are

slightly more responsive to economic cycles (a one-point rise in the unemployment rate

results in a 6-7 percent increase in Food Stamp caseloads). Waivers appear to have a

significant negative effect on Food Stamp caseloads, although there are typically few

provisions in these waivers directly related to Food Stamps. Similar results are found in

Wilde, et. al. (2000), who look at transitions on and off Food Stamps in the early 1990s

and find strong economic responsiveness and an effect of state welfare waivers. Currie

and Grogger (2001) use post-1996 data and indicate that waivers and TANF both

decreased the food stamp caseload. Figlio, Gundersen, and Ziliak (2000) find significant

cyclicality in the Food Stamp caseload. As with related work on cash benefits, once they

include a lagged dependent variable and various lags in other variables, they find much

smaller effects of policy changes.

         More work indicating how Food Stamp caseloads are changing within different

populations can be important. The 1996 legislation limited Food Stamp eligibility among

able-bodied persons without children and the effect of these restrictions would be

interesting to study. Similarly, there has been a sharp decline in Food Stamp use among




51
  This raises a variety of policy-related issues about how families learn of their Food Stamp eligibility and
how they maintain benefits while working. See Greenstein and Guyer (2001) for a review of these issues.
                                                                                                          51


legal immigrant families and their children since the 1996 legislation eliminated their

eligibility. The effects of this change could also be studied.52



                                 VI.      Labor Force Participation

         Declining caseloads are a mixed indicator. They indicate less receipt of cash

assistance, which is good for those concerned with government budgets but may be bad

from the viewpoint of individual well-being. The thrust of the 1990s reforms was to

increase work and it is important to explore not just whether policies caused women to

leave welfare, but also whether these same policies helped women enter the labor force

and replace their public assistance income with earnings.

         The leavers’ studies focus on employment behavior among ex-welfare recipients.

As noted above, this is only a subgroup of those affected by welfare reform (others

choose never to come onto welfare as a result of the reforms). But labor market

opportunities for this group have received substantial public attention. The evidence

suggests that close to two-thirds of welfare leavers are working at a future point in time.53

An even higher share held at least one job since leaving welfare. Martinson (2000) notes

that only 20 percent of leavers appear to never work in a four year follow-up of work

programs in six sites. In short, most leavers find jobs, although jobs and jobholding may

be unstable, so that leavers may not work continuously.54



52
   Borjas (2001b) has a recent paper on this.
53
   Cancian, et. al. (1999) uses the two-thirds number to summarize existing leavers studies. Loprest (2001)
indicates 61 to 64 percent are working at a survey point within two years of leaving welfare. Moffitt and
Roff (2000) cite 63 percent working in studies of three major metropolitan areas. Devere (2001) indicates
55 to 64 percent are working within 3 months of leaving welfare, based on a review of state leavers studies.
54
   A growing body of research has focussed on the effects of personal barriers – such as health problems,
substance abuse problems, low skills, or domestic violence – on work, indicating that mothers with
multiple barriers work less (Danziger, et. al., 2000; Zedlewski and Loprest, 2001).
                                                                                                              52


         Wages among leavers vary by study, but typically range between $5.50 and $8.50

per hour among those who are working.55 Most leavers appear to have no more than two

spells of employment inside 4 years (Martinson, 2000), which does suggest job churning

is not extensive. Holzer, Stoll, and Wissoker (2001) indicate that employers rate welfare

recipients as performing as well or better than other employees.

         While descriptively interesting, these studies raise a variety of questions. First,

how much did policy influence labor market changes? Second, how did the labor market

respond to this influx of low-wage workers? I summarize the research on each of these

questions next.

         Did Policy Influence Work Behavior? Figure 4 indicates that work among single

mothers started to rise in the mid-1990s, strongly suggesting that policy was important to

this change. Other more controlled evidence supports this conclusion.

         Moffitt (1999a) and Schoeni and Blank (2000) investigate the effects of waivers

on labor force participation and weeks and hours of work. Both conclude that waivers

had a significant and positive impact on work behavior among less-skilled women. In

contrast, Schoeni and Blank (2000) find few effects of TANF implementation on

increasing labor market participation; once they control for state unemployment and

income changes, the post-1996 rise in labor force participation among less-skilled women

is fully explained. Using a slightly different data set and empirical techniques O’Neill

and Hill (2001) find that both economy and policy matter in the post-TANF era.56



55
   Devere (2001) cites these numbers in summarizing a large number of state leaver studies. Loprest’s
(2001) national survey of leavers finds average wages of $7.15 among those who left welfare between 1997
and 1999. Moffitt and Roff (2000) cite average wages of $7.50. Cancian, et. al. (1999) cite $6.50-$7.50 as
the typical wage range of leavers.
56
   The lack of time fixed effects in the O’Neill and Hill study almost surely results in a larger coefficient on
the TANF dummy variable than in other studies.
                                                                                                  53


        In short, these regression studies conclude that policy changes appear to have

mattered in the mid-1990s, although the strong labor market unambiguously helped

increase work among less skilled women as well. These studies focus only on welfare

reform, however, and are largely unable to separately identify the effects of larger

national changes in the EITC or the minimum wage.

        There is unanimous agreement that the growing EITC increased labor force

participation among single parents. A number of studies, including Eissa and Liebman

(1996), Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001), Blank, Card, and Robins (2000), Ellwood (2000),

and Hotz, Mullin and Scholz (2001), all find that a sizable component of the growth in

labor force participation among single women can be linked to the EITC expansions.57

The lack of studies that effectively include both welfare reforms and EITC changes

makes it difficult to talk about the comparative impact of these two policy changes.

Grogger (forthcoming) is unique in trying to explicitly control for both EITC parameters

and welfare reform effects. He finds significant effects of the EITC on welfare usage and

work behavior as well as significant policy reform effects. Ellwood (2000) argues the

independent effects of the policies cannot be accurately separated because many of the

welfare reforms were administrative in nature and interacted with the strong economy

and the growth of EITC supports.

        The minimum wage also rose in both the early and the mid 1990s. While

minimum wage increases should raise the returns to work among low skilled workers,

they might also result in a loss of jobs. Despite a great deal of debate about minimum

wage effects on teenagers, we have far less evidence of minimum wage effects on single


57
  Eissa and Hoynes (1998) indicate that the EITC may have small negative effects on labor force
participation among married women.
                                                                                            54


mothers. Card and Krueger (1995) summarize the studies on minimum wage effects;

almost all focus on teenage employment. Bernstein and Schmitt (1998) investigate the

minimum wage increases of 1996 and 1997 and conclude there is little evidence of job

loss among adults due to these minimum wage changes. Neumark (2001) finds the

changes affected employment primarily among unskilled teen workers.

       Only one paper has addressed the effect of child care subsidy policies under

welfare reform on mothers’ work behavior. Lemke, Witt, and Witte (2001) use data from

Massachusetts to demonstrate that the availability of subsidies and the attributes of the

local child care market both affect the probability a welfare recipient moves into work.

       Ideally, one would like to measure the combined effects of all policy changes, as

well as their individual (and potentially interactive) effects. Research that does this is not

available. It does appear, however, that both the welfare reforms and the growing work

support programs of the 1990s contributed to the sharp rise in work among single parents.

       A final set of evidence on the impact of welfare reform on labor market

participation comes from the randomized experiments that measure the impact of specific

welfare-to-work efforts on the behavior of the experimental group (the group that

receives the program) versus the control group (the group that does not receive the

program). This evidence is voluminous, with two decades of experiments that analyze

various welfare-to-work efforts. Almost unanimously, these studies indicate a significant

positive effect of welfare-to-work efforts on labor market participation, although the size

of that impact varies across studies and programs (Gueron and Pauly, 1991; Bloom and

Michalopoulos, 2001). I summarize some more recent contributions to this experimental

literature in more detail in Section VIII below.
                                                                                                    55


          How Did the Labor Market Respond? The large influx of less-skilled women into

the labor market constitutes a substantial increase in labor supply. A best estimate is that

welfare reform will increase labor supply among less-skilled women by a little over 1

million workers between 1996 and 2002 (Bartik, 2000, Table 2.1). This is a labor supply

shock equal to 3.1 percent of employment among all women with less than a college

degree.

          An outward shift in the labor supply curve of one group of less-skilled workers

would be expected to lower wages for all less-skilled workers, if the new group is a close

substitute for existing workers. An observer might be particularly worried about how

these labor force participation increases have affected other previously-working less-

skilled women. Although the less-skilled male labor force tends to work in a somewhat

different set of occupations and industries (Blank and Schmidt, 2001), there is enough

overlap in jobs that this group should also be affected.58

          The raw data suggests that any supply shifts (which would have lowered wages)

were swamped by the overall demand increase due to a booming economy. Wages

among less skilled women rose throughout the 1990s and unemployment rates fell. In

fact, female unemployment rates were at their lowest point in several decades, while

wages among less skilled women were at their highest point in several decades by the end

of the 1990s. As a result, there was little public discussion of displacement issues. Of

course, it is always possible that wages would have risen even faster in the absence of

this supply shift.




58
  Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (forthcoming) show that shocks to wages of low-skilled men affect
levels of welfare receipt.
                                                                                                          56


        There is evidence that the rapid labor supply increase among single moms might

have affected other groups. As Figure 4 indicates, labor force participation increases

among married women with children slowed noticeably in the latter part of the 1990s, at

just the time when work among single women with children expanded. Even more

striking, among less-skilled men labor force participation over the 1990s continued to fall

(Holzer and Offner, 2001). This surprised labor economists, who would have predicted

that the strong economy of the 1990s would pull more of these men into the labor force.59

On the other hand, it is hard to believe that men (or women) were deterred from entering

the labor market by increased employment among ex-welfare recipients when overall

unemployment rates were hovering around 4 percent throughout the country and

employers complained constantly about a lack of workers.

        Several papers have tried to document who hired ex-welfare recipients. Holzer

and Stoll (2001) analyze survey data from employers in four major cities in 1998 and

1999 and find that three percent of all job openings went to ex-welfare recipients. Lane

and Stevens (2001) use administrative data from Maryland to investigate whether certain

employer characteristics are more likely to result in long-term employment by newly-

hired welfare recipients. They find that welfare leavers appear to have significantly

different experiences in different industries, among smaller versus larger employers, and

among shrinking versus growing emplowers.

        Bartik (2000, 2001) takes on the displacement issue. He indicates that welfare

reform is unlikely to have large effects on the overall labor market, since the labor supply

shock is too small. He estimates the effect on wages and employment among less-skilled

59
  For instance, Freeman and Rodgers (1999) indicate that falling unemployment strongly increased labor
force participation among young men in metropolitan areas in the mid-1990s, although they could find no
                                                                                                    57


labor market groups using a variety of models and indicates that different estimation

approaches can result in quite different numbers. For instance, estimates of the elasticity

of labor demand to changes in labor supply vary widely across models. Bartik’s

preferred estimates suggest that welfare reform should reduce wages among female high

school dropouts by between 5 and 15 percent.60 Wage effects among other groups are

lower. He forecasts that the effects of welfare reform on wages and employment among

less skilled women will be larger and more visible in the near future.

        It is difficult to untangle the effect of changing labor supply when labor demand is

also changing rapidly. Bartik’s estimates suggest that the answer depends very much

upon the model specified. This is a ripe area for further investigation, including a closer

look at why labor supply among less-skilled men did not grow over the 1990s, better

estimates of the labor demand elasticities for less-skilled workers, and attention to the

effects of any future economic slow-down on (more recently hired) ex-welfare recipients

versus other labor market participants.



                            VII. Income, Poverty and Well-Being

        Many would claim that the overall effects of welfare reform should be evaluated

in terms of their net income-increasing or poverty-reducing impacts.61 As we will see,

this is a much less-well understood area of analysis than the analysis of caseload change

or labor force participation.




effects for adult men.
60
   Others who have simulated these effects with simpler models include Bernstein (1997) and Solow
(1998).
61
   The 1996 legislation itself made no mention of poverty reduction.
                                                                                                     58


        In part, this reflects the fundamental problem of appropriately measuring

economic well-being. Cash income is not an adequate concept if many low-income

families receive in-kind benefits. There are serious problems with underreported income

among the low-income population (Edin and Lein, 1997). After-tax income may be a

better measure than before-tax income, particularly in a period when tax rules (especially

the EITC) for low-income families are changing.62 One might want to measure

disposable income and include an accounting for unavoidable transportation or child care

expenses associated with entering the work force. Even better, one might want to look at

consumption rather than income data. Unfortunately, data are not readily available that

provide reliable and consistent information on all of these measures. Even if one focuses

only on changes in income-based poverty or poverty gaps (the two poverty-based

measures that are most often used) there are difficulties in measurement and

interpretation, as discussed in Section III above.

        Finally, it is worth noting that many other measures of well-being than income,

poverty, or even consumption might seem useful. One might want to know about quality

of housing, food intake and nutrition, crime victimization, mental health, health insurance

access, or access to good public education. Welfare reforms may change child well-

being by affecting parental oversight as well as family income.63 Consistent data on

these measures are even less available than are credible income measures.

        In this section I summarize what is known about the interaction between welfare

reform and changes in income, poverty, and other measures of well-being. The existing

62
  The Bureau of the Census makes available special Current Population Survey tapes, based on the March
supplement (which includes income and income components for the previous year), that include imputed
in-kind income and taxes.
                                                                                                      59


information described in this section is quite limited. There is a great need for more

research, better data and more comprehensive measurement of well-being changes and

their relationship to the 1996 legislative reforms.

        A major premise of the 1996 reform was the claim that work would make people

better off. Those who testified in favor of this legislation presented charts at

Congressional hearings showing that women who worked would be economically better

off than women who stayed on welfare, particularly with the minimum wage and EITC

changes enacted by earlier Congresses (Haskins, 2001). Indeed, a series of simulation

exercises done in the late 1990s showed unambiguously that steady work, even at a

relatively low wage, when combined with the EITC, with child care assistance, with

access to Medicaid, with Food Stamp and Child Support assistance, would leave a

woman substantially better off (Acs, et. al., 1998). Critics claimed that these simulations

were unreliable since many women did not have access to all of these work supports and

many women were not able to find or maintain steady employment. The evidence on

income and poverty (Tables 3 through 5) suggest that most single mothers had higher

incomes by the end of the 1990s, despite a loss in government assistance.

        Leavers’ Studies. Few of the studies of ex-welfare recipients contain any

information on overall economic well-being of leavers; most focus only on welfare use

and labor force participation. Haskins (2001) indicates that income among welfare

leavers in these studies must be around $11,000, based on earnings and work information.

Among those studies that calculate poverty rates, most find quite high poverty among

leavers, although the numbers vary widely. For instance, Loprest (2001) uses a national


63
  Grogger, Karoly and Klerman (2002) summarize various studies (mostly state-specific) that present
survey data measuring material well-being among children.
                                                                                                       60


survey of leavers to suggest that 48 percent remain poor. Danziger, et. al. (2001) report

about 50 percent of welfare leavers were poor (based on annual incomes two years after

welfare receipt.) Moffitt and Roff (2000) look at data in three cities and estimate that 74

percent of leavers are poor. Cancian, et. al. (1999) uses data from the NLSY to indicate

that 55 percent of women are poor in the year following an exit from welfare, but this

falls to 42 percent five years later. Bavier (2002) looks at monthly panel data on welfare

leavers from the SIPP and concludes that income rises over time among leavers, in part

because earnings of other family members rise.

        Two studies provide some comparisons over time. Loprest (2001) finds evidence

of slight improvements in the percent working and the monthly earnings of women who

left welfare between 1997-99 versus leavers from 1995-97. This should mean that later

leavers had higher incomes, and indeed poverty rates are lower in this group. Cancian,

et. al. (2002), in a study based on Wisconsin data alone, find evidence of lower earnings

among welfare leavers in 1997 versus 1995. Neither of these studies, however, can

control for changes in the composition or selectivity of welfare leavers over time.64

        Regression Analysis of Poverty and Income Changes. None of the evidence cited

above attempts to separately identify the causal factors behind income and poverty

changes over the 1990s. Three studies listed in Table 6 have looked at these variables,

using the now-familiar state panel data methodology to estimate the determinants of

changes in family income and poverty probabilities.




64
  I cite no experimental evidence in this section. Most randomized studies of welfare-to-work changes
looked only at earnings and have no information on overall income changes. A few more recent studies of
waivers involving multiple program changes are exceptions to this. Consistent with leaver study results,
these tend to show little change in income (Bloom and Michalopoulos, 2001).
                                                                                                              61


         Schoeni and Blank (2000) find that the waivers enacted in the early 1990s

appeared to increase income among low-income women. Moffitt (1999) finds an effect

of waivers on earnings, but their estimated effect on total income is small and poorly

determined.65 Grogger (forthcoming) finds that waivers and TANF reforms increased

both earnings and income. Schoeni and Blank investigate the impact of waivers and

TANF on poverty rates as well as income. They find that the implementation of waivers

is associated with a 2.4 point decline in the poverty rate among less-skilled women,

holding the state economic climate constant. The implementation of TANF is associated

with a 2.0-2.2 point decline in the poverty rate among less-skilled women. This evidence

suggests that the welfare reform policies had income-improving effects for disadvantaged

women.66 Gunderson and Ziliak (2001) investigate the effects of welfare reform on

poverty rates and poverty gaps among different subgroups among the poor and also find

significant effects.

         These results, based on national samples of all low income women, are stronger

than those from studies that look only at welfare leavers. This suggests that income

increases among those who don’t enter welfare (that is, the non-entrants who would have

gone on welfare in the pre-reform period but choose to remain off welfare post-reform)

are large. This is precisely what one might expect if non-entrants were self-selected to be

more employable. It is also worth noting that leaver studies typically do not ask about

income or earnings among other family members, which several studies find to be a

major reason why total incomes among single mothers are rising.

65
  Moffitt looks only at single mothers, while Schoeni and Blank look at all women.
66
  Schoeni and Blank try to investigate the effect of these policies across the income distribution and find
that waivers appear to have benefited all women with less than a high school degree. In contrast, TANF
                                                                                                          62


        Consistent with these results are estimates by Meyer and Sullivan (2001) who

focus on consumption rather than income among single mothers. They find that total

consumption of single mothers increases in the mid-1990s, both absolutely and relative to

income among women without children and married mothers. (There are a few

subgroups for which this is not true.) They interpret this as evidence that welfare reform

did not harm women’s well-being.67

        The well-being of two specific groups deserves mention. Legal immigrants

entering the country after August 1996 were made ineligible for virtually all forms of

federal public assistance (TANF, Food Stamps, Medicaid, or SSI).68 The impact of this

provision is likely to grow over time as a growing share of new immigrants are covered

by it. There has been remarkably little literature studying the impact of these provisions

on the behavior and well-being of the immigrant population. Use of public assistance

among immigrants has fallen much more rapidly than among non-immigrants. For

instance, between 1994 and 1998, the share of immigrants receiving AFDC/TANF or

Food Stamps fell almost in half (Borjas, 2001a, Table 14-2). Food Stamp receipt among

eligible citizen children living with immigrant parents fell from 80 percent in 1994 to 46

percent in 1999.69 Both Lofstrom and Bean (2001) and Haider, et. al. (2001) claim that

the faster declines in immigrant welfare use are largely due to different local labor

markets in high-immigrant versus low-immigrant regions. Kaestner and Kaushal (2001)

suggest that welfare changes have increased employment among more recently-arrived


appears to have benefited only female high school dropouts above the 20th percentile of the income
distribution of all female high school dropouts.
67
   Another closely-related topic is the effect of welfare reform on household savings. Hurst and Ziliak
(2001) provide an analysis of this issue.
68
   At their option, states were allowed to run state-funded programs serving immigrants and a number of
states have taken this option (Borjas, 2001b). California, with the largest immigrant population, is
particularly generous.
                                                                                            63


immigrants. Further studies looking at the connections between these policy changes and

the changing economic and employment status of immigrants would be very useful.

           A second group of concern is children. Duncan and Chase-Lansdale (2001a,

2001b) provide the best available discussion of how child well-being might interact with

welfare reform. Below, I discuss evidence on the impact of financial incentive welfare-

to-work programs on child well-being. Evidence is limited that relates welfare reform

more broadly with child outcomes. Bennett, Lu and Song (2001) argue that welfare

reform has led to an income decline among families where the parent has less than a high

school degree. Paxson and Waldfogel (forthcoming) indicate that higher rates of out-of-

home placement appear linked with some aspects of welfare reform. Haider, Jacknowitz,

and Schoeni (2001b) show that breastfeeding rates appear lower due to greater work

behavior. This is another area where further research would be highly useful.



                 VIII. Experimental Evaluations of Specific Policy Choices

           While experimental evaluations of welfare reform programs have limitations, as

discussed above, they provide some of the most credible evidence about the effects of

specific reforms. I focus here on a few topics which have been evaluated by random

assignment methodology and that particularly add to our theoretical and empirical

knowledge of the effects of redesigned welfare programs. This section reviews the

evidence on three specific policy choices: Mandatory employment programs, earnings

disregards and financial incentive programs, and time limits.

           Mandatory Employment Programs. Since the mid-1980s, states have

experimented with a wide variety of welfare-to-work employment programs. Most of

69
     Underlying data provided by USDA for tables published in USDA (2000).
                                                                                                            64


these have been mandatory, meaning that welfare recipients who are ruled to be “work

eligible” are required to participate if they want to continue receiving welfare benefits.

Summaries of evaluations of earlier welfare-to-work efforts, both mandatory and

voluntary, can be found in Gueron and Pauly (1991) and Friedlander and Burtless (1995).

        States that received waivers from AFDC program rules to run strong mandatory

welfare-to-work programs in the early 1990s were also required to fund a serious

evaluation of their new program, typically a random assignment evaluation. As a result

of this, a wide variety of mandatory welfare-to-work programs were evaluated in the

early 1990s. The results from these programs are nicely summarized in Bloom and

Michalopoulos (2001) and in Michalopoulos and Schwartz (2001), both of which review

randomized evaluations of 20 mandatory welfare-to-work programs in specific states.70

        Virtually all of these programs produced some significant increases in

employment and reductions in welfare usage and payments. Earnings per year increased

between $200 and $600 in most programs.71 Michalopoulos and Schwartz (2001) break

these results down for different groups of participants. They indicate little difference in

the employment gains experienced by the most versus the least disadvantaged

participants in these programs (which means that the ongoing earnings and employment

differentials between these two groups remained about the same after recipients

participated in mandatory welfare-to-work programs, although both groups worked more

and earned more). It is particularly interesting that employment outcomes did not seem

significantly worse among less skilled participants, or participants with identifiable


70
   See also Hamilton, et. al. (2001) which summarizes information on program effectiveness in a five year
follow-up of 11 welfare-to-work programs.
71
   The largest earnings increase occurred in the Riverside County GAIN program, where annual earnings
gains exceeded $1000/year.
                                                                                           65


barriers to work, such as child care problems. The one group that appears not to benefit

from these programs are recipients at a high risk of depression.

       A key comparison in these studies is between those programs that focused on job

search or labor force attachment (LFA) through some sort of work-first program that

pushed recipients into jobs as rapidly as possible, and those programs that focused on

human capital development (HCD) and provided more training and educational

opportunities to recipients. Three programs included side-by-side evaluations of LFA

versus HCD welfare-to-work programs within the same location (Atlanta, GA, Grand

Rapids, MI, and Riverside County, CA). Other programs had somewhat mixed models,

including work-first efforts for some recipients and education and training for others.

       While labor economists are particularly likely to predict that education and

training will make people better off in the long run, the existing evaluations challenge

that assessment. Work-first and LFA programs increased earnings and decreased welfare

usage more quickly, while HCD programs cost more, particularly in the first year when

women were in training rather than working. But even three years out, after women from

HCD programs had been in the labor market for up to two years, HCD participants did

not outperform LFA participants. This may suggest that the gains to experience among

women who have been out of the labor market may be larger than the gains to education

and training, at least initially. While the HCD programs significantly increased the

number of participants holding a GED degree, there was little evidence that this resulted

in higher earnings or more work hours (Freedman, et. al., 2000).

       These evaluations had three year follow-up surveys, at the most. Using data from

the California GAIN program, Hotz, Imbens, and Klerman (2000) match control and
                                                                                            66


treatment group members from earlier welfare-to-work programs in California with

earnings records, allowing them to follow welfare-to-work participants (and their control

groups) for up to nine years afterwards. They find that in years 7-9, those who received

more education or training are doing as well or better than those who were put into work-

first programs. Their conclusion is that the HCD programs look better with longer-term

evaluations. This study uses data from one state only, and verifying these results for

other programs would be useful.

       Interestingly, the best results from these studies occur in programs with mixed

activities, suggesting that a combination of work-first for some women and education for

others might be optimal. For instance, the Portland, OR, program and the GAIN program

in Butte, CA, for single women showed $1200/year earnings increases, while GAIN

Riverside (CA) showed $1400/year increases (Bloom and Michalopoulos, 2001). Further

experimentation with mixed activity programs would be useful, particularly evaluations

of retention-based programs that provide education, training, or job retention services to

women after they have worked for a period. Anecdotal evidence suggests that many

women who participate in work-first programs appear to recognize the need for further

training at a later date. Some women lose their jobs and have difficulty finding another

job. Second-chance programs would aim at assisting job retention or providing training

after a woman has acquired some labor market experience. No programs of this sort for

women moving from welfare to work have been evaluated with randomized experimental

evaluations.

       A disappointing aspect of the mandatory work programs is that they provide little

evidence of increased income. In fact, increases in earnings appear to be entirely offset
                                                                                                           67


by losses in public assistance income.72 Hence, these programs have no anti-poverty

effects. This has led to a great deal of interest in the use of earnings disregards in

conjunction with mandatory work, to create work incentives and subsidize earnings at the

same time.

         Earnings Disregards and Financial Incentive Programs. Several studies have

tested the effects of strong earnings supplements as a way to incentivize work and reduce

welfare usage. These so-called “financial incentive programs” include the Minnesota

Family Investment Program (MFIP) (Miller, et. al., 2000, and Gennetian and Miller,

2000), the New York Child Assistance (CAP) program (DeMarco and Mills, 2000), the

New Hope program in Milwaukee (Bos, et. al., 1999), the Work Restructuring Project

(WRP) in Vermont (Bloom, et. al., 1998), and the Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP) in

Canada (Michalopoulos, et. al., 2000). Two of these programs – MFIP and SSP -- have

explicitly tested the combined versus separate effects of earnings disregards and other

employment service programs. Three other programs have been evaluated that included

financial incentives along with other policies: the Connecticut Jobs First program

(Bloom, et. al., 2000b), the Florida Family Transition Program (FTP) (Bloom, et. al.,

2000a), and the Iowa Family Investment Program (FIP) (Fraker and Jacobson, 2000). In

these three evaluations it is difficult to make statements about the effect of financial

incentives only, but they do show the combined effects of financial incentives along with

a mix of other mandatory and voluntarily-available job search services. Table 7 shows




72
  These results are typically based on administrative data on earnings and benefits. Cancian, et. al. (1999)
indicates that this is likely to undercount true family income since it does not include income from partners
or other family members.
                                                                                                          68


the effects of these programs on a set of key variables, as measured by random

assignment evaluations.73

         Because of their strong evaluation results, both MFIP and SSP have garnered a

great deal of interest and I describe them briefly to the reader. MFIP was implemented in

Minnesota in 1994, and provided a strong earnings disregard that allowed women to

receive some cash assistance until their earnings were about 140 percent of the poverty

line.74 Participants were also required to participate in mandatory job search programs.

A subset of the treatment group was provided with the financial incentives from earnings

disregards, but not subject to mandatory job search requirements. A control group

continued to receive AFDC. Participants were randomized into both treatment groups

and the control group, so that the separate effects of mandatory job search and earnings

disregards could be explored.

         The SSP program was implemented in 1992 in two provinces in Canada (New

Brunswick and British Columbia).75 It offered a randomly chosen group of women on

welfare (known as Income Assistance in Canada) an alternative: If they agreed to leave

welfare, they could receive an earnings supplement in every month when they averaged

30 hours of work per week or more. The supplement was large and roughly doubled the

earnings of most participants. It was calculated as half the difference between a

participant’s earnings and an “earnings benchmark”, set at $30,000 in New Brunswick

and $37,000 in British Columbia (Canadian dollars). The supplement was reduced by 50


73
   For a more thorough discussion of the results of financial incentive programs see Blank, Card, and
Robbins (2000) or Michalopoulos and Berlin (2001).
74
   For more detailed description of the MFIP program, see Miller, et. al. (2000).
75
   For more information on the SSP project, see Michalopoulos, et. al. (2000) or Quets, et. al. (1999). Note
that the SSP experiment offered women a choice, hence some of the treatment group chose to stay in
Income Assistance. In contrast, those in MFIP’s treatment group had to participate in the alternative
program and were no longer eligible for AFDC.
                                                                                           69


cents for every dollar of earnings. Some of these women were also randomly assigned to

an SSP-Plus program, which combined the earnings supplement with job-related services

such as resume writing assistance, job search assistance, and self-esteem workshops.

Participation in these services was not mandatory, so the evaluation compares the effect

of earnings supplements with and without voluntary employment services.

       The results of the earnings disregard experiments suggest that positive work

incentives coming through larger earnings disregards can increase employment. The top

part of Table 7 indicates that employment increased by 3.6 percent among those receiving

MFIP financial incentives only, and by 3.3 percent in the New York CAP program. The

relatively small financial incentives in the Vermont WRP program led to almost no

employment effects.

       As discussed above, mandatory employment programs alone appear to have little

effect on income or poverty, but Table 7 indicates that the MFIP incentive-based program

had significant positive effects on monthly income and significant negative effects on

poverty (although WRP and CAP did not.) In the MFIP incentives program, this was

entirely due to the earnings benefit supplements; earnings actually decreased slightly.

This highlights the fact that earnings disregard programs cost more, since they pay

benefits to supplement earnings of workers, phasing out more slowly than less-generous

welfare programs. Hence, these programs tended not to reduce the cost or the usage of

welfare assistance. They significantly increased the amount of assistance that went to

workers, however, rather than non-workers.

       Most promising of all were the programs that combined employment programs

with earnings disregards, shown in the bottom half of Table 7. The SSP earnings
                                                                                                           70


supplement required working 30 hours per week and provided the largest financial

incentive to work among these programs. The result was a 7.2 percent employment gain

among those offered the SPP program, significant income increases, and a greater than 9

percent decline in poverty rates.76 The full MFIP program that included both generous

disregards and mandatory employment programs had large positive effects on

employment and income, and significant negative effects on poverty. This was due to

both significant earnings increases combined with significant ongoing cash transfers to

the workers.77 The MFIP evaluation allows us to measure the separate impact of

disregards versus mandatory employment; the results indicate that the significant

employment effects depended upon the mandatory employment program, while the anti-

poverty effects depended upon the high earnings disregard.

         Other programs that combined both financial incentives and strong work

requirements show similar gains in both employment and in income. As Table 7

indicates, the Connecticut Jobs First program and the Vermont Welfare Restructuring

Program resulted in strong earnings and employment gains, and (smaller) income gains.

The Florida FTP program and the Iowa FIP programs have limited earnings disregards,

but these are large enough that the loss of cash transfers is less than the earnings gains,

hence women in these programs also increased employment and increased earnings.

Again, these results are a sharp contrast to the mandatory employment programs alone,

where earnings gains are typically entirely offset by cash transfer losses.


76
   Card, Michalopoulos, and Robins (2001) also describe earnings gains among SSP recipients of around
2.4 to 3 percent per year over the period of the experiment. It is also worth noting that a substantial number
of persons who were offered the SSP supplement did not take it up. Most of these non-participants said
that they would have liked to receive the supplement but could not find full-time work or could not
overcome various barriers to work.
77
   The 30 hour work requirement in SPP resulted in a substantial rise in full-time work. In contrast, MFIP
had more of an effect on part-time work.
                                                                                           71


        The evidence in Table 7 is striking and worth emphasis. In traditional welfare

programs (see Figure 2), maximum benefits are paid to non-workers. Hence, traditional

welfare programs typically increase income but reduce labor supply at the same time,

creating inefficiencies. Burtless (1986) notes that in the Negative Income Tax

experiments, the government had to spend almost $2 to increase incomes by $1, largely

because of labor supply reductions. In contrast, financial incentives programs (especially

those with mandatory employment programs) provided strong work incentives at the

same time they supplemented incomes. In these programs, both labor supply and income

increased.

       Part I of Table 8 presents calculations of income gains per dollar spent for some

of the financial incentive programs that included both incentives and work requirements.

Column 1 shows income gains to program participants and column 2 shows transfer

payments. Column 3 indicates the income gains per dollar transferred. An alternative

calculation occurs in column 6 which shows total program benefits (column 4, including

such things as the imputed value of additional health care) per dollar of total program

costs (column 5, transfers plus the provision of other services and administration). In

looking at Table 8, one might be tempted to think that programs with a benefit/cost ratio

of less than one should not be run. I caution against this interpretation. In many cases

programs with lower benefit/cost ratios may offer important and necessary services.

Programs with higher benefit/cost ratios are relatively more appealing, but the data in

Table 8 do not allow one to drawing any absolute conclusions about the value of these

programs.
                                                                                                      72


        In the SSP program, $1 in government transfers increased income by almost $2

among long-term welfare recipients since the earnings supplements were reinforced by

increased labor supply. In MFIP (among long-term recipients) the gain is even larger

and $1 in government transfers increased income by almost $2.50; New Hope also shows

substantial gains. Only two-parent families in MFIP show relatively small gains for each

dollar transferred. This suggests that these financial incentive programs are relatively

efficient in redistributing income. Even in column 6, where the calculation is based on

total program costs, the ratios are better than the 0.50 number cited by Burtless for the

negative income tax (again the exception is among two-parent families in MFIP.)78

        In contrast, the mandatory employment programs summarized in part II of Table

8 show much smaller benefit gains in absolute terms (column 4) and generally lower

income gains per dollar of government spending (column 6). In some cases, there are

actual income losses among recipients, resulting in negative ratios. As redistributive

programs, these are simply less effective. These mandatory employment programs were

generally not focused on income gains, so it may be unfair to judge them on this basis. In

fact, a primary goal of most of these programs was to reduce government spending, and

many of them were quite effective at that. Some of these programs, such as Riverside

GAIN, even saved the government substantial amounts of money per recipient; while

income gains were small in Riverside, the government savings suggests a very efficient

transfer program.

        In addition to their income-enhancing effects for the family and their

employment-enhancing effects for the parent, financial incentive programs also appeared


78
  The calculations in columns 4, 5, and 6 require more imputations and assumptions and hence may be
regarded as slightly less reliable than those in columns 1, 2, and 3.
                                                                                                             73


to have positive effects on children’s outcomes. A number of these studies have

collected data on child outcomes as well as on employment and income. Morris, et. al.

(2001) summarize this research and indicate that earnings supplement programs (alone or

combined with mandatory employment programs) appear to have significant and positive

effects on school achievement and child behaviors among elementary-school-age

children.79 Mandatory employment programs alone do not appear to produce these gains.

These effects are strongest among the children of long-term welfare recipients. Duncan

and Chase-Lansdale (2001a) suggest that these changes appear to be operating through

changes in the utilization of child care or after-school programs, rather than through

changes in home environments.

         Adolescent effects are based on smaller samples and are less positive. Two

studies find reductions in achievement and increases in behavioral problems among teens

whose mothers participate in work incentive programs.

         The evidence that financial incentive programs can reduce poverty, increase

earnings, and may even improve child outcomes at the same time, particularly when

combined with other job-related services, suggest that these financial incentive programs

are the most promising avenue of policy change to come out of the U.S. (and Canadian)

welfare reforms of the mid-1990s. Several caveats about these results should be noted,

however. First, these financial incentive programs have not been run in a random set of

states. The strongest results come from Minnesota and Canada, and might not be

generalizable to other locations. Second, the wide variance in results shown in Table 8

suggests that financial incentive programs are more effective with some populations.


79
  Samples in these studies are too small to produce reliable conclusions regarding the effects on children
under age 3. For an earlier summary of the literature see Hamilton, et. al. (2000).
                                                                                             74


        Time Limits. The effects of time limits have been studied both by randomized

experiments and through larger econometric studies of national data. It is fair to say,

however, that we lack a great deal of information about the effect of time limits, largely

because not enough time has passed to evaluate them. By mid-2000, only about 60,000

families had hit time limits of one sort or another. Only in late 2001 and early 2002 will

the first group of women who were continuously on welfare since TANF was enacted

begin to hit the 60-month time limit set in many states. As more and more families hit

the five-year time limits over the near future, there will be more opportunities to study the

effects of these time limits.

        Six state programs that implemented time limits earlier (through state waiver

programs) have been studied through random assignment experiments (Arizona,

Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Indiana and Virginia). In none of these states do time

limits show large effects on employment, though there is some evidence that women are

leaving welfare early in order to preserve welfare eligibility in the future.80

        These results are somewhat difficult to interpret, however. These experiments

were conducted on the very first group of women anywhere in the United States to hit

time limits. This group may be more prone to misunderstand the implications of time

limits or to disbelieve that they would actually be enforced. Furthermore, all of these

experiments are studying of a larger set of changes, which include time limits as one

component. In none of these studies can the independent effects of time limits be

deduced. Conclusions about the effect of time limits on employment are largely based on

comparisons between the results in these states to experimental results in other states
                                                                                                   75


without time limits. In addition, none of these evaluations can investigate the entry

effects of time limits, that is, the extent to which they discourage families from receiving

welfare in the first place.

        The effects of time limits on families are an issue of great interest and scrutiny.

Some evidence indicates that a high share of clients who are subject to future time limits

do not entirely understand this provision. The evidence from Florida suggests that the

most disadvantaged were the least affected by Florida’s time-limited program; it had few

effects on their employment, earnings or income (Bloom, et. al., 2000a). Those who hit

the time limit in Florida were clearly struggling financially, but were not notably worse

off than many other families who left welfare for other reasons. Time limits in Florida

did appear to reduce welfare use the most among families with younger children

(Grogger and Michalopoulos, 1999). Those who are “sanctioned off” welfare may be

similar to those who hit time limits. Leavers’ studies indicate that those who leave

welfare due to sanctions are less likely to be employed after leaving welfare and are also

more disadvantaged than other leavers across a range of attributes (U.S. General

Accounting Office, 2000). Lack of long follow-up periods in many of these studies

makes it difficult to evaluate the long-term effects of time limits or sanctions.



                              IX. Marriage and Fertility Changes

        A major impetus for welfare reform within the U.S. has been ongoing concern

about rises in out-of-wedlock births and declining marriage rates, especially among low



80
  See Bloom (1999), Bloom and Michalopoulos (2001) and Pavetti and Bloom (2001) for summaries of
CN, DE, FL and VA studies and references to the original experimental results. The AZ and IN
experiments are described in Fein, et. al. (1998) and Kornfeld, et. al. (1999), respectively.
                                                                                                           76


income women and men. Indeed, the major stated goals of the 1996 legislation included

reducing out-of-wedlock births and increasing marriage.

        There are several mechanisms by which welfare reform might accomplish this. A

simple economic model would suggest that means-tested transfer programs make it easier

for lower-income couples to afford a child. Furthermore, the fact that most of this

support has historically been focused on single mothers and not married couples means

that the incentives to marry are limited. While changes in cash assistance programs made

assistance to two-parent couples more available in the early 1990s81, growth in the EITC

increased the marriage penalty for low-income workers (Ellwood, 2000).

        In addition to standard economic incentive-based models, there are also a host of

more cultural/behavioral models that claim the growth in out-of-wedlock childbearing is

due to decreased social disapproval of out-of-wedlock childbearing and a shift in

behavioral norms away from marriage. Increases in means-tested support would make it

easier for such shifts in marital and fertility norms to occur.82

        Both of these theoretical approaches imply that recent U.S. changes in public

assistance should have reduced the incentives to become a single mother and increased

the incentives to marry. Time limits, sanctions, diversion activities, and work incentives

all make it harder to receive public assistance as a single mother without also engaging in

work-related activities.

        Some states have gone beyond these welfare reforms to enact programs that are

explicitly directed at fertility and marriage decision-making. For instance, some state

81
  The Family Support Act of 1988 required all states to make two-parent married couple families eligible
for AFDC (although in most cases these families faced more stringent eligibility requirements).
                                                                                                          77


waivers in the early 1990s allowed states to mandate that teen mothers must stay in

school and live at home with their parents (or in another supervised setting) if they are to

receive cash assistance, the so-called “minor parent provision.” Other states were given

authority to enact “family caps”, which refuse benefit increases to welfare recipients who

have further children outside of marriage. After states received greater discretion under

TANF, more states implemented these programs.83

         Trends in the data. Is there evidence of changes in fertility or marital behavior in

the mid-1990s, similar to the labor force participation changes discussed above? Figure 5

shows the trends in three key variables.84 Marriage rates have fallen steadily for many

decades, with no noticeable break in trend over the 1990s. Similarly, divorce rates are

also slowly falling, with no change in the 1990s. Birth rates to unmarried women did

change noticeably around 1990, ending a steep increase to flatten out and even fall

slightly over the 1990s. This change in the nonmarital birth rate is evident among both

black and white women, and among teens and older women, but occurs well before major

welfare reforms were implemented.

         Further evidence on trends in key family structural variables can be seen by

looking at the share of families with children that are headed by never-married females.85

This number has increased steadily from 3 percent in 1976 to over 10 percent in 2000, the

highest level ever recorded. When one looks at the trends in headship among never-

married mothers who have lower incomes or are less educated, however, there is a bit

more evidence that the increases of the past two decades slowed somewhat in the mid-to-

82
   For instance, Murray (1994) argues that the growth in means-tested benefits in the late 1960s/early 1970s
led to long-term increases in out-of-wedlock childbearing. For a discussion of these behavioral arguments,
see Murray (2001).
83
   Maynard, et. al. (1998) discuss these state policies in more detail.
                                                                                               78


late 1990s. Other recent evidence suggests that the share of children living with single

mothers (particularly in African American families) declined significantly in the late

1990s (Dupree and Primus, 2001). This is at least consistent with the theory that welfare

reform might be producing some behavioral changes among less skilled women.

           It might be unreasonable to expect any marriage or fertility effects from welfare

reform to show up within a few years. Only a relatively small share of the population

gets pregnant or becomes married in any given year; changes in these decisions will

affect aggregate numbers only slowly over time. Furthermore, marriage and fertility

patterns may be much more sluggish and resistant to change than is work behavior. All

of this suggests that identifying effects on family structure due to welfare reform is likely

to be difficult, and any measured effects are likely to be small.

           Causal analysis of these changes. The literature that relates the policy changes

of the 1990s to changes in marital or fertility behavior is still quite limited and much

good research remains to be done. A large body of earlier work has analyzed the

relationship between AFDC benefits and fertility behavior. I do not review this literature

here, in part because it has been well reviewed elsewhere (Moffitt, 1992; Moffitt, 1998b).

The primary conclusion is that studies tend to show either no effects or small effects. To

cite Moffitt (1998a, p5) in the introduction to a book analyzing the relationship between

welfare and fertility behavior, “[I]t is also fair to note that if there were a sizable effect of

welfare on demographic behavior, it would probably be more evident with the available

statistical methods than appears to be the case in the research literature. The findings




84
     For a discussion of related trends see Murray (2001) or Bachrach (1998).
85
     Author’s tabulations on the March Current Population Survey data from 1976 to 2000.
                                                                                               79


reported in the chapters are…consistent with the existence of a small, real effect but one

that is difficult to detect and sensitive to the methodology used[.]”

       Evidence of small effects in the existing literature do not imply that recent welfare

reform effects must also be small, for at least two reasons. First, this previous literature

focuses on the effect of differences in welfare benefit levels on fertility patterns. As

discussed above, welfare benefit levels have not changed radically; rather, a host of other

behavioral incentives and mandates have been imposed on welfare recipients. These

might have different and stronger effects, particularly if these changes seriously limit

welfare benefit availability. Second, programs like family caps and minor parent

provisions are directly aimed at changing fertility behavior and might have larger and

more direct effects than changes in benefits or availability.86

       Table 9 summarizes the literature that attempts to link welfare reform with

changes in family structure. Part A lists the econometric studies. Horvath-Rose and

Peters (2001) use state panel data to investigate out-of-wedlock birth trends from 1984 to

1996, including controls for the implementation of family caps or minor parent

provisions. They find a significant and negative effect of family caps, similar to the New

Jersey study. The minor parent provision appears to have positive effects on nonmarital

fertility in their study, however, which is not the expected sign and suggests that there

may be omitted variable problems with the entire study. Clearly, the mixed evidence on

family caps suggests that further investigation might be useful. Schoeni and Blank

(2000) use panel data to investigate the effects of waivers and of TANF implementation

on the percent married and the probability of being a female household head. They find
                                                                                                          80


evidence that the policy reforms had small but significant effects on these family

formation variables. Fitzgerald and Ribar (2001) use data from the early 1990s and find

state waivers had mixed results on female headship.

         Part B of Table 9 summarizes econometric studies that have tried to investigate

the expected effect of family caps using data from the AFDC program. Fairlee and

London (1997) look at whether differences in AFDC benefit levels change the likelihood

that single mothers would have additional births. They find little evidence of this. Acs

(1996) and Grogger and Bronars (2001) have similar results. Argys, Averett and Rees

(2000) investigate how AFDC benefits might affect pregnancy and abortion behavior.

They find small effects that are highly sensitive to specification and methodology.

         Experimental evaluations of the effects of employment programs on marriage and

fertility behavior (summarized in Part C of Table 9) show quite mixed results, from what

are admittedly quite a different group of programs.87 Three studies directly analyze

actual family cap programs, each using quite different methodologies. Camasso, et. al.

(1998a, 1998b) report on a pre-post data comparison and an experimental comparison in

New Jersey after family caps were implemented and indicate that the birth rate was

significantly lower among those subject to family caps. Some have raised concerns about

the interpretability of these evaluations, however (Maynard, et. al., 1998). The A Better

Chance (ABC) program in Delaware ran a strong mandatory work activities program and

included a family cap. A randomized study of the program showed few effects on

marriage or fertility (Fein, 1999).

86
  This might be especially true if one takes the behavioral norms model seriously. The implementation of
family caps in most states occurred simultaneously with a lot of media attention to the fact that the state
wanted to actively discourage additional out-of-wedlock births.
                                                                                                             81


         The New Chance experiment, which provided educational and job assistance to

teen welfare mothers (along with family planning counseling) found pregnancy rates in

the experimental group actually increased in a randomized evaluation (Quint, Bos, and

Polit, 1997). The Teen Parent Demonstration (TPD) Project in Ohio, which required teen

welfare mothers to participate in a rich set of education and work support programs, had

no effect on second pregnancies (Kisker, Rangarajan and Boller, 1998). The California

Work Pays Demonstration (Hu, 2000) was a work-oriented welfare reform that increased

marriage rates in some populations.

         The largest and most positive effect of welfare reform on family structure is found

in the MFIP demonstration, discussed above as a particularly effective financial incentive

program (Miller, et. al., 2000). Single mothers who were in the MFIP experimental

group married at a significantly higher rate than those in the control group, while two-

parent families in MFIP stayed married at a higher rate.88

         Overall, the recent literature on the effects of policy on family structure has not

provided clear guidance as to what states should do if they want to influence fertility and

marriage through their welfare reform efforts. While the MFIP results are cited as

evidence that welfare reform can influence marriage, it would be useful to have

additional experimental evidence that showed similarly strong and positive results on

marriage or fertility from other state reform efforts. Even some programs that explicitly

focused on fertility issues as one component of welfare reform (such as New Chance or

the TDP program) did not show the desired effects. In addition, further econometric

87
 Murray (2001) also reviews the studies cited here, as well as several others that are not based on recent
welfare reform efforts.
                                                                                                           82


exploration of the determinants of marriage and fertility trends, particularly focusing on

the changes in the 1990s, would be highly interesting.



                                           X.       Conclusion

         The U.S. welfare reforms of the 1990s have generated extensive interest. Both

the federal changes in work support programs like the EITC and the revolution in the

design of state public assistance programs have drawn research attention. While it is far

too early to draw any final conclusions about the long-term effects of these program

changes, the research literature to date has produced several important results.

         More significant caseload declines and larger increases in labor force participation

among less-skilled mothers were possible than many observers would have predicted.

Entry into welfare fell and exits from welfare rose. There remains debate as to how much

these results were due to a strong economy, to program reform, or to their interactive

effects. While some of this change in behavior is due to traditional labor supply

responses to growing wages and increased financial incentives to work, the changes were

greater than historical experience would lead one to expect. State welfare programs were

substantially different post-1996, including such elements as time limits, sanctions, and

diversion efforts. Tracking down the exact relationship between these program

differences and specific behavioral changes remains difficult, but there is a growing body

of evidence indicating that these new program elements mattered.




88
  Another financial incentive program discussed above, SSP (implemented in Canada), had more mixed
results on marriage. Positive marriage effects occurred in one of the two sites, while the other site showed
negative marriage effects. Harknett and Gennetian (2001) discuss possible reasons for this.
                                                                                          83


       At least over the late 1990s, these changes in behavior occurred along with

moderate increases in cash income and moderate declines in poverty among less-skilled

single mother families, those most affected by the policy changes. This is in contrast to

the mandatory employment programs of an earlier era, which increased labor supply but

seemed to have few positive effects on income (earnings gains offset benefits losses).

These positive outcomes were best demonstrated in a set of experimental evaluations of

so-called “financial incentive programs” which both provided financial incentives to

work while also mandating strong work efforts. These programs, enacted in only a

limited number of states, seem to have been particularly effective in increasing

employment and reducing poverty, and they provide perhaps the best model of “new-

style” welfare programs. Their results are markedly different from those of the older

negative income tax experiments.

       The literature evaluating these welfare reforms is likely to continue to grow. Let

me mention three key areas where future research may be particularly important. First,

some important questions can only be answered after more time has passed. We have

only very preliminary evidence on whether these reforms have had any long-term impacts

on marriage or fertility behavior. Similarly, we are just at the beginning of observing the

impact of actually imposing time limits on larger numbers of welfare recipients. Most

important, perhaps, is the question of how much the remarkable U.S. economy in the late

1990s was fueling the declines in caseloads, and increases in work and income among

low-wage single mothers. Only as we experience economic cycles will we be able to

effectively separate the economic effects from the policy effects of welfare reform.

Tracking the changes in a less-robust economy will be important, as will investigating
                                                                                              84


whether certain states have packages of programs that make their low-income citizens

more or less vulnerable in an economic downturn.

       Second, the well-being effects of these policy changes should be better

understood. We need to know more about families’ disposable income changes after

leaving public assistance; about their long-term opportunities for wage and income

growth as their labor market experience grows; and how families whose access to public

assistance has become much more limited cope with the combined demands of work,

parenting, and economic survival. For instance, there is a growing interest in how such

things as chronic child health problems (such as asthma) or parental mental health

(particularly problems of depression) might interact negatively with efforts to become

economically self-sufficient.

       Third, there is a need to develop adequate research experience in methodologies

that these new research questions require. This means a better understanding of how to

effectively utilize administrative data sources; a better way to identify and code specific

policy components within welfare reform; a better way to interpret and generalize

program impacts from an increasingly diverse set of state programs; and more credible

ways to identify policy effects and analyze their impacts on long-term behavioral

changes.
                                                                                     85


                                        References

Acs, Gregory. 1996. “The Impact of Welfare on Young Mothers Subsequent
Childbearing Decisions.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol 31(4): 898-915.

Acs, Gregory, Norma B. Coe, Keith Watson, and Robert I. Lerman. 1998. Does Work
Pay? An Analysis of the Work Incentives under TANF. Occasional Paper Number 9,
Assessing the New Federalism. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute. July.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Phillip B. Levine. 2000. “Child Care and Mothers’
Employment Decisions.” In Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, David Card and
Rebecca M. Blank, eds. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Argys, Laura M., Susan L. Averett, and Daniel I. Rees. 2000. “Welfare Generosity,
Pregnancies, and Abortions Among Unmarried AFDC Recipients.” Journal of
Population Economics. Vol 13: 569-94.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Mark W. Plant. 1990. “Nonparametric Estimates of the Labor-
Supply Effects of Negative Income Tax Programs.” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol
8(1, part 2): S396-S415.

Bachrach, Christine A. 1998. “The Changing Circumstances of Marriage and Fertility in
the United States.” In Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior, Robert A.
Moffitt, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Research Council.

Bartik, Timothy J. 2000. “Displacement and Wage Effects of Welfare Reform” in
Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, David Card and Rebecca M. Blank, eds. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Bartik, Timothy J. 2001. Jobs for the Poor: Can Labor Demand Policies Help? New
York: Russell Sage.

Bartik, Timothy J., and Randall W. Eberts. 1999. “Examining the Effect of Industry
Trends and Structure on Welfare Caseloads,” in Economic Conditions and Welfare
Reform, Sheldon H. Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.

Bavier, Richard. 2002. “The Impact of Welfare Reform on Families in Data from the
Survey of Income and Program Participation.” Unpublished manuscript. March.

Bell, Stephen H. 2001. “Why Are Welfare Caseloads Falling?” Assessing the New
Federalism, Discussion Paper 01-02. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute. March.

Bennett, Neil G., Hsien-Hen Lu, and Younghwan Song. 2001. “The Influence of Welfare
Reform on the Economic Well-being of Children, 1987-2000.” Unpublished manuscript.
December.
                                                                                       86




Bernstein, Jared. 1997. “Welfare Reform and the Low-Wage Labor Market:
Employment, Wages, and Wage Policies.” Technical paper 226. Washington, D.C.:
Economic Policy Institute.

Bernstein, Jared and John Schmitt. 1998. “Making Work Pay: The Impact of the 1996-97
Minimum Wage Increase.” Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute.

Black, Dan A., Terra G. McKinnish, and Seth G. Sanders. Forthcoming. “Does the
Availability of High-Wage Jobs for Low Skilled Men Affect Welfare Expenditures?
Evidence from Shocks to the Coal and Steel Industries.” Journal of Public Economics.

Blank, Rebecca M. 1997a. It Takes A Nation: A New Agenda for Fighting Poverty.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Blank, Rebecca M. 1997b. “Policy Watch: The 1996 Welfare Reform.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives. Vol 11(1):169-88. Winter.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2000. “Fighting Poverty: Lessons from Recent U.S. History.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol 14(2): 3-19.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2001a. “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?
Journal of Human Resources, Vol 36(1): 85-118. Winter.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2001b. “Declining Caseloads/Increased Work: What Can We
Conclude About the Effects of Welfare Reform?” Economic Policy Review, Vol 7(2):
25-36. September.

Blank, Rebecca M., David Card and Philip K. Robins. 2000. “Financial Incentives for
Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families.” In Finding Jobs: Work and
Welfare Reform, Rebecca M. Blank and David Card, eds. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.

Blank, Rebecca M. and David T. Ellwood. 2002. “The Clinton Legacy for America’s
Poor.” In American Economic Policy in the 1990s, Jeffrey A. Frankel and Peter R.
Orszag, eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Blank, Rebecca M. and Patricia Ruggles. 1996. “When Do Women Use AFDC and Food
Stamps? The Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation.” Journal of Human Resources.
Vol 31(1): 57-89. Winter.

Blank, Rebecca M. and Lucie Schmidt. 2001. “Work, Wages, and Welfare.” In The
New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
                                                                                     87


Blau, David M. Forthcoming. “Child Care Subsidy Programs.” In Means Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, Robert Moffitt, ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bloom, Dan. 1999. Welfare Time Limits: An Interim Report Card. New York:
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. April.

Bloom, Dan and Charles Michalopoulos. 2001. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect
Employment and Income: A Synthesis of Research. New York: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation.

Bloom, Dan, Charles Michalopoulos, Johanna Walter, and Patricia Auspos. 1998.
Implementation and Early Impacts of Vermont’s Welfare Restructuring Project. New
York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. October.

Bloom, Dan, James J. Kemple, Pamela Morris, Susan Scrivener, Nandita Verma, and
Richard Hendra. 2000a. The Family Transition Program: Final Report on Florida’s
Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation. December.

Bloom, Dan, Laura Melton, Charles Michalopoulos, Susan Scrivener, and Johanna
Walter. 2000b. Implementation and Early Impacts of Connecticut’s Welfare Reform
Initiatives. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Bishop, John H. 1998. “Is Welfare Reform Succeeding?” Working Paper No. 98,
Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies, Cornell University. August.

Borjas, George J. 2001a. “Welfare Reform and Immigration.” In The New World of
Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.

Borjas, George J. 2001b. “Food Insecurity and Public Assistance: Evidence from the
Immigrant Provisions in Welfare.” Unpublished manuscript. February.

Bos, Johannes M., Aletha C. Huston, Robert C. Granger, Greg J. Duncan, Thomas W.
Brock, and Vonnie C. McLoyd. 1999. Two-Year Results of a Program to Reduce
Poverty and Reform Welfare. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation. August.

Brauner, Sarah and Pamela Loprest. 1999. “Where Are They Now? What States’
Studies of People Who Left Welfare Tell Us.” Series A, No A-32, Assessing the New
Federalism Project. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Burtless, Gary. 1986. “The Work Response to a Guaranteed Income: A Survey of
Experimental Evidence.” In Lessons from the Income Maintenance Experiments, Alicia
H. Munnell, ed. Boston, MA: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
                                                                                     88




Camasso, Michael J. Carol Harvey, Radha Jagannathan, and Mark Killingsworth. 1998a.
“A Final Report on the Impact of New Jersey’s Family Development Program: Results
from a Pre-Post Analysis of AFDC Case Heads from 1990-1996.” New Jersey
Department of Family Services, Trenton.

Camasso, Michael J. Carol Harvey, Radha Jagannathan, and Mark Killingsworth. 1998b.
“A Final Report on the Impact of New Jersey’s Family Development Program:
Experimental-Control Group Analysis.” New Jersey Department of Family Services,
Trenton.

Cancian, Maria, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan, Daniel Meyer, and Barbara Wolfe.
1999. “Work, Earnings and Well-Being After Welfare” in Economic Conditions and
Welfare Reform, Sheldon H. Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research.

Cancian, Maria, Robert Haveman, Daniel R. Meyer, and Barbara Wolfe. 2002. Before
and After TANF: The Economic Well-Being of Women Leaving Welfare. IRP Discussion
Paper No. 1244-02. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Institute for Research on
Poverty. February.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics
of the Minimum Wage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Card, David, Charles Michalopoulos, and Philip K. Robins. 2001. “The Limits to Wage
Growth: Measuring the Growth Rate of Wages for Recent Welfare Leavers.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8444. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
August.

Center for Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP). 2001. Poverty and Income Trends:
1999. Washington, D.C.: CBPP.

Chernick, Howard. 1998. “Fiscal Effects of Block Grants for the Needy: An
Interpretation of the Evidence.” International Tax and Public Finance. Vol 5(2):205-33.
May.

Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New
Approach. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1997. “Technical Report: Explaining the Decline in
Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996.” Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President.
April.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1999. “Economic Expansion, Welfare Reform, and the
Decline in Welfare Caseloads: An Update. Technical Report.” Washington, D.C.:
Executive Office of the President. September.
                                                                                        89




Currie, Janet, and Jeffrey Grogger. 2001. “Explaining the Recent Declines in Food
Stamp Program Participation.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs. Vol 2:
203-244.

Danziger, Sandra, Mary Corcoran, Sheldon Danziger, Coleen Heflin, Ariel Kalil, Judith
Levin, Daniel Rosen, Kristin Seefeldt, Kristine Siefert, and Richard Tolman. 2000.
“Barriers to the Employment of Welfare Recipients.” In Prosperity for All? The
Economic Boom and African Americans,” R. Cherry and W. M. Rodgers, eds. New
York: Russell Sage.

Danziger, Sheldon, Colleen M. Heflin, Mary E. Corcoran, and Elizabeth Oltmans, 2001.
“Does It Pay to Move from Welfare to Work?” Unpublished manuscript (available at
www.ssw.umich.edu/poverty/pubs.html). August.

DeMarco, Donna and Gregory Mills. 2000. The New York State Child Assistance
Program: Five-Year Impacts, Costs and Benefits. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
February.

Devere, Christine. 2001. “Welfare Reform Research: What Do We Know About Those
Who Leave Welfare?” CRS Report for Congress. Washington, D.C.: Congressional
Research Service. March.

Duncan, Greg J. and P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale. 2001a. “Welfare Reform and Child
Well-being.” In The New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Duncan, Greg J. and P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale. 2001b. For Better and For Worse:
Welfare Reform and the Well-Being of Children and Families. New York: Russell Sage.

Dupree, Allen and Wendell Primus. 2001. “Declining Share of Children Living with
Single Mothers in the Late 1990s.” Washington, D.C.: Center for Budget and Policy
Priorities. June.

Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein. 1997. Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive
Welfare and Low-Wage Work. New York: Russell Sage.

Eissa, Nada and Hilary W. Hoynes. 1998. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor
Supply of Married Couples.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
6856. Cambridge, MA: NBER. December.

Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned
Income Tax Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 605-37.
                                                                                     90


Ellwood, David T. 2000. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social
Policy Reforms on Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements.” National Tax Journal.
Vol 53(4, part 2):1063-1105. December.

Fairlee, Robert W. and Rebecca A. London. 1997. “The Effect of Incremental Benefit
Levels on Births to AFDC Recipients.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.
Vol 16:4, 575-97. Fall.

Fein, David J. 1999. Will Welfare Reform Influence Marriage and Fertility? Early
Evidence from the ABC Demonstration. Bethesda, MD: Abt Associates, Inc.

Fein, David J., Erik Beecroft, William Hamilton, Wang S. Lee, Pamela A. Holcomb,
Terri S. Thompson, and Caroline E. Ratcliffe. 1998. The Indiana Welfare Reform
Evaluation: Program Implementation and Economic Impacts After Two Years. Report
prepared for the Division of Family and Children, Family and Social Services
Administration, State of Indiana. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates, Inc. November

Feist, Holger and Ronnie Schöb. 1998. “Workfare in Germany and the Problem of
Vertical Fiscal Externalities.” Finanz Archiv. 55: 461-80

Figlio, David N., Craig Gundersen, and James P. Ziliak. 2000. “The Effects of the
Macroeconomy and Welfare Reform on Food Stamp Caseloads.” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics Vol 82(3): 635-41. August.

Figlio, David N. and James P. Ziliak. 1999. “Welfare Reform, the Business Cycle, and
the Decline in AFDC Caseloads,” in Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform, Sheldon
H. Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Fitzgerald, John M. and David C. Ribar. 2001. “The Impact of Welfare Waivers on
Female Headship Decisions.” Joint Center for Poverty Research Working Paper No. 247.
Northwestern University. December.

Fraker, Thomas M. and Jonathan E. Jacobson. 2000. Iowa’s Family Investment
Program: Impacts During the First 3-1/2 Years of Welfare Reform. Washington, D.C.:
Mathematica Policy Research. May.

Freedman, Stephen, Daniel Friedlander, Gayle Hamilton, JoAnn Rock, Marisa Mitchell,
Jodi Nudelman, Amanda Schweder, and Laura Storto. 2000. National Evaluation of
Welfare-to-Work Strategies. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation.

Freeman, Richard B. and William M Rodgers III. 2000. “Area Economic Conditions
and the Labor Market Outcomes of Young Men in the 1990s Expansion.” In Prosperity
for All? The Economic Boom and African Americans,” R. Cherry and W. M. Rodgers,
eds. New York: Russell Sage.
                                                                                     91


Friedlander, Daniel and Gary Burtless. 1995. Five Years After: The Long-Term Effects
of Welfare-to-Work Programs. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Gabe, Thomas. 2001. Trends in Welfare, Work, and Economic Well-Being of
Female-Headed Families with Children. CRS Report for Congress. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Research Service. January.

Gais, Thomas L., Richard P. Nathan, Irene Lurie, and Thomas Kaplan. 2001.
“Implementation of the Personal Responsibility Act of 1996.” In The New World of
Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.

Gennetian, Lisa A. and Cynthia Miller. 2000. Reforming Welfare and Rewarding Work:
Final Report on the Minnesota Family Investment Program, Volume 2: Effects on
Children. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. September.

Gladden, Tricia and Christopher Taber. 2000. “Wage Progression Among Less Skilled
Workers,” in Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, David Card and Rebecca M.
Blank, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Greenstein, Robert and Jocelyn Guyer. 2001. “Medicaid and Food Stamps. In The New
World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.

Grogger, Jeffrey. 2000. “Time Limits and Welfare Use.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 7709. Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Grogger, Jeffrey. 2002. “The Behavioral Effects of Welfare Time Limits.” American
Economic Review. Vol 92(2): Forthcoming. May.

Grogger, Jeffrey. Forthcoming. “The Effect of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy
Changes on Welfare Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families.” Review
of Economics and Statistics.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Stephen G. Bronars. 2001. “The Effect of Welfare Payments on
the Marriage and Fertility Behavior of Unwed Mothers: Results from a Twins
Experiment.” Journal of Political Economy. Vol 109(3): 529-545.

Grogger, Jeffrey, Lynn Karoly, and Jacob Klerman. 2002. Consequences of Welfare
Reform: A Research Synthesis. Document DRU-2676-DHHS, Prepared by RAND for
the Agency for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Charles Michalopoulos. 1999. “Welfare Dynamics Under Time
Limits.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper W7353. Cambridge,
MA: NBER.
                                                                                         92




Gruber, Jonathan. Forthcoming. “Medicaid.” In Means Tested Transfer Programs in
the United States, Robert Moffitt, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gueron, Judith and Edward Pauly. 1991. From Welfare to Work. New York: Russell
Sage.

Gunderson, Craig and James P. Ziliak. 2001. “Poverty and Macroeconomic
Performance: A View from the States in the Welfare Reform Era.” Unpublished
manuscript. August.

Hamilton, Gayle, with Stephen Freedman and Sharon McGroder. 2000. Do Mandatory
Welfare-to-Work Programs Affect the Well-Being of Children? A Synthesis of Child
Research Conducted as Part of the National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. DHHS, Administration for Children and Families and Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation; U.S. Department of Education,
Office of the Under Secretary and Office of Vocational and Adult Education.

Hamilton, Gayle, Stephen Freedman, Lisa Gennetian, Charles Michalopoulos, Johanna
Walter, Diana Adams-Ciardullo, Anna Gassman-Pines, Sharon McGroder, Martha
Zaslow, Jennifer Brooks, and Surjeet Ahluwalia. 2001. How Effective Are Different
Welfare-to-Work Approaches? Five-Year Adult and Child Impacts for Eleven Programs.
National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies. Washington, D.C.: U.S. DHHS,
Administration for Children and Families and Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation; U.S. Department of Education, Office of the Deputy Secretary
and Office of Vocational and Adult Education. December.

Haider, Steven J., Alison Jacknowitz, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2002. “Welfare Work
Requirements and Individual Well-Being: Evidence from the Effects on Breastfeeding.”
Unpublished manuscript. January.

Haider, Steven, Robert F. Schoeni, Yuhua Bao, and Caroline Danielson. 2001.
“Immigrants, Welfare Reform, and the Economy in the 1990s.” Unpublished manuscript.
September.

Harknett, Kristen and Lisa A. Gennetian. 2001. How an Earnings Supplement Can
Affect the Marital Behaviour of Welfare Recipients: Evidence from the Self-Sufficiency
Project. Ottawa, Canada: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.

Haskins, Ron. 2001. “The Second Most Important Issue: Effects of Welfare Reform on
Family Income and Poverty.” In The New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron
Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Hofferth, Sandra L., Stephen Stanhope, and Kathleen Mullan Harris. 2001. “Exiting
Welfare in the 1990s: Did Public Policy Influence Recipient’s Behavior?” Unpublished
manuscript. June.
                                                                                        93




Hofferth, Sandra L., Stephen Stanhope, and Kathleen Mullan Harris. 2002. “Remaining
Off Welfare in the 1990s: The Influence of Public Policy and Economic Conditions.”
Unpublished manuscript. February.

Holzer Harry J. and Paul Offner. 2001. “Trends in Employment Outcomes of Young
Black Men, 1979-2000.” Unpublished manuscript. November.

Holzer, Harry J. and Michael A. Stoll. 2001. Employers and Welfare Recipients: The
Effects of Welfare Reform in the Workplace. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of
California.

Holzer, Harry J., Michael A. Stoll, and Douglas Wissoker. 2001. “Job Performance and
Retention Among Welfare Recipients.” Unpublished manuscript. August.

Horvath-Rose, Ann and H. Elizabeth Peters. 2001. “Welfare Waivers and Non-Marital
Childbearing.” In For Better and For Worse: Welfare Reform and the Well-Being of
Children and Families, Greg J. Duncan and P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, eds. New York:
Russell Sage.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido Imbens, and Jacob Klerman. 2000. “The Long-Term Gains
from GAIN: A Re-Analysis of the Impacts of the California GAIN Program.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8007. Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles H. Mullin and John Karl Scholz. 2001. “The Earned Income
Tax Credit and Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare.” Unpublished
manuscript. March.

Hoynes, Hilary W. 2000. “The Employment, Earnings and Income of Less Skilled
Workers over the Business Cycle” In Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, Rebecca
M. Blank and David Card, eds. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hu, Wei-Yin. 2000. “Marriage and Economic Incentives: Evidence from a Welfare
Experiment.” Unpublished manuscript, University of California Los Angeles.

Hurst, Erik, and James P. Ziliak. 2001. “Welfare Reform and Household Saving.”
Unpublished manuscript. July.

Jencks, Christopher, Joseph Swingle, and Scott Winship. 2001. “Did Welfare Reform
Alter Single Mothers’ Income, Living Arrangements or Ability to Feed Their Families?”
Unpublished manuscript. October.

Kaestner, Robert and Neeraj Kaushal. 2001. “Immigrant and Native Responses to
Welfare Reform.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8541.
Cambridge, MA: NBER. October.
                                                                                     94


Kaushal, Neeraj, and Robert Kaestner. 2001. “From Welfare to Work: Has Welfare
Reform Worked?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. Vol 20(4): 699-719.

Kisker, Ellen E. Anu Rangarajan, and Kimberly Boller. 1998. “Moving Into Adulthood:
Were the Impacts of Mandatory Programs for Welfare-Dependent Parents Sustained
After the Programs Ended?” Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.

Klerman, Jacob and Steven Haider. 2001. “A Stock-Flow Analysis of the Welfare
Caseload: Insights from California Economic Conditions.” Unpublished manuscript.
Santa Monica, CA: RAND. January.

Kornfeld, Robert, Laura Peck, Diane Porcari, John Staubinger, Zacharay Johnson, and
Clemintina Cabral. 1999. Evaluation of the Arizona EMPOWER Welfare Reform
Demonstration: Impact Study Interim Report. Report prepared for the Arizona Dept. of
Economic Security. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.

Ku, Leighton, Frank Ullman and Ruth Almeida. 1999. “What Counts? Determining
Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility for Children.” Discussion Paper 99-05, Assessing the
New Federalism. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

Lane, Julia and David Stevens. 2001. “Welfare-to-Work Outcomes: The Role of the
Employer.” Southern Economic Journal Vol 67(4): 1010-21.

Lemka, Robert J., Robert Witt, and Ann Dryden Witte. 2001. “Child Care and the
Welfare to Work Transition.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Wellesley
College.

Levine, Philip B. and Diana M. Whitmore. 1998. “The Impact of Welfare Reform on the
AFDC Caseload,” National Tax Association Proceedings – 1997. Washington, D.C.:
National Tax Association. Pp.24-33.

Lofstrom, Magnus and Frank D. Bean. 2001. “Labor Market Conditions and Post-
Reform Declines in Welfare Receipt Among Immigrants.” IZA Discussion Paper No.
347. Bonn, Germany: IZA (Forschungsinstitut fur Zukunft der Arbeit). August.

Loprest, Pamela. 2001. How Are Families that Left Welfare Doing? A Comparison of
Early and Recent Welfare Leavers. Series B, No B-36, Assessing the New Federalism
Project. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute. April.

Loprest, Pamela, Stefanie Schmidt, and Ann Dryden Witte. 2000. “Welfare Reform
under PRWORA: Aid to Children with Working Families?” Tax Policy and the
Economy. Vol 14:157-203.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., David C. Mancuso, and Margaret O’Brien-Strain. 2002. Does
California’s Welfare Policy Explain the Slower Decline of Its Caseload? San Francisco:
Public Policy Institute of California.
                                                                                       95




Maloy, Kathleen, LaDonna Pavetti, Julie Darnell and Peter Shin. 1999. Diversion as a
Work-Oriented Welfare Reform Strategy and Its Effect on Access to Medicaid.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Martinson, Karin. 2000. The National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies
Evaluation: The Experience of Welfare Recipients Who Find Jobs. Written by MDRC
for U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Washington, D.C.: DHHS.
December.

Maynard, Rebecca, Elisabeth Boehnen, Tom Corbett, and Gary Sandefur, with Jane
Mosley. 1998. “Changing Family Formation Behavior Through Welfare Reform.” In
Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior, Robert A. Moffitt, ed. Washington,
D.C.: National Research Council.

Mead, Lawrence M. 2000. “Caseload Change: An Exploratory Study.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management. Vol 19(3): 465-472. Summer.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, The Earned Income Tax
Credit, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol
116(3): 1063-1114. August.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2001. “The Effects of Welfare and Tax
Reform: The Material Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8298. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
May.

Meyers, Marcia K., Bonnie Glaser, and Karin MacDonald. 1998. “On the Front Lines of
Welfare Delivery: Are Workers Implementing Policy Reforms?” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management. Vol 17(1):1-22.

Michalopoulos, Charles and Gordon Berlin. 2001. “Financial Work Incentives for the
Working Poor.” In The New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins,
eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Michalopoulos, Charles, David Card, Lisa A. Gennetian, Kristen Harknett, and Philip K.
Robins. 2000. The Self-Sufficiency Project at 36 Months: Effects of a Financial Work
Incentive on Employment and Income. Ottawa, Canada: Social Research and
Demonstration Corporation. June.

Michalopoulos, Charles and Christine Schwartz (with Diana Adams-Ciardullo). 2001.
What Works Best for Whom: Impacts of 20 Welfare-to-Work Programs by Subgroup.
National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies. Washington, D.C.: U.S.DHHS and
U.S. Department of Education. January.
                                                                                       96


Miller, Cynthia, Virginia Knox, Lisa A. Gennetian, Martey Dodoo, Jo Anna Hunter, and
Cindy Redcross. 2000. Reforming Welfare and Rewarding Work: Final Report on the
Minnesota Family Investment Program. Vol 1: Effects on Adults. New York: MDRC.
September.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1987. “Historical Growth in Participation in Aid to Families with
Dependent Children: Was There a Structural Shift?” Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics. Vol 9(3):347-63.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.”
Journal of Economic Literature. Vol 30(1):1-61.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1998a. “Introduction.” In Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive
Behavior, Robert A. Moffitt, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Research Council.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1998b. “The Effects of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility.” In
Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior, Robert A. Moffitt, ed. Washington,
D.C.: National Research Council.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1999a. “The Effects of Pre-PRWORA Waivers on Welfare Caseloads
and Female Earnings, Income, and Labor Force Behavior,” in Economic Conditions and
Welfare Reform, Sheldon H. Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1999b. “Explaining Welfare Reform: Public Choice and the Labor
Market.” International Tax and Public Finance. Vol 6:289-315.

Moffitt, Robert A. Forthcoming. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program.” In Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Robert Moffitt, ed.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Moffitt, Robert A. and Jennifer Roff. 2000. “The Diversity of Welfare Leavers, Welfare,
Children and Families: A Three City Study.” Johns Hopkins University Policy Brief 00-
02.

Morris, Pamela, Aletha Huston, Greg Duncan, Danielle Crosby, and Hans Bos. 2001.
How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Children: A Synthesis of Research. New York:
MDRC.

Mueser, Peter R., Julie L. Hotchkiss, Christopher T. King, Phillip S. Rokicki, and David
W. Stevens. 2000. “The Welfare Caseload, Economic Growth and Welfare-to-Work
Policies: An Analysis of Five Urban Areas.” Unpublished manuscript. July.

Murray, Charles. 1994. “Does Welfare Bring More Babies.” The Public Interest. Vol
115: 17-30. Spring.
                                                                                      97


Murray, Charles. 2001. “Family Formation Issues and Welfare Reform.” In The New
World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.

Neumark, David. 2001. “The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from
a Pre-Specified Research Design.” Industrial Relations. Vol 40(1): 121-144. January.

Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. “Targeting Transfers through
Restrictions on Recipients.” American Economic Review, 72(2):372-77. May.

Ohls, James C. and Harold Beebout. 1993. The Food Stamp Program: Design
Tradeoffs, Policy and Impacts. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.

O’Neill, June E. and M. Anne Hill. 2001. “Gaining Ground? Measuring the Impact of
Welfare Reform on Welfare and Work.” Civic Report No. 17, Center for Civic
Innovation. New York: Manhattan Institute. July.

Pavetti, LaDonna and Dan Bloom. 2001. “Sanctions and Time Limits: State Policies,
Their Implementation and Outcomes for Families.” In The New World of Welfare,
Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Press.

Paxson, Christina, and Jane Waldfogel. Forthcoming. “Work, Welfare, and Child
Maltreatment.” Journal of Labor Economics.

Primus, Wendell, Lynette Rawlings, Kathy Larin, and Kathryn Porter. 1999. The Initial
Impacts of Welfare Reform on the Incomes of Single-Mother Families. Washington,
D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

Quets, Gail, Philip K. Robins, Elsie C. Pan, Charles Michalopoulos, and David Card.
1999. Does SSP Plus Increase Employment? Ottawa, Canada: Social Research and
Demonstration Corporation. May.

Quint, Janet C., Johannes M. Bos and Denise F. Polit. 1997. New Chance: Final Report
on a Comprehensive Program for Young Mothers in Poverty and Their Children. New
York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. October.

Riccio, James, Daniel Friedlander and Stephen Freedman. 1994. GAIN: Benefits, Costs,
and Three-Year Impacts of a Welfare-to-Work Program. New York: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation. September.

Schiller, Bradley R. 1999. “State Welfare-Reform Impacts: Content and Enforcement
Effects.” Contemporary Economic Policy. Vol 17(2):210-22. April.

Schirm, Allen L. 2001. “Reaching Those in Need: State Food Stamp Participation Rates
in 1998.” Prepared by Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. for the Food and Nutrition
Service. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture. January.
                                                                                     98




Schoeni, Robert F. and Rebecca M. Blank. 2000. “What Has Welfare Reform
Accomplished? Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and
Family Structure.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7627.
Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Solow, Robert M. 1998. Work and Welfare. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Strawn, Julie, Mark Greenberg, and Steve Savner. 2001. “From Welfare-to-Work to
Workforce Development.” In The New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron
Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Swann, Christopher A. 2002. “Welfare Reform When Recipients are Forward Looking.”
Unpublished manuscript, SUNY-Stony Brook. March.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2000. The Decline in Food Stamp
Participation: A Report to Congress. Washington, D.C. July.

U.S. Department of Commerce. 1999. Experimental Poverty Measures: 1990-97. U.S.
Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-205. Washington, D.C. June.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). 2000. Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) Program: Third Annual Report to Congress. Washington,
D.C.: DHHS.

United States General Accounting Office (GAO). 2000. Welfare Reform: State
Sanction Policies and Number of Families Affected. Report number GAO/HEHS-00-44.
Washington, D.C.: GAO.

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. 1996. 1996 Green
Book: Background materials and data on programs within the jurisdiction of the
Committee on Ways and Means. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. 1998. 1998 Green
Book: Background material and data on programs within the jurisdiction of the
Committee on Ways and Means. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. 2000. 2000 Green
Book: Background material and data on programs within the jurisdiction of the
Committee on Ways and Means. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Ventry, Dennis J. 2000. “The Collision of Tax and Welfare Politics: The Political
History of the Earned Income Tax Credit, 1969-99.” National Tax Journal. Vol 53(4,
part 2):983-1026.
                                                                                        99


Wallace, Geoffrey and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. “What Goes Up Must Come Down?
Explaining Recent Changes in Public Assistance Caseloads,” in Economic Conditions
and Welfare Reform, Sheldon H. Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research.

Weaver, R. Kent. 2000. Ending Welfare As We Know It. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.

Wilde, Parke E., Sandra Hofferth, Stephen Stanhope, Mary Noonan and Nancy Collins.
2000. “Pre-1997 Trends in Welfare and Food Assistance in a National Sample of
Families.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 82:642-8. August

Zedlewski, Sheila. R. (with Amelia Gruber). 2001. “Former Welfare Families Continue
to Leave the Food Stamp Program.” Assessing the New Federalism Discussion Paper
No. 01-05. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

Zedlewski, Sheila R. and Pamela Loprest. 2001. “Will TANF Work for the Most
Disadvantaged Families?” In The New World of Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron
Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Zedlewski, Sheila R., Linda Giannarelli, Joyce Morton, and Laura Wheaton. 2002.
“Extreme Poverty Rising, Existing Government Programs Could Do More.” Assessing
the New Federalism Project, Series B, No. B-45. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
April.

Ziliak, James P. 2002. “Social Policy and the Macroeconomy: What Drives Welfare
Caseloads?” Focus (Newsletter of the Institute for Research on Poverty, University of
Wisconsin-Madison). Vol 22(1): 29-34.

Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly. 2000.
“Accounting for the Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or the Economy?”
Journal of Human Resources. Vol 35(3):570-86. Summer.
                                                                                      Figure 1


                                                   Earned Income Tax Credit Subsidy in 2000

                                                              2+ child family


                 $3,888

                                      slope= .40                                                 slope= -.2106



                                                              1 child family
Subsidy Amount




                                slope= .34

                 $2,353
                                                                                          slope= -.1598




                      0                            $6,920     $9,720      $12,690                                           $27,413       $31,152
                                                                                Earnings Level

                          Source for EITC Parameters: “The EITC and the Taxation of Lower-Income Working Families.” Joint Economic Committee Staff Report, March
                          2000. (http://www.seante.gov/~jec)
                                                         Figure 2
                                                         Figure 2

             Income Constraint Resulting From A Typical Welfare Program




                                                                                 slope=w   G: Maximum Benefit at
Income




                                                                                              0 Earnings
                             slope=w-t                   B                                 w: Wage Rate
                                                                                           t: Benefit Reduction
                                                                                              Rate
                                                          Break-Even Point
     G

               Benefits
                                                                     Earnings



         0
                                              Hours of Work
             Note: Assumes no income other than welfare benefits and earnings.
                                                                                             Figure 3

                                                                         Total AFDC/TANF Caseloads

                                 6,000,000
Number of AFDC/TANF Households




                                 5,000,000                                              AFDC/TANF
                                                                                        Households

                                 4,000,000



                                 3,000,000



                                 2,000,000                                                                   1996 Welfare Reform



                                 1,000,000


                                        0
                                        70

                                                 72

                                                        74

                                                                76

                                                                       78

                                                                               80

                                                                                      82

                                                                                              84

                                                                                                        86

                                                                                                               88

                                                                                                                     90

                                                                                                                            92

                                                                                                                                   94


                                                                                                                                            6

                                                                                                                                                  98

                                                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                                            9
                                       19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                              19

                                                                     19

                                                                             19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                    Year
                                             Source: Agency for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services (http://acf.dhhs.gov)
                                                                                              Figure 4


                                     Labor Force Participation Rates for Women by Marital Status and Children
                                                                   (Ages 20-65)
                                 0.800

                                 0.780

                                 0.760
Labor Force Participation Rate




                                                  Single w/ no kids
                                 0.740

                                 0.720
                                          Single w/ kids under 18
                                 0.700

                                 0.680

                                 0.660
                                         Married w/ kids under 18
                                 0.640

                                 0.620                Married w/ no kids

                                 0.600
                                        89


                                                 90


                                                            91


                                                                         92


                                                                                 93


                                                                                         94


                                                                                                  95


                                                                                                            96


                                                                                                                    97


                                                                                                                            98


                                                                                                                                    99


                                                                                                                                            00
                                     19


                                              19


                                                         19


                                                                      19


                                                                              19


                                                                                      19


                                                                                               19


                                                                                                         19


                                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                                         19


                                                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                               Year
                                         Source: Tabulations of March Current Population Survey Data
                                                                                               Figure 5



                                                                  Key Demographic Trends, 1970-1999
                       50                                                                                                                                 12


                       45

                                                                                                                                                          10
                       40




                                                                                                                                                               Marriage and Divorce Rate per 1,000
                       35
                                         Marriage Rate                                                                                                    8
Birth Rate per 1,000




                       30

                                                                                            Birth Rate for All Unmarried
                       25                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                            Women Ages 15-44

                       20

                                                                                                                                                          4
                       15


                       10                                     Divorce Rate
                                                                                                                                                          2

                        5


                        0                                                                                                                                 0
                            0


                                    2


                                             4


                                                     6


                                                              8


                                                                       0


                                                                               2


                                                                                        4


                                                                                                 6


                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                                              6


                                                                                                                                                     8
                          7


                                    7


                                             7


                                                      7


                                                              7


                                                                       8


                                                                                8


                                                                                        8


                                                                                                 8


                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                                           9


                                                                                                                                    9


                                                                                                                                               9


                                                                                                                                                      9
                       19


                                 19


                                          19


                                                   19


                                                           19


                                                                    19


                                                                             19


                                                                                     19


                                                                                              19


                                                                                                       19


                                                                                                                19


                                                                                                                        19


                                                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                                                            19


                                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                            Year

                              Source: National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics Reports. (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs)
                                          Table 1


                        Maximum Benefit Levels Across States
                                    (2000 Dollars)



Selected Points In Benefit                                             Percent Change
Distribution                      1990              1995        2000       1995-2000

20th Percentile State         $358 (NC)     $319 (IA)      $288 (IN)          -19.60%

Median State                  $480 (NE)     $428 (IL)      $379 (DC)          -21.00%

80th Percentile State       $680 (MI) $607 (MD) $546 (WA)                       -19.70%
Source: State Policy Documentation Policy (www.spdp.org) and The Urban Institute
(www.urban.org/).
Note: Maximum benefit levels for family of three. 51 states (including D.C.) used in
analysis.
                                        Table 2

                        Cumulative Cash Welfare Available
                       During First 24 Months of Work for a
                        Welfare Recipient with 2 Children

                       Jan 1996 AFDC Program ($2000)   2000 TANF Program
                       Hourly Wage = $6/hour           Hourly Wage = $6/hour
                       30 hr            40 hr          30 hr           40 hr
State                  workweek         workweek       workweek        workweek

Alabama                $0              $0              $492           $492
Alaska                 $11887          $6175           $13478         $9794
Arizona                $0              $0              $0             $0
Arkansas               $0              $0              $0             $0
California             $4198           $788            $8724          $5700
Colorado               $131            $0              $3             $0
Connecticut            $7862           $2150           $13032         $13032
Delaware               $0              $0              $3096          $560
District of Columbia   $126            $0              $1296          $0
Florida                $0              $0              $672           $0

Georgia                $144            $0              $16            $0
Hawaii                 $3733           $710            $7882          $4785
Idaho                  $0              $0              $0             $0
Illinois               $0              $0              $3108          $1112
Indiana                $0              $0              $0             $0
Iowa                   $152            $0              $3024          $605
Kansas                 $165            $0              $168           $0
Kentucky               $582            $0              $757           $524
Louisiana              $0              $0              $1140          $1140
Maine                  $698            $26             $5568          $2544

Maryland               $0              $0              $0             $0
Massachusetts          $750            $78             $6000          $2976
Michigan               $294            $0              $456           $0
Minnesota              $608            $0              $7776          $4026
Mississippi            $0              $0              $1020          $1020
Missouri               $0              $0              $1614          $616
Montana                $647            $0              $1332          $0
Nebraska               $0              $0              $0             $0
Nevada                 $0              $0              $1044          $1044
New Hampshire          $685            $13             $5400          $2376
                                     Table 2-continued


                         Jan 1996 AFDC Program ($2000)       2000 TANF Program
                         Hourly Wage = $6/hour               Hourly Wage = $6/hour
                         30 hr            40 hr              30 hr           40 hr
State                    workweek         workweek           workweek        workweek
New Jersey               $225             $0                 $1551           $424
New Mexico               $0               $0                 $3336           $312
New York                 $802             $130               $5294           $2028
North Carolina           $660             $0                 $816            $816
North Dakota             $174             $0                 $3399           $299
Ohio                     $0               $0                 $2952           $0
Oklahoma                 $0               $0                 $0              $0
Oregon                   $298             $0                 $0              $0
Pennsylvania             $131             $0                 $672            $0
Rhode Island             $703             $31                $6336           $3312

South Carolina           $0                $0                $261              $82
South Dakota             $501              $0                $0                $0
Tennessee                $827              $155              $1848             $0
Texas                    $0                $0                $536              $435
Utah                     $763              $91               $3024             $0
Vermont                  $2133             $444              $4128             $0
Virginia                 $0                $0                $6984             $5924
Washington               $668              $0                $4104             $1080
West Virginia            $0                $0                $0                $0
Wisconsin                $544              $0                $0                $0
Wyoming                  $892              $185              $0                $0

Median State             $152              $0                $1140             $299

    Source: Author's calculations from program parameters found in the State Policy
    Documentation Project (www.spdp.org) and U.S. House of Representatives (1996).
    Note: All numbers in 2000 dollars. Ignores any waivers that affected BRRs in 1995, and
    assumes all states are subject to the federally-mandated BRR.
                                       Table 3


                                U.S. Poverty Rates


Percent Poor                                     1979      1989      1992        2000
All Families                                     9.2%     10.3%     11.9%        8.6%

Families with Single Female Householder          30.4%    32.2%     35.4%      24.7%

Black Families, Single Female
Householder                                      49.4%    46.5%     50.2%      34.6%

Hispanic Families, Single Female
Householder                                        49.2%    47.5%      49.3%     34.2%
Source: The Census Bureau (http://www.census.gov/)
Note: 1979, 1989 and 2000 represent the end of extended periods of economic growth.
1992 is the end of the recession of the early 1990s.
                                          Table 4

           Impact of the Safety Net on Poverty Gaps per Person
            (All persons in families with children, 1999 dollars)

                                                    Year
                               1993             1995             1997             1999
Poverty Gap
Based on:
 Pretransfer Income        $2,737             $2,562           $2,562            $2,370
 Plus Social               $2,559             $2,394           $2,338            $2,185
   Insurancea
 Plus Means-               $1,488             $1,419           $1,529            $1,547
   tested Benefitsb
 Plus Federal              $1,447             $1,386           $1,514            $1,524
   Taxes
   (including
   EITC)
Percent Reduction in Poverty Gap due to:
 Social                      16.1                15.8             18.4             17.7
   Insurance
 Means-Tested                43.8                44.7             37.2             34.0
   Benefits
 Federal Taxes                1.1                   4.4            5.7              6.8

   a. Includes Social Security, disability, and worker’s compensation.
   b. Includes cash benefits, food stamps, housing subsidies and school lunch.

Source: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (2001).
                                              Table 5

          Average Income of Female-Headed Families by Quintile
                                      (1999 Dollars)

                                                                               % Change   % Change
Average Disposable Income                   1993     1995      1997     1999      93-95      97-99
Quintile 1                                 7,714 8,532 8,292           7,835       10.6        -5.5
Quintile 2                                12,929 14,438 14,403        15,494       11.7         7.6
Quintile 3                                16,216 18,971 18,850        19,984       17.0         6.0
Quintile 4                                22,568 24,698 25,130        27,204        9.4         8.3
Quintile 5                                42,718 47,057 50,801        59,858       10.2       17.8
Source: Tabulations by Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
                                                             Table 6

                                           Research on Welfare Reform Impacts
Part A: Econometric Research on Welfare Reform Impacts Using Data Prior to 1996 Welfare Reform

              Dependent                     Key Independent
Study         Variable(s)                     Variables                Results on Key Variables

Bartik &      Log(AFDC caseloads             Multiple economic         • Local labor demand information is important in
Eberts            per capita)                 variables (including        explaining caseload changes and including these
(1999)                                        unemploymt rates,           variables reduces the unemployment coefficient.
                Based on state                and local labor market    • 1% increase in employment growth leads to 4% decline
                administrative                demand information)         in caseloads, similar to the effect of a 1% decline in
                data, 1984-96                Dummy variables              unemployment.
                                              for state waivers         ▪ Gross job flows (high job turnover) is positively
Includes state and year fixed effects. Some estimates include lagged       correlated with higher caseloads.
dependent variable and first difference models.


Blank         Log(AFDC caseloads            Multiple economic          • Share of caseload change due to economic factors:
(2001a)             per capita)             variables (including         29% in 1990-94
                                            unemploymt & wage            59% in 1994-96
              Based on state                information)               • Share of caseload change due to waivers:
              administrative                Dummy variables for         -22% in 1990-94
              data, 1977-96                  state waivers               28% in 1994-96
                                                                       • 5% estimated change in AFDC caseloads due to
Also includes extensive controls for demographic, program and             1-point increase in unemployment.
political variables, along with state and year effects.
                                                   Table 6-continued


Council of     Log(AFDC caseloads               Unemploymt rates            • Share of caseload change due to economic factors:
Economic             per capita)                Dummy variables for           24% to 31% in 1989-93
Advisers                                          state waivers               31% to 45% in 1993-96
(1997)         Based on state                   (looks at overall           • Share of caseload change due to waivers:
               administrative                   waiver effects &              13% to 31% in 1993-96
               data, 1976-96                    policy components)          • 3% to 5% estimated change in AFDC caseloads due to
Also includes state effects, year effects and state time trends.              1-point increase in unemployment.

Figlio &       log (AFDC caseloads             Unemploymt rates             In static models:
Ziliak                per capita)              Dummy variables for          • Share of caseload change due to economic effects:
(1999)                                          state waivers                -10% to 36% in 1993-96
               Based on state                                               • Share of caseload change due to waivers:
               administrative                                                 0% ro 24% in 1993-96
               data, 1976-96                                                In dynamic models:
Also includes state effects, year effects, and state time trends. Dynamic   • Share of caseload change due to economic effects:
models include first-difference and lagged dependent variables.               18% to 76% in 1993-96
                                                                            • Share of caseload change due to waivers:
                                                                              -7% to 1% in 1993-96
                                                                             • 6% to 9% long-run rise in caseloads due to
                                                                               1-point rise in unemployment rate.

Levine &       Log(AFDC caseloads              Unemploymt rates             • Economic effects of same size as CEA (1997) study.
Whitmore             per capita)               Dummy variables for          • States with waivers have almost twice the caseload
(1998)                                          state waivers                 reduction but no difference in unemployment rates.
               Based on state
               administrative
               data, 1976-96
Also includes state effects, year effects and state time trends.
                                                         Table 6-continued


Moffitt        Log (AFDC participants/         Unemploymt rates              • Reduction in participation due to waivers:
(1999a)           female population,            Dummy variables for            -1.7 percentage pts among women high school dropouts.
                       aged 16-54)                state waivers                -0.8 to –1.0 percentage points among all women.
               Weeks and Hours of work          (looks at overall            ▪ Among high school dropouts also find significant effects
               Earnings                           waiver effects &              of waivers on weeks and hours of work; no significant
               Income                            policy components)             effects on earnings or income.
               Based on March CPS data,                                      • 0 to 0.3 percentage point rise in participation due to
                aggregated into education &                                    1-point rise in unemployment rates
                age cells by state, 1977-95
Also includes state effects, year effects and state time trends, along
with demographic controls.

Schiller       AFDC caseload                    Multiple economic            • Institutional program operation variables are
(1999)         growth by state                  variables (including           highly significant.
                                                unemployment rates           • Programs defined as “tough” produce greater
               Based on state                   and per capita income)         caseload reductions.
               administrative                   Dummy variable for
               data, 1991-96.                   “soft” or “tough” state
                                                 reforms
                                                State program operation
                                                 variables (approval rates
                                                  exemption rates, work
                                                  assignment rates, etc.)
Does not include state or year fixed effects.
                                                           Table 6-continued




Wallace &       Log(AFDC caseloads             Multiple economic               • Share of caseload change due to economic effects:
Blank                 per capita)                variables (including            50% for 1990-94
(1999)                                           unemploymt and                   47% for 1994-96
                Based on state                   wage information)             • Share of caseload change due to waivers:
                administrative                 Dummy variables for               -13% for 1990-94
                data, 1980-96                     state waivers                  22% for 1994-96
Also includes extensive controls for demographic, program and                  • 5% to 6% rise in caseloads due to
political variables, along with state and year effects.                          1-point rise in unemployment rate.



Ziliak,         Log(AFDC caseloads/             Unemploymt rates               • No separate estimates of economic effects alone;
Figlio,             Female population,          Dummy variables for               66% of change due to economic and seasonal
Davis, &               aged 14-55)               individual policy                factors in 1993-96.
Connelly        Based on state                   components of                 • Share of caseload change due to waivers:
(2000)          administrative                   state waivers                   -9% in 1993-96.
                data, 1987-96                                                  • 2% estimated change in AFDC caseloads
Also includes state effects, state time trends, time trends (t, t2, t3 ),         due to 1-point increase in unemployment
and month effects. Estimated models include lagged dependent                      that lasts 5 months.
 variables and first differences.
                                                        Table 6-continued



Part B: Econometric research on Welfare Reform Impacts Including Data After the 1996 Welfare Reform

                Dependent                       Key Independent
Study           Variable(s)                       Variables                 Results on Key Variables

Council of      log(AFDC caseloads               Unemploymt rates           ▪ Share of caseload change due to economic factors:
Economic              per capita)                Dummy variables              26% to 36% in 1993-96
Advisers                                           for state waivers and       8% to 10% in 1996-98
(1999)          Based on state                     TANF implementn          ▪ Share of caseload change due to waivers:
                administrative                   (looks at overall            12% to 15% in 1993-96
                data, 1976-98                      waiver effects &         ▪ Share of caseload change due to TANF:
                                                   policy components)          35% to 36% in 1996-98
Includes state effects, year effects, and state time trends.

Grogger         AFDC/TANF                      Unemploymt Rates            ▪ TANF and waivers have identical (negative) effects
(2000)           participation                 Dummy variables               on participation, creating a 2.1 percentage point decline
                                               for state reforms             (exclusive of time limits).
                Based on March                 (waivers and TANF)          ▪ Time limits have significant negative effects on
                CPS data, 1978-98              and for time limits            participation in families with younger children.
Includes state effects and year effects. Also includes demographic controls.
Children’s ages are interacted with time limit dummy variables.

Grogger         AFDC/TANF                      Unemploymt Rates            ▪ Time limits have significant negative effects on
(forthcoming) participation                    Dummy variables               TANF participation and positive effects on earnings,
                Employment measures            for state reforms             especially among women with younger children.
                Earnings & income              (waivers and TANF)          ▪ No effect of time limits on earnings or income.
                Based on March                 and for time limits         ▪ Significant effect of EITC on welfare use and
                CPS data, 1978-99              EITC parameters               participation.
Includes state effects and year effects. Also includes demographic controls.
Children’s ages are interacted with time limit dummy variables.
                                                    Table 6-continued
Kaushal &      Employment                     Unemploymt Rates             • States with both time limits and family caps show
Kaestner       Hours                          Dumy variables                 significant increases in employment and hours
(2001)         Fertility                        for family cap and           among married women with children.
                                               time limits                 • Little significant effects of reform on fertility.
               Based on March                 Also codes reforms
               CPS data, 1995-99                by “intensity”
Difference in difference estimates for unmarried women with children,
using married women with children and unmarried women without children
as control groups. Includes state and year effects and demographic controls.

O’Neill &      AFDC/TANF                     Unemploymt rates              ▪ Share of caseload change due to economic factors:
Hill            participation                Dummy variables                 30% in 1992-96; 17% in 1996-99
(2001)         Employmt last week            for state waivers and         ▪ Share of caseload change due to welfare reforms:
                                             TANF implementatn               12% in 1992-96 (waiver period)
                Based on March                                               49% in 1996-99 (TANF period)
                CPS data, 1982-99.                                         ▪ Similar effects on employment changes.
Includes state effects, state time trends and national time trend.          ▪ Policy effects strongest among younger and
No year effects included. Demographic controls included. Separate             more educated women.
groups of single mothers by age, education, and race are analyzed.
Schoeni &       AFDC/TANF                        Unemployment or state       ▪ Waivers have a significant effect on AFDC participation,
Blank            participation                     income measures             labor market participation, earnings, income, poverty
(2000)          Employment measures              Dummy variables               rates, and marital status.
                Earnings measures                 for state waivers          ▪ TANF has significant negative effects on welfare
                Income & poverty                  and TANF implementatn         participation, larger than the effects of waivers.
                Family structure                 (Also measures TANF         ▪ TANF has relatively small but significant effects
                                                   effects as a pre-post       on earnings, poverty rates, and household structure.
                Based on March CPS                  1996 effect)             ▪ Economic factors fully explain labor market changes
                data, 1977-99,                                                  in the TANF period.
                aggregated into education
                & age cells by state
Includes state effects, year effects, state time trends. Also includes demographic controls.
                                                          Table 6-continued


Wallace &     log(AFDC caseloads            Multiple economic              ▪ Estimated caseload change due to economic factors:
Blank               per capita)             measures (including               20% to 36% in 1990-94
(1999)                                      unemployment and wages)           8% to 12% in 1994-98
               Based on monthly             Dummy variables for            ▪ Estimated caseload change due to waivers:
               state administrative         state waivers and                 -4% to –5% in 1990-94
               data, 1980:1-1998:6          TANF implementatn                  26% to 31% in 1994-96
Also includes state-month effects. Models estimated in first differences    ▪ Estimated caseload change due to TANF:
with lagged dependent variables.                                              28% to 35% in 1997:1-98:6
                                                    Table 6-continued


Part C: Econometric Research on Welfare Reform Impacts Using Flow Data

               Dependent                     Key Independent
Study          Variable(s)                     Variables                   Results on Key Variables

Hofferth,      Prob(exit welfare             Unemployment and              ▪ Unemploymt not linked to welfare exits.
Stanhope &     conditional on                 state income                 ▪ Work exemptions for mothers with young children
Harris         spell duration)               Dummy variables for             increase welfare exits; earnings disregards decrease
(2001)                                        individual policy              exits; other policy components insignificant.
               Based on monthly               components in state          ▪ Primary policy effects on exits from welfare to work.
               PSID data on welfare           waivers                        Non-work-related exits not affected by policy.
               spells, 1989-96
Uses event history analysis. Also includes demographic controls and state fixed effects

Hofferth,      Prob(Return to AFDC           Unemployment and              ▪ Higher unemployment correlated with welfare re-entry.
Stanhope &     conditional on time            state income                 ▪ Work exemptions for mothers with young children make
Harris         since leaving AFDC)           Dummy variables for             women less likely to re-enter welfare; other policy
(2002)                                       individual policy               components insignificant.
               Based on monthly              components in state           ▪ Some income increases visible over time among welfare
               PSID data on post-            waivers                         leavers.
               welfare spells, 1989-96
Uses event history analysis. Also includes demographic controls and state fixed effects.
                                                         Table 6-continued


Klerman &     Log (Caseloads              Unemployment rates           ▪ Standard estimates based on stock data may be biased.
Haider           per capita)              (No policy effects are       ▪ Simulated effects of economic factors on caseload
(2000)        Welfare entry rate          estimable since data           changes between 1995-98 range from 12% to 47%.
              Welfare continuation        is from a single state)
                      rate
              Based on monthly
              administrative data
              from CA, 1989-98
Develop stock-flow model of caseload change. Estimates include county and time fixed effects.


Mueser,        Welfare exit rate              Unemployment rates             ▪ Changes in exit rates explain about 2/3rds of
Hotchkiss,     Welfare entry rate             Dummy variables on               the caseload decline in 4 of the 5 cities; changes
King,                                          significant state                in entry rates explain 1/3 of the decline.
Rokicki &       Quarterly adminis-             program changes               ▪ Economic conditions affect welfare exits, not entries.
Stevens         trative data from 5           (including waiver and          ▪ State waivers reduce welfare exits by 21%; TANF
(2000)          metro areas,                   TANF implementatn)              reduces welfare exits by 11%.
                early 1990s-97
Includes site specific dummies, time trends, and quarter effects.
                                                             Table 7



                    Effects of Financial Incentive Schemes Tested Using Random Assignment
                                                Third Year Effects

I. Programs with Incentives Only
         Outcome            MFIP Incentive Only        WRP Incentive Only     NY CAP
Employment (%)                     3.6*                       0.2              3.3*
Annual Earnings ($)                -191                       -69              523*
Annual Cash Transfers ($)        1165***                      -58               186
Annual Income ($)                 973***                     -106               200
Poverty (%)                      -8.3***                      n/a               n/a


II. Programs with Incentives and Work Requirements
         Outcome               SSP     Full MFIP   Full WRP            CT Jobs First      FTP       Iowa FIP
Employment (%)                 7.2***       11.5***       11.2***         6.4***        8.6***       2.4***
Annual Earnings ($)           649***          571*          575*         730***         915***       308***
Annual Cash Transfers ($)     800***         614***       -358***        -515***          -293       115***
Annual Income ($)             1449***       1185***          199           175           521**          --
Poverty (%)                   -9.4***       -12.4***         n/a            n/a           n/aa          --

Sources: Employment, Earnings, Cash Transfers, and Annual Income for all programs except NY CAP and Iowa FIP come from
Bloom and Michalopoulos (2001, Appendix Tables C.2 and C.3). Poverty data for MFIP comes from Miller et al (2000, Table 4.5).
Poverty data for SSP comes from Michalopoulos et al (2000, Table ES.2). Data for NY CAP program come from DeMarco and Mills
(2000) and are averages over the first five years after random assignment. Data for Iowa FIP program come from Fraker and Jacobsen
(2000) and are averages over the third year after random assignment. All data in U.S. dollars.
a
  The FTP evaluation provides no information on poverty rates, but reports a 6.0 percentage point positive impact on the question
"usually has enough money at the end of the month" (significant at the 1 percent level).
                                                                        Table 8

          Annual Benefits Received per Dollar Spent in Various Welfare Reform Evaluations


                                                                                                             Total
                                                                         Transfer                           program            Total
                                                         Income          payments         Column 1          benefits         program          Column 4
                                                        gains per           per               /               per            costs per            /
                                                        recipient        recipient        Column 2         recipient*        recipient        Column 5
                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
I. Financial Incentives Programs (including
strong work requirements)

Self Sufficiency Project (SSP), Canada
 Long-term recipients                                     $1849             $948              1.95              n/a              n/a                 n/a

Minnesota's Family Investment Plan
(MFIP)
 Single parent urban long-term recipients                 $1476            $596               2.48            $2044            $1693             1.21
 Single parent urban recent applicants                     $840            $868               0.97            $1193            $1624             0.73
 Two parent applicants                                     $844            $2088              0.40             $104            $2552             0.04

New Hope Demonstration, Milwaukee, WI                      $806             $483              1.67            $2306            $3616             0.64

II. Mandatory Employment Programs only

National Evaluation of Welfare to Work
Strategies (NEWWS, 7 sites)
  Maximum (Portland, OR)                                    n/a              n/a              n/a              $121             $208             0.58
  Minimum (Riverside HCD, CA)                               n/a              n/a              n/a             -$509             $798             -0.64

Greater Avenues for Independence
Program (GAIN, 6 sites in California)
 Maximum (Riverside)                                        n/a              n/a              n/a              $380            -$587           large**
 Minimum (Los Angeles)                                      n/a              n/a              n/a             -$312             $688            -0.45

          * Includes the total imputed value of all program benefits and services to recipients. This includes the income gains represented in
          Column 1, as well as the imputed value of health insurance benefits, support services, and fringe benefits.
          ** It is difficult to calculate comparable cost-benefit ratios for the GAIN Riverside site, since the program increased income to
          recipients while generating savings to the government in reduced program costs. In some sense, with government savings the cost-
          benefit ratio is infinite. Of the 6 GAIN sites, 3 increased income to recipients at a cost savings to the government, 2 increased income
          to recipients while increasing government costs, and the Los Angeles program reduced income to recipients while increasing
          government costs.

          Sources and notes:
          1. Dollar amounts are calculated over different years for different programs; all in U.S. dollars. See sources for details.
          2. SSP: Michalopoulos et al (2000). Column 1 and 2 figures come from table ES-1, page ES-7. Does not include taxes, and
               ignores costs of administering program. Effects are over 3 years.
          3. MFIP: Miller et al (2000). Column 1 and 2 figures come from tables 4.1, 5.1, and 6.1, and present effects over 10 quarters.
               Column 4 and 5 figures come from Table 7.1, and present effects over 5 years. Both sets of numbers include the Earned Income
               Tax Credit (EITC).
          4. New Hope: Bos et al (1999). Column 1 and 2 figures come from Table 5 of the Executive Summary. Column 4 and 5 figures
               come from Table 8.3. Effects are over 2 years.
          5. NEWWS: Program benefits come from Freedman et al (2000), Tables 5.1, 6.1, and 6.2. Costs come from Bloom and
               Michalopoulos (2001), and are net of savings in transfer payments (AFDC and Food Stamps), which come from Tables 6.1 and
               6.2 of Freedman et al (2000). Columns 1 and 2 are not applicable as no additional transfer payments were paid to experimentals.
               Does not include the EITC on either the cost or the benefit side. Effects are over 2 years. Riverside ran more than one program.
               The results presented above were from the Human Capital Development (HCD) program, which emphasized education first.
          6. GAIN: Riccio, Friedlander and Friedman (1994). Columns 1 and 2 are not applicable as no additional transfer payments were
               paid to experimentals. Column 4 and 5 figures come from Tables 6b and 7 of Executive Summary. Effects are over 5 years.
                                                            Table 9

                  Research on the Effects of Welfare Reform on Family Structure and Fertility

Part A. Econometric Estimates of Waiver and TANF Effects

Study                     Data                   Dependent Var         Key Independent Var          Results

Fitzgerald and Ribar      SIPP panels            Female headship       Welfare waivers      • Waivers don’t affect headship
       (2001)             1990, 1992, 1993        *Levels              (Aggregate and         levels
                                                  *Exits from and      by policy component) • Waivers increase exits from and
                                                 entries to headship                          reduce entries to headship
                                                                                            • Estimated effects of waivers by
                                                                                              policy component often show
                                                                                              wrong sign

Horvath-Rose and Peters   State administrative   Nonmarital birth      Welfare waivers      • In aggregate, waivers reduce
      (2001)              panel data             ratios                (aggregate and         nonmarital births
                          1984-96                                      by policy component) • Family caps have negative and
                                                                                               significant effect
                                                                                            • Minor parent provisions have
                                                                                              significant positive effect
                                                                                            • Few effects of time limits,
                                                                                              AFDC-UP or work requiremts

Kaushal and Kaestner      CPS data               Childbearing          Family caps and       • No significant or credible effects
      (2001)              1995-99                                      time limits             of family caps or time limits on
                                                                                               childbearing among single
                                                                                               mothers with children.
                                                       Table 9-continued

Schoeni and Blank          CPS data,             Among all women:     Welfare waivers       • Waivers reduce headship
     (2000)                aggregated to state   *Share who           (aggregate effects)     and increase marriage
                           level, 1977 – 1999     head households     TANF implementa-      • TANF reduces headship
                                                 *Share married          tion

Part B. Econometric Estimates of the Effects of Family Caps

Study                      Data                  Dependent Var        Key Independent Var          Results

Acs (1996)                 NLSY                  Probability of       Incremental AFDC      • Negative effect, but insignificant
                           Women w/ at least     higher order birth   benefits
                           one child

Argys, Averett and         NLSY                  Probability of       Incremental AFDC      • Positive significant effect on
Rees (2000)                                      pregnancy and        benefits                pregnancy, unless state
                                                 abortion                                     fixed effects are included
                                                                                            • No effect on abortion

Fairlee and London         SIPP                  Probability of       Incremental AFDC      • Few effects on births
  (1997)                   1990                  higher order birth   benefits
                           Women w/ at least
                           one child

Grogger and Bronars        Census                Time to              Incremental AFDC      • No significant effects
 (2001)                    1980 PUMS             next birth           benefits
                                                    Table 9-continued

Part C. Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Welfare Reform on Family Structure and Fertility

Experiment           Location and Years        Nature of Intervention      Results

A Better Chance   Delaware                      Mandatory job search       • Few effects on marriage
(ABC) Demonstratn 5 sites                       2-year time limits         • Cohabitation increases among less skilled
Fein (1999)       Experiment: 1995-96           Earnings disregards          and younger mothers
                  Final evaluation:             Strong sanctions           • No fertility effects
                   18 months out                Family caps                • Reduced enthusiasm for childbearing
                                                Work supports

California Work     California                 Reduced benefit levels      • Significantly more married couples
Pays Demonstratn      4 sites                  Increased BRRs                stay together.
Hu (2000)           Experiment: 1992-96                                    • No significant effects on single
                    Evaluation includes                                      women’s marriage or cohabitation
                    data thru 1997                                           rates.

Family Developmt     New Jersey                Family cap program          • Birth rates 9% lower
Program              1994-95                   Earnings disregards         • Increased family planning use
Camasso, et. al.                               Work supports               • No change in abortions
(1998a and 1998b)                              Two-parent families
                                               given better access to AFDC

Minnesota Family       Minnesota               Work mandates               • Increased marriage among single
Investment Program 7 sites                     Large earnings disregard       long-term recipients
Miller, et. al. (2000) Experiment: 1994-96     Service coordination        • Reduced separation among married
                       Final evaluation:                                      two-parent recipients
                         3 years out
                                                Table 9-continued

New Chance          10 states              Comprehensive services      • Increased instability in living arrangements
Quint, Bos, and       16 sites             (education, employment      • No effect on pregnancy, births, or
Polit (1997)        Experiment: 1989-92    and life planning) to           abortions
                    Final evaluation:      AFDC recipients who
                      3½ years out         were teen mothers and
                                           high school dropouts

Teen Parent          Illinois and NJ       Mandatory participation in • More births in experimental group
Demonstration Project 3 sites              employment, education, and (an unexpected effect)
Kisker, Rangaranjan, Experiment: 1987-91   life planning assistance
and Boller           Final evaluation:
(1998)                  6½ years out
