NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE AND SOCIAL INCENTIVES FOR FERTILITY: ISRAELI PUZZLES

Charles F. Manski
Joram Mayshar

Working Paper 8984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8984

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

This research was supported in part by a grant from the Israel Foundations Trustees (1998-2000), and in part
by United States National Science Foundation Grant SES-0001436. The Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
prepared for our use the merged Census and Birth Registry data file analyzed here. We are grateful to the
Bureau staff, including Elana Jacoby and Eliezer Kamon, for their efforts. Arie Beresteanu, Philip Cross,
Shira Klein, and Francesca Molinari provided excellent assistance in our analysis of the data. We thank
Eliahu Ben-Moshe, Momi Dahan, Charles Kamen, and Arie Peltial for very constructive comments on an
earlier version of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Charles F. Manski and Joram Mayshar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Private and Social Incentives for Fertility: Israeli Puzzles
Charles F. Manski and Joram Mayshar
NBER Working Paper No. 8984
June 2002
JEL No. J1, H2

ABSTRACT
Whereas most of the world has experienced decreasing fertility during the past half century, Israel
has experienced a puzzling mix of trends. Completed fertility has decreased sharply in some
ethnic-religious groups (Mizrahi Jews and non-Bedouin Arabs) and increased moderately in other groups
(non-ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi and Israeli-born Jews). In a phenomenon that can only be described as
a reverse fertility transition, fertility has increased substantially (from about 3 to 6 children per women)
among ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi and Israeli-born Jews. This paper explores how private and social
incentives for fertility may have combined to produce the complex pattern of fertility in Israel. Theoretical
analysis of the social dynamics of fertility shows that this pattern could have been generated by the joint
effects of (a) private preferences for childbearing, (b) preferences for conformity to group fertility norms,
and (c) the major child-allowance program introduced by the Israeli government in the 1970s.
Econometric analysis of fertility decisions shows that fundamental identification problems make it
difficult to infer the actual Israeli fertility process from data on completed fertility. Hence we are able to
conjecture meaningfully on what may have happened, but we cannot definitively resolve the Israeli
fertility puzzles.

Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu

Joram Mayshar
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
91905 Jerusalem, Israel
msjoram@mscc.huji.ac.il

2
1. Introduction

Demographers have long wavered between two perspectives on fertility behavior: Homo
Economicus, who chooses an optimal family size, and Homo Sociologicus, who conforms to social
norms (see Hammel 1990). These two perspectives dominate the ongoing debate on the underlying
sources of the fertility transition - the recent historic sharp decline in fertility toward rates that are
below replacement. Summaries of this debate by Cleland and Wilson (1987) and by Bongaarts and
Watkins (1996) find fault with the “economic approach” for failing to explain why the fertility
transition has occurred in different places under rather different economic conditions, and why the
initial stage of the transition is so rapid, relative to the more gradual pace of economic change. Both
articles cite a general need to incorporate “sociological” elements into economic models of fertility,
and a particular need to understand how social norms affect fertility and evolve.
Although discussions of fertility sometimes give the impression that economics and
sociology offer competing models of fertility, the two approaches are compatible with one another.
Women may choose family size to maximize utility functions that recognize both private and social
incentives for fertility, and social incentives may themselves evolve as an outcome of these
childbearing decisions. Indeed a rapidly growing literature on the economics of social interactions
has sought to understand how such processes operate in education, residential choice, labor markets,
and many other environments [see Becker and Murphy (2000), Manski (2000), and the references
therein]. Kohler (2001) presents a recent attempt to formally incorporate social interactions into the
analysis of fertility choice.
This paper explores how private and social incentives for fertility may have combined to
produce the rather complex fertility pattern observed in Israel in the past half-century. Table 1
summarizes random sample data on completed fertility (lifetime number of children) among Israeli
women alive and married in 1995, who married either before 1955 or in the period 1970-80. The
table is based on a special file that merged information from the 1983 Census and the 1995 national

3
Population Registry prepared at our request by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. It shows that
fertility in Israel displays considerable variation both over time and across major ethnic/religious
sub-groups of the population.

Table 1. Average Completed Fertility among Israeli Women Alive in 1995
Married prior to 1955
Ethnicity
Jews – Mizrahi origin

UltraOrthodox
6.86

Others

(217)

Jews – Ashkenazi origin
Jews – Israeli-born parents
Arabs – Non-Bedouins
Arabs – Bedouins

Married 1970-80

5.23

UltraOrthodox
5.11

(10,491)

(274)

Others
3.46
(20,427)

2.76

2.29

5.88

2.88

(571)

(14,954)

(275)

(17,164)

3.03

3.06

5.91

3.12

(40)

(793)

(57)

(2,636)

8.41

5.55

(2,290)

(6,055)

7.32

(34)
In parentheses: the number of women in each cell in the sample.

9.02
(139)

Comparing women married prior to 1955 with those married 1970-80, the table shows that
completed fertility declined among Jewish women of Mizrahi origin (whose father was born in Asia
or North Africa) and among non-Bedouin Arab women, in accords with trends worldwide. Yet
childbearing increased in all other sub-groups of the population. It increased slightly (from 3.06 to
3.12) among non-ultra-orthodox Jewish women whose parents were born in Israel, and moderately
(from 2.29 to 2.88) among non-ultra-orthodox women of Ashkenazi origin (whose father was born in
Europe or America). In a phenomenon that can only be described as a reverse fertility transition,
fertility increased rapidly and substantially (from 3.03 to 5.91, and from 2.76 to 5.88) among ultraorthodox women of these origins.
What explains the dissimilar levels and trends in completed fertility among different groups
of Israeli women? It is easy to suggest a set of private and social forces that may have combined to

4
yield the complex pattern of fertility depicted in Table 1. The potentially relevant sources of timeseries and cross-sectional variation in fertility include these:1

The fertility transition: Standard economic and social-cultural explanations of the fertility transition
can readily rationalize the substantial declines in fertility among Israeli Arabs and among Jews of
Mizrahi origin. In both groups, women married prior to 1955 largely lived in traditional societies
characterized by low income and high child mortality, but women married in 1970-1980 lived in the
western-oriented society of modern Israel, characterized by relatively high income and low child
mortality.

Religiosity: Ultra orthodox Jewish women follow the directives of their rabbis, who encourage high
fertility and discourage the use of contraceptives. Other Jewish women may hold varying preferences
for family size and are not subject to strong religious strictures against contraception.

Social Interactions: The various ethnic and religious sub-populations of Israeli have interacted to
different degrees over the past half-century, and so may have been subject to different social norms
for childbearing. Adoption of the fertility norms of Ashkenazi Jews by the Mizrahi Jews, most of
who migrated to Israel in the 1950s, may partly explain the fertility decline in the latter group.
Increased integration between these two groups may partly explain the increased fertility among the
former. Yet, throughout the past half-century, the Jewish ultra-orthodox, the Jewish non-ultraorthodox, and the Arab sub-populations of Israel have largely resided, been schooled, and worked in
separate, almost isolated communities.

Recent history: The traumatic decimation of European Jewry in the Holocaust may have affected
fertility in the period following World War II. Thus, it is sometimes argued that the Holocaust
1

For a discussion of the underlying sources of the Israeli fertility pattern see Friedlander and Carole (1993).

5
reduced the fecundity of the women who were directly affected, but increased the desire to have
children among survivors and the kin of non-survivors. It has also been suggested that the relatively
high death rates experienced or expected by some sub-groups of Israelis in repeated wars may have
increased the desired number of children, as a form of insurance.
Child allowances and related public welfare programs. Changes in public policy have generated
time-series variation in private incentives for fertility. In 1970-75, the Israeli government introduced
a universal (non income-tested) child allowance program that ranks among the most generous in the
world. Modest monthly payments are made to families with one or two children under age 18, but
the payments for each child from the fourth up are substantial. The 1960s and early 1970s also saw
the introduction of other major welfare programs that reduced the private cost of childbearing and
childcare. On the whole, women married prior to 1955 bore their children before the introduction of
the child allowance and other welfare programs, while women who married after 1970 were subject
to them throughout their childbearing years.
Juxtaposition of the child allowance program and the Israeli fertility patterns in Table 1
suggests that enactment of the allowance program in 1970-75 may explain some of the trends shown,
particularly the reverse fertility transition among the ultra-orthodox of Ashkenazi origin. However,
the same allowance program applied to other segments of the Jewish population, who experienced a
variety of different fertility trends.

These and perhaps other disparate forces have somehow combined to determine fertility in
Israel.

The puzzle, or set of puzzles, is how to disentangle these forces and identify the

socioeconomic process at work. From a public policy perspective, there is particular interest in
learning how the child allowance and other welfare programs have affected, and continue to affect,
fertility. From a social science perspective, there is a general interest in learning how private and
social incentives interact to determine childbearing. This paper addresses the puzzles posed by

6
Israeli fertility patterns and makes some, albeit incomplete, progress towards its resolution.
We begin with the public policy question, focusing on the child allowance program. Section
2, which draws on Mayshar and Manski (2001), describes the history of the program, compares it
with similar ones in Europe, and recalls Malthus’ hypothesis on the fertility effects of child
allowances. We also present in this section a more complete picture of how Israeli fertility evolved
over time for different social groups.
The empirical associations that we find between the child allowance program and the timeseries variation in fertility are intriguing but necessarily inconclusive. The challenge is to dig
beneath these associations to learn how private and social incentives may have combined to
determine fertility. Section 3 poses a model of family-size decisions that flexibly represents some
aspects of decision making while abstracting from others. The model assumes that, at some point
after marriage, a woman chooses a family size that is optimal, given the information available at the
time.2 The woman’s valuation of bearing a given number of children depends on her private
preference for family-size, her preference for conformity to social norms in childbearing, and the
child allowance that the mother would receive. Perhaps the main respect in which the model
abstracts from actual childbearing behavior is its neglect of the dynamics of birth timing, a subject
that has been a focus of some recent economic research (see Hotz and Miller, 1988, Walker 1995).
Abstracting from timing issues enables us to determine how optimal family size varies with fertility
preferences, social norms, and child allowances.
Our model of family-size decisions, although simple in many respects, is still too complex in
its general formulation to permit much in the way of theoretical analysis. After making further
simplifying assumptions, we are able to characterize the social dynamics of fertility with
considerable clarity. Given these assumptions, we find that a proportional allowance formula, in
2

We follow the long tradition in demography of attributing fertility decisions to women rather than to couples. This
attribution is merely semantic in the large majority of cases in Israel, which has been characterized by low rates of nonmarital childbearing and divorce.

7
which the magnitude of the benefit is proportional to the number of children, generates a simple
dynamic in which the distribution of family size converges to a unique steady state. In this case, the
value of steady-state mean family size varies linearly with the magnitude of the allowance; it is
however independent of the magnitude of preferences for conformity to social fertility norms and of
the dispersion of the distribution of private fertility preferences.
A piecewise linear allowance formula of the type enacted in Israel is then shown to generate
rather different dynamics. It continues to be the case that the distribution of family size converges to
a steady state. However, steady-state mean family size now does depend on preferences for
conformity to social norms and on the shape of the distribution of private fertility preferences.
Moreover, some configurations generate multiple steady states, some being locally stable and others
not. Performing numerical calculations in particular cases, we are able to demonstrate that small
changes in the magnitude of allowances or in private fertility preferences can, in principle, yield
rather large changes in mean fertility; on the order of the changes observed in Israel between 1950
and 1980.3
Section 4 describes our efforts to use the fertility model developed in Section 3 to interpret
the actual decisions made by Israeli women. The goal was to estimate a version of the model that
could be applied to examine how Israeli child allowance policy has affected family-size decisions.
Unfortunately, we were not able to credibly separate the effects on decision making of child
allowances, private fertility preferences, and preferences for conformity. Our attempts to fit
reasonably flexible versions of the model yielded unstable, unreliable estimates. A qualitatively
‘sensible’ estimate of the effect of child allowances on fertility emerged only when we maintained
assumptions that we feel are too strong to be believable.
The main contribution of Section 4 is to explain the identification problem that we faced
3

Previous research on endogenous social interactions, wherein each decision-maker is influenced by the decisions of
others, has shown that such interactions can produce social multipliers that magnify the individualistic effects of policy
interventions (see Manski, 1993). Previous research has also shown that endogenous interactions can generate complex

8
when attempting to estimate the fertility model. The basic problem, common to all econometric
analysis of choice behavior, is that observation of a woman’s chosen family size only partly reveals
her preferences; hence the fertility preferences of Israeli women cannot be learned in an entirely
empirical manner. A specific problem in our analysis is that the information about preferences
revealed by data on completed fertility depends qualitatively on the shape of the child allowance
formula that women face; revealed preference analysis is more difficult when the benefit is
proportional to family size than when it is nonlinear. The Israeli allowance has, to varying degrees
over the years, been nonlinear in family size. However, we found in practice that nonlinearity of the
formula provides an insubstantial foundation for empirical analysis.
Viewing our work in toto, we see a clear empirical contribution in our description of the
complex time-series and cross-sectional pattern of Israeli fertility (Section 2). Our theoretical
analysis of the joint determination of fertility dynamics by private preferences, preferences for
conformity, and child allowances helps to understand how such a complex pattern of fertility may
have come to be (Section 3). However, our structural empirical analysis of fertility decisions does
not persuasively disentangle the forces at work (Section 4). This being so, we can at best conjecture
on the processes that have generated Israeli fertility. Section 5 presents our concluding thoughts.

2. Child Allowances and Fertility in Israel

Section 2.1 describes the history of the Israeli child allowance program. Section 2.2
compares this program with ones in Europe and summarizes empirical research on the Malthusian
hypothesis that child allowance programs increase fertility among the poor. Section 2.3 then
examines fertility patterns in Israel.

dynamics with potentially multiple steady states (see Brock and Durlauf, 2001). Our findings are based on an interaction
model that differs in some respects from those studied earlier.

9

2.1. The Israeli Child Allowance Program

The Israeli welfare state has subsidized childbearing and childcare through a number of
mechanisms, including provision of free education and health insurance, generous maternity grants,
tax benefits for working mothers, and housing benefits that depend on the number of children.4 In the
major tax reform of 1975, Israel instituted a generous child allowance program that quadrupled the
allowances granted up to 1969.5 Since 1975, the National Insurance Institute (NII) has annually
allocated more than 1.6 percent of GDP to this program. A notable feature of the program is that the
size of the allowance varies substantially with the birth order of the child, with the first two children
under age 18 receiving minimal benefits, and each child from the fourth on receiving a large benefit.
Enactment of the child allowance program was in part a response to growing ethnic
discontent among Mizrahi Jews who had immigrated to Israel from Arab countries after 1948 or
from North Africa in the early 1960s. These Jews were often poor and had large families. A
universal child allowance was thought at the time to be an effective way to reduce their poverty,
without creating the work disincentives thought to be characteristic of income-tested benefits.6 In
fact, enactment of the child allowance program appears to have had a dramatic short run impact in

4

See Doron and Kramer (1991) for background on the development of Israel’s welfare system.

5

The child allowance program enacted under the 1975 tax reform replaced a complex system of benefits for children that
included tax credits, small mandatory child payments by private employers, minor allowances by the NII to large
families, and a more substantial allowance to children of army veterans that had been enacted in 1971.
6

The report of the national commission that recommended the 1975 tax reform (State of Israel, 1975) indicates that the
possible impact of child allowances on fertility was not an important consideration at the time. Moreover, an earlier
commission of demographers (State of Israel, 1966), set up to study pro-natalist policies, had concluded in 1966 that: “it
would not be appropriate to recommend monthly grants for families as an incentive to have children for the following
reasons: small grants do not have any impact on increased fertility… if the grant ...would be ...large, then considerable
sums of money will flow to large families, for whom it would not provide a birth incentive, because they do not practice
birth control anyway, but it could turn out to be a factor that discourages bread-winners from working.”

10
reducing the incidence of poverty among Israeli children in the mid-1970s. Since then, however, the
percentage of Israeli children living below the poverty line has steadily increased.7
The child allowance program uses a credit point system under which mothers receive a
monthly, tax-exempt allowance from the NII, the allowance equaling the number of credit points to
which her children are entitled, multiplied by the cash value of a credit point. The number of credit
points depends on the number of children in the family who are below the age of 18; prior to 1997, it
also depended on whether the family had the status of ‘army veterans.’8 Appendix Table A-1
presents the credit point formula in effect from 1975 through 2000. Figure 1 shows how the New
Israel Shekel (NIS) value of Israeli child allowance benefits has evolved over the longer period 19651999.
As Figure 1 and Table A-1 indicate, various adjustments have been made in the child
allowance program since 1975. The real value of credit points eroded initially due to inflation, but
has been fully linked to the CPI since 1987. In addition, repeated changes have been made in the
credit point formula, with the number of credit points for children of high birth-order gradually
increasing over time. In 1983, the number of credit points allocated to families with veteran status
and four or more children increased by fifty percent.9 In 1994 and 2000, the credit points for
children from the fourth up were raised further.

7

According to NII annual reports, the incidence of child poverty rose from 9.6% to 13.9% between 1979 and 1984.
Using somewhat different definitions, between 1987 and 1997, the incidence of child poverty rose from 9.5% to 11.8%
among families of wage earners, and from 20.5% to 21.8% in the population at large. The increase in the overall
incidence of child poverty, despite the significant decline of family size among the relatively poorer two main sub-groups
of the population, Arabs and Mizrahi Jews, can be explained by the increased weight of these two groups in the
population, and, in addition, by the increased family size and population weight of ultra-Orthodox Jews.

8

The conditions for obtaining veteran status prior to 1993 were such that almost all Jews received it, including the ultraOrthodox who by and large did not serve in the army. Almost all Arabs, for whom army service is voluntary, did not
receive it. Beginning in 1993, the dependence of the allowance on veteran status was gradually phased out over four
years. From 1997 on, all children receive the full allowance.

9

Between 1985 and 1992, fiscal concerns led to suspension of the allowance for the first child to families with fewer than
four children and with income above a certain low threshold; in 1991-2 this suspension was extended to the second child.
This created some work disincentives and administrative confusion due to the income threshold, and also implied that the

11
As Table A-1 shows, the marginal allowance granted for children from the fourth up fully
covers the marginal cost of caring for these children in a manner that averts poverty, as calculated
using Israel’s official poverty line for families of different sizes. To give a sense of the magnitude of
the allowances, consider families with six children under age 18. In 1999, such families received a
monthly tax-exempt allowance of NIS 2,566, equivalent to about $640 per month, and to 39 percent
of the income level officially defined to mark the poverty line for families of that size.
20,000
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000

4

6,000

3

4,000

2

2,000

1

0

1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999

Figure 1: Annual value of child allowances per family, by number of children
under age 18 (NIS in constant1995 prices. $1.00 = NIS 3)

2.2. European Child allowances and the Malthusian Hypothesis
Allowances for children are not new. Already in the second century AD, an extensive
alimenta system of public subsistence payments to children was in force in Rome. According to
Duncan-Jones (1974, 295), this system was “evidently intended to encourage a rise in the birth-rate.”

marginal allowance for the fourth child whose total allowances were kept intact (for families with income above the
income threshold) increased from 3.75 to 4.75 and then to 5.75 credit points.

12
The motivation apparently was the shortage of Romans to run the empire, but other historians
emphasize other motives.
The English Poor Laws, initiated during the reign of Elizabeth I, were clearly motivated by
welfare considerations rather than by a pro-natalist sentiment. As is well known, it was a proposal by
William Pitt to increase family benefits for the poor that prompted Thomas Malthus’ 1798 Essay on
the Principle of Population. In the fifth chapter, Malthus contended that providing financial support
for poor families as a function of family size would not contribute toward alleviating poverty; to the
contrary, in the long run it would exacerbate poverty by encouraging poor families to have more
children or to work less. According to Malthus, well-intended allowances for families in need may
thus become a trap that could contribute toward perpetuating poverty in general, and among children
in particular.10 The empirical validity of Malthus’ hypothesis on the fertility effects of the English
Poor laws was subject to much criticism, but a recent study by Boyer (1989) seems to confirm
Malthus.
Modern day child allowances seem to be motivated by a mixture of concern for the welfare of
children and concern with forecasts of declining population. The latter was clearly paramount in the
case of France and Belgium, which introduced universal child allowances in the 1930s. Following
their lead, all European countries and almost all other developed countries in the world followed suit
— with the notable exception of the United States.11 Notwithstanding the large magnitude of these
programs, there has been no definitive study of the demographic effects of modern European
programs of child and family support. Yet the consensus seems to be that these programs have had
at most a negligible impact on fertility. It is often noted that France, with possibly the most generous
(and complex) child support program in the world, has an overall birth rate no higher than that of
10

Under Malthus’ influence, Pitt withdrew his proposal. Later on, Britain radically amended its poor laws, still much
influenced by Malthus’ ideas.
11

For a comparison of the terms of child, or family, allowances across countries see Social Security Administration
(1999).

13
neighboring countries, where the allowance program is less extensive. Based on an econometric
study of 22 industrialized countries from 1970 to 1990, Gauthier and Hatzius (1997) have reported
that child support programs may have had a positive effect on birth, but one of a very small
magnitude. Specifically, they estimate that a 25% increase in child support benefits would increase
total fertility from an average of 1.71 children per woman to 1.78 children per woman. Several
studies on European countries have concluded that pro-natalist policies have encouraged women to
give birth earlier, yet have had practically no effect on total lifetime births (see Walker, 1995;
Gauthier and Hatzius, 1997).

2.3. Fertility Patterns in Israel

The standard source of information on fertility in Israel has been annual data on total fertility,
a construct that measures the average lifetime number of births a woman would have if she were to
give birth over time according to the current birth rates of women of different age cohorts. Figure 2
presents the time series of total fertility in Israel among the three major ethnic sub-populations:
Ashkenazi Jews, Mizrahi Jews, and Arab Moslems.12 The figure shows a significant decline up to
the middle 1970s and middle 1980s within the latter two groups, and a fluctuating total fertility rate
among Ashkenazi Jews.13

12

The trend in total fertility of Arab Christians, not shown in the figure, differs from that of Arab Moslems. The total
fertility rate of Christians initially was similar to that of Moslems, but declined by the 1990s to levels below that of
Ashkenazi Jews.
13

Berman (2000) has used data from surveys of the Israeli labor force to estimate total fertility among Israeli ultraorthodox in the periods 1980-84 and for 1994-96. He finds (Table VI) that total fertility increased from 6.9 to 7.8 among
Ashkenazi ultra-orthodox, and from 4.6 to 7.2 among Mizrahi ultra-orthodox. Berman interprets this recent rise in total
fertility, as well as increased religious stringency and reduced labor participation, as a response of a “club to a change in
wages and [non child-specific] transfers” (p. 940, parenthetical explanation added).

14

12
Mizrahi
10

Ashkenazi
Moslem s

8
6
4
2
0
1949

1954

1959

1964

1969

1974

1979

1984

1989

1994

Figure 2: Total Fertility rates of the Main Sub-populations in Israel, 1949-1996

The trends depicted in this figure do not suggest that the child allowance program, enacted in
1970-5, has had any material effect on fertility. However, total fertility is a synthetic-cohort
construct that may not adequately represent the childbearing decisions of actual women. Moreover,
the Malthusian hypothesis concerning the fertility effects of child allowances should apply primarily
to poor families, who form just part of the large sub-populations depicted in Figure 2. For these
reasons, we decided to obtain data that would enable a less aggregated and more accurate portrayal of
Israeli fertility patterns than has previously been possible.
At our request, the Central Bureau of Statistics prepared a special data file merging
information from the 1983 Census of Population and Housing and the 1995 Population Registry. We
begin with the random sample of households in which the husband and wife completed the ‘long
form’ of the 1983 Census. Within these households, we identified all women born between 1920
and 1960 who were married at the time of the census, whose husbands were also enumerated, and

15
whose national identity card numbers appear in the 1995 Population Registry.14 The Population
Registry links the identity numbers of children to those of their mothers; hence we were able to
determine the number and age of children born to each woman until 1995.15
To understand Israeli fertility patterns, we felt it important to disaggregate the three major
ethnic sub-populations into more homogeneous groups. Information collected from respondents to
the 1983 Census made it straightforward to distinguish Bedouins from other Arabs, and to
distinguish Jews whose parents were born in Israel from those whose parents immigrated to the
country.16 We also thought it important to disaggregate Jewish Israelis by degree of religiosity,
particularly to distinguish ultra-orthodox Jews from others. This was more problematic, because
respondents to the 1983 Census were not asked to report their religious practices. We ultimately
used a schooling-based criterion, previously applied by Dahan (1998), whereby families are
identified as ultra-Orthodox if the last place of study that was reported by the husband in the 1983
census was a post-secondary yeshiva (an orthodox institute of religious study).17
Table 1, introduced in Section 1, uses the merged Census and Population Registry data to
present completed fertility rates within each of eight groups defined by ethnic origin and religiosity.
The table provides a simple ‘before-and-after’ perspective on the association between fertility and
the 1970-5 child allowance program. To accomplish this, we distinguish women married prior to
1955, who generally completed child-bearing before initiation of the program, from those married in
14

In cases where a woman had multiple marriages, here and throughout the paper we use “year of marriage” to mean
“year of first marriage.”
15

The linkage of children’s identification numbers to those of their mothers is quite accurate for children born after
1960, but incomplete for children born in the 1950s and almost nonexistent for children born earlier. Fortunately, the
1983 census itself provides information on the total number of live births up to that year. A detailed explanation of the
manner in which we combined Population Registry and Census data to determine each sampled woman’s births is
available in a technical memorandum which can be obtained from the authors upon request.
16

In principle, we could further disaggregate those with Israeli-born parents into Ashkenazi and Mizrahi subgroups. We
do not do so because the samples of ultra-orthodox segments of these subgroups are quite small.

17

See Mayshar and Manski (2001) for analyses of fertility patterns that use alternatives to this criterion for identification
of religiosity.

16
the period 1970-1980, who were eligible for the allowances throughout most or all of their
childbearing years. The table excludes women married between 1955 and 1970 because their
childbearing period straddles the date of the policy change. It excludes those married after 1980,
who were married only shortly before the 1983 census and had less then 15 years of marriage up to
1995.18
The disaggregated data on completed fertility in Table 1 present a more nuanced portrayal of
Israeli fertility patterns than do the more aggregated data on total fertility presented in Figure 2. As
already discussed in Section 1, the table shows that Israel manifests the worldwide trend towards
reduced childbearing only within the Mizrahi-Jewish and Arab-non-Bedouin sub-populations.
Within all other groups, completed fertility among women married in the period near the 1975
reform is higher than among women married earlier on. The increase in completed fertility among
ultra-orthodox Jews of non-Mizrahi origin is little short of astonishing. On average, women in these
groups approximately doubled their childbearing, from about three children per women to about six.
Other analyses of our sample data reinforce the impression that the completed fertility rates
of ultra- orthodox Ashkenazi Jews substantially increased in the period around the 1975 tax reform.19
The discussion below focuses on Jewish Israelis because Arab Israelis, not having veteran status,
generally did not receive significant child allowances at any point during the period of our analysis.
Figures 3 and 4 supplement the data on averages in Table 1, while concentrating on the
fertility among ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi women. In Figure 3 we present the entire distribution of
completed fertility, comparing those married before 1955 with those married in 1970-1980. The
figure demonstrates the substantial shift rightward in the distribution. The mode increased from two
to five children. The percentage of women with three children or less fell from 78% to 23%.

18

Some women who married before 1980 were still of child bearing age in 1995. We used ethnic-group, age-specific
fertility rates for 1994-5 to predict childbearing by these women after 1995.
19

The sample of ultra-orthodox Jews with Israeli born parents is too small to support the analyses to be discussed, so we
now focus on the ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi Jews.

17
Figure 4 moves away from completed fertility and compares the kernel-smoothed agespecific fertility rates of ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi women in the five-year periods that just straddle
the 1970-5 allowances reform: 1965-9 and 1975-9. For women of age 21 and below, the age-specific
rates are essentially identical in the two periods. However, the rates for women of age 22 and above
are persistently higher in the latter period, indicating a marked change in fertility behavior.
40%
35%
30%
25%
Up to 1955

20%
15%

1970-80

10%
5%
0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Number of Children

Figure 3. Distribution of Completed Fertility among Ultra-Orthodox Ashkenazi Women:
Women Married before 1955 and 1970-1980
0.40
0.35

Specific fertility rate

0.30
0.25

1965-9

1975-9

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44

age

Figure 4. Comparison of Age-Specific Fertility Rates for Ultra-Orthodox Ashkenazi Women:
1965-69 versus 1975-79

18
The final descriptive evidence that we present in Figure 5 shows kernel-smoothed completed
fertility rates by year of marriage, for each of the four sub-groups of Israeli Jews whose parents were
not born in Israel. The overall message of Figure 5 is surprisingly simple to describe, albeit not to
explain. During 1945-1950, completed fertility varied by ethnicity, with Mizrahi women bearing
about three times as many children as did Ashkenazi women. Thirty years later, during 1975-1980,
completed fertility again separates the population into two groups, but now the relevant dimension is
religiosity rather than ethnicity, with ultra-orthodox women bearing about twice as many children as
non ultra-orthodox Jewish women. Such large, group-specific changes in fertility present an
intriguing puzzle, or set of puzzles.
10

Mizrahi non ultra-orthodox

9

Ashkenazi non ultra-orthodox

8

Ultra-orthodox Mizrahi

completed fertility

7

Ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

year of marriag

Figure 5: Completed Fertility among Jewish sub-groups, by year of marriage

3. Family-Size Decisions: Private Preferences, Child Allowances, and Social Interactions

To do more than speculate about the fertility patterns described in Section 2, it seems
essential to model the family decision processes that generate the population statistics. Combining
basic elements of economic and sociological thinking, we think it plausible to suppose that women

19
choose family size to maximize utility functions that recognize both private and social incentives for
fertility. The private incentives depend in part on government policy toward children, one aspect of
which is the child allowance program. The social incentives depend in part on the childbearing
behavior of peers.
We pose a decision model with these properties here. The model aims to balance realism and
tractability so as to provide a suitable vehicle for analysis of fertility decisions.

3.1. Maintained Assumptions

We assume that a woman chooses family size irrevocably sometime after marriage, based on
the information available at the time. Thus we abstract from revisions to family planning that may
occur if new information later becomes available. Let t denote the date of the fertility decision, j
denote a woman choosing family size (i.e., number of children) at that date, and k denote family size.
We assume that woman j assigns utility Utj(k) to having k children and acts to maximize utility.
Thus the woman chooses

(1) ktj = argmax k = 0, 1, . . . Utj(k)

children, assuming that the argmax is unique. We assume no infertility and no child mortality, or
similar sources of uncertainty that could prevent some women from realizing their family-size plans.
We also take the spacing of the k births as predetermined.
We now further assume that the above utility function has three additively separable
components, the first two expressing private incentives and the third expressing social incentives:

(i). a private utility of family size, assumed quadratic in the number of children. This is ajk bjk2, where (aj, bj) are woman-specific parameters. We assume that aj > 0 and bj > 0.

20

(ii). a government incentive for childbearing embodied in the child allowances formula prevailing at
the time of the fertility decision. This is Atj(k), the discounted life-cycle allowance that woman j
would receive under the formula prevailing at the decision date, if j were to have k children; we
assume that Atj(0) = 0. The magnitude of the allowance may vary with characteristics of the woman,
such as veteran status. Let Itj denote the family’s expected life-cycle income from date t on; here we
assume, for simplicity, that income does not depend on family size. Then expected life-cycle
consumption if woman j were to have k children is Atj(k) + Itj. The contribution to utility of such
consumption is cj[Atj(k) + Itj], where cj > 0 is a woman-specific parameter.

(iii). a social interaction wherein the woman compares k with the actual family sizes of other women
in the population. We assume that the population is composed of M mutually exclusive and
exhaustive strata, or reference groups. Consider group m. Woman j incurs a utility loss that grows
with the squared deviation between k and the size of each family in group m. The woman averages
these losses across the members of m, yielding the average loss Σh (k - h)2 Ptm(h), where Ptm(h) is the
fraction of women in group m having h children. Finally, the woman aggregates the average losses
across the M groups, yielding the aggregate loss -Σm wmj [Σh (k - h)2 Ptm(h)], where wj ≡ (wmj, m =
1, …, M) are parameters that measure the utility weight the woman attaches to each group. We
assume that wmj > 0, m = 1,…,M.

Combining the private, government, and social determinants, the form of the utility function
that we assume is

(2) Utj(k) = ajk - bjk2 + cj[Atj(k) + Itj] - Σm wmj [Σh (k - h)2 Ptm(h)].

21
3.2. Optimal Family Size

Let Stm = Σh h Ptm(h) be the mean number of children in group m at date t. For each m,

(3) Σh (k - h)2 Ptm(h) = Σh [(k - Stm) + (Stm - h)]2 Ptm(h) = (k - Stm)2 + Σh (h - Stm)2 Ptm(h)
= k2 – 2kStm + Stm2 + Σh (h - Stm)2 Ptm(h) .

It follows that

(4) Utj(k) = Utj(0) + ajk - bjk2 + cjAtj(k) - (Σm wmj)k2 + 2(Σm wmj Stm)k
= Utj(0) + (aj + 2Σm wmj Stm)k - (bj + Σm wmj)k2 + cjAtj(k).

Hence

(5) ktj = argmax k= 0, 1, …. (aj + 2Σm wmj Stm)k - (bj + Σm wmj)k2 + cjAtj(k).

The model yielding equation (5) expresses many core features of economic and sociological
thinking about fertility decisions. The model acknowledges that family size is a discrete choice
problem and recognizes that women may have heterogeneous preferences, expressed through the
woman-specific parameters (a, b, c, w). The model flexibly expresses the idea that social norms may
affect fertility. We suppose that each woman may pay attention to childbearing in multiple reference
groups and place different weight on the practices of each group. A woman may be concerned with
the entire distribution of family size within each group. Yet, as shown in equations (3) and (4), the
model has the simplifying property that decision making ultimately depends only on mean family
size in each group, not the entire distribution.

22
The model yields an especially simple solution if the child allowance is proportional to the
number of children in a family. Thus, suppose that Atj(k) = πtjk for some πtj > 0. Then (5) becomes

(6) ktj = argmax k= 0, 1, …. (aj + 2Σm wmj Stm + cjπtj)k - (bj + Σm wmj)k2.

Observe that both composite coefficients are positive. Hence utility is quadratic in family size with
its maximum at

aj + 2Σm wmj Stm + cjπtj
(7) ktj = INT[ + ½],
2(bj + Σm wmj)
where INT[A] denotes the integer component of the real number in brackets.
Of course, the model does not express all potentially important features of fertility decisions.
In particular, it neglects associations between fertility and family income that form part of the
Malthusian hypothesis. It ignores possible connections between family-size decisions and female
labor-supply decisions, which would make life-cycle income a function of family size. It also
ignores the possible contributions of child labor to life-cycle income. Nevertheless, we feel that
equation (5) provides an effective, practical starting point for theoretical and empirical analysis of the
interaction of private and social incentives for fertility.
Section 3.3 approaches the problem from a theoretical perspective, making further
idealizations in order to achieve some understanding of the dynamics and steady-state distributions
of family size that may be generated by the model. Section 4 examines the problem from an
empirical perspective, with particular attention to the difficulty of identification of private and social
incentives.

23
3.3. The Social Dynamics of Fertility in Two Special Cases

The fertility model introduced above, although simple in many respects, is still too complex to
permit much in the way of theoretical analysis. An interesting theoretical analysis becomes possible
if we make four further assumptions, as follow:

(a) The number of children is continuous, rather than integer-valued.
(b) Each woman is influenced only by women in her own group who made their choices in the
preceding period.
(c) All women in a given ethnic-religious group have the same values of utility parameters (b, c, w),
so that only the parameter aj may vary within the group.20 The within-group distribution of this
parameter is continuous and time-invariant, with density f(a).
(d) The child allowance formula is piecewise linear in the number of children, with one kink. The
allowance formula is time-invariant and is the same for all members of a given group.

Given these assumptions, we can consider each group in isolation and characterize the
evolution of family size and the steady state distribution of family sizes. We begin with the special
case in which there is no kink, so the allowance is proportional to family size.

20

Letting c vary within the group does not qualitatively change the analysis, but complicates the notation somewhat.
Given that behavior is unaffected by a positive multiplicative change in the four utility parameters (a, b, c, w), we could
also normalize b or w. The essential part of our assumption is thus that both (b, w) are constant within the group.

24

Allowances Proportional to Family Size
Suppose that the allowance formula is A(k) = πk, where π > 0 is the time-invariant allowance
per child. Supposing that children are continuous and invoking the other assumptions above,
equation (7) for the optimal family size for woman j who chooses family size at date t becomes:

aj + 2wSt-1 + cπ
(8) ktj =  ,
2(b + w)
where St-1 is the mean family size of women who chose their family size at date t – 1. It follows that
the mean family size of women who choose at date t is

a + 2wSt-1 + cπ
(9) St = S(St-1, λ) = E[ ]
2(b + w)

=

µ + 2wSt-1 + cπ
 ,
2(b + w)

where µ ≡ E(a) > 0, and where λ ≡ [b, c, w, A(.) f(.)] is the full set of parameters that characterize
preferences and child allowances.21
Equation (9) determines the social dynamics of mean family size. With b > 0 and w > 0, St
converges monotonically to the unique steady state So that solves the equation

(10) So = S(S0, λ).

The steady-state in this case of proportional allowances is:

21

µ.

Equation (9) shows that when allowances are proportional to family size, sufficient statistics for A(.) and f(.) are π and

25

(11) S

o

µ + cπ
= .
2b

This simple result is qualitatively unsurprising in many respects. The steady-state mean
family size So increases with the magnitude of the allowance per child π and with the parameter c
measuring the contribution to utility of the allowance. So also varies as expected with the private
determinants of utility, increasing with µ and decreasing with b.
Observe, however, that So does not vary with the social interaction parameter w; hence there
is no social multiplier effect. Furthermore, the steady state is unique and the fertility gap between any
two groups who differ only in the parameter µ is independent of the magnitude of the allowances.
These results turn out to be peculiar to the case of proportional child allowances. We show below
that when the allowance is piecewise linear, steady-state mean family size may not be unique and
may depend on w in a somewhat subtle manner.
With So determined, it is straightforward to characterize the entire steady-state distribution of
family sizes. Inserting St-1 = So in equation (8), we obtain that the steady-state optimal family size of
a woman with private utility parameter a is

a + 2wSo + cπ
(12) ko(a, λ) = 
2(b + w)

1 ba + wµ
=  (  + cπ).
2b
b+w

Observe that ko(a, λ) is linear in a. Hence the density function for optimal family size has the
same shape as f(a), the density of a. Observe that the child-allowance π always shifts ko(a, λ) by the
same amount, regardless of the value of a. Hence child allowances affect the central tendency of the
distribution of family sizes but not its dispersion. Finally, observe that ko(a, λ) is determined by a

26
weighted average of a woman’s own utility parameter and the mean µ of this parameter in the group,
with weights b/(b + w) and w/(b + w) respectively. Thus the social interaction parameter w, which
was earlier shown not to affect the central tendency of the distribution of family size, does affect the
dispersion of the distribution. All else equal, the larger the value of w, the more concentrated is the
distribution around its mean So.

Piecewise Linear Child Allowances
Now suppose that the child allowance formula has the piecewise linear form

A(k) = 0 if k < K,

A(k) = π(k – K) if k > K,

where K > 0 is a specified threshold family size and π > 0 is the time-invariant allowance per child
from the Kth onward. 22 Although the Israeli child allowance formula has changed over the years, the
formula has always been reasonably well approximated by a function of this form.
Given assumptions (a) – (d) and a piecewise linear allowance formula, the optimal family
size is

(13) ktj = argmax k > 0 {(aj + 2wSt - 1)k - (b + w)k2 + cπ(k – K) · 1[k > K]},

where 1[k > K] is the indicator function taking the value one if k > K and zero otherwise. The

22

The present analysis generalizes easily to formulas that begin with a positive allowance per child and rise in marginal
value after K children; that is, to formulas of the type
A(k) = π1k if k < K, A(k) = π2(k – K) if k > K, where 0 < π1 < π2.
However, the analysis does not apply to piecewise linear formulas that initially give larger allowance per child and then
smaller ones; that is to formulas of the above type but with 0 < π2 < π1. Such formulas have qualitatively different
implications for family-size distributions.

27
objective function in (13) is quadratic everywhere except at the point k = K, where its first derivative
jumps by cπ units. Holding (b, w, c, π, K, St - 1) fixed, optimal family size can be shown to vary
discontinuously with the utility parameter aj, the single discontinuity occurring at a certain pivot
value a(St-1, λ), which is

(14) a(St-1, λ) = 2(b + w)K - 2wSt-1 - cπ/2.

In particular,

(15a)

aj + 2wSt-1
ktj = 
2(b + w)

(15b)

aj + 2wSt-1 + cπ
ktj = 
2(b + w)

< K

> K

if aj < a(St-1, λ)

if

aj > a(St-1, λ).

A woman whose parameter a equals the pivot value is indifferent between these two solutions.
Recall that the distribution of the parameter a has been assumed continuous; hence the
borderline case a = a(St-1, λ) occurs with probability zero. It follows that the mean family size
among women who choose fertility at date t is

a + 2wSt-1
(16) St = S(St-1, λ) = E[   a < a(St-1, λ)] · Prob(a < a(St-1, λ)]
2(b + w)

a + 2wSt-1 + cπ
+ E[   a > a(St-1, λ)] · Prob(a > a(St-1, λ)]
2(b + w)

28
1
=  [ µ + 2w St-1 + cπ · Prob(a > a(St-1, λ)].
2(b + w)
Inspection of equation (16) shows that, given any value of the parameters λ, the function S(St-1, λ) is
increasing and continuous in St-1; hence the recursive equation St = S(St-1, λ) generates a monotone
time path for mean family size.23
A steady state, where So = S(S0, λ), is defined implicitly by the condition

1
(17) So =  [µ + cπ · Prob(a > a(S°, λ)].
2b
Inspection of (17) shows that this equation necessarily has solutions, and these satisfy the inequalities
µ/2b < So < (µ + cπ)/2b. That is, the steady state solutions with piecewise linear allowances lie
between the steady state µ/2b that would prevail in the absence of allowances and the steady state (µ
+ cπ)/2b that would prevail if allowances were proportional to family size.
Implicit differentiation of equation (17) reveals that ∂So/∂π > 0 and ∂So/∂K < 0. Thus, as
should be expected, a more generous child allowance formula generates increases in steady-state
mean family size. When π > 0 and K > 0, similar differentiation also reveals that sgn(∂So/∂w) =
sgn(S0 – K). Thus, stronger social interactions reinforce the deviation of steady state fertility away
from the threshold K. We think this last result particularly important, and so state it as a proposition:

Proposition: Let our assumptions hold. Under a child allowance program with allowances
proportional to family size, social interactions have no effect on mean steady state fertility So. Under
23

Equation (16) simplifies substantially if the support of the distribution of utility parameter a lies either entirely to the
left or entirely to the right of a(St-1, λ). In the former case, where Prob(a > a(St-1, λ)] = 0, all women choose to have the
family size that they would prefer in the absence of child allowances. In the latter case, where Prob(a > a(St-1, λ)] = 1, all

29
a program with allowances piecewise linear and threshold K, stronger social interactions reinforce
the deviation of So from K.

This result is the key to our findings below on the differential effect of allowances on different social
groups and on the possibility of multiple equilibria.

Findings for Specific Distributions of Utility Parameters
The above analysis partially characterizes steady state fertility when the allowance formula is
piecewise linear, but important questions remain open. In particular, we would like to know whether
the steady state equation (17) can have multiple solutions and we would like to understand the role of
the social interaction parameter w in determining the steady state. Answers to these questions could
shed light on the role that the piecewise linear Israeli child allowance system may have played in
generating the sharply different fertility trends experienced by different ethnic-religious groups. As
we have shown, a proportional allowance program, even when coupled with strong social
interactions, cannot explain the reverse-fertility transition among Israeli ultra-orthodox woman, nor
why their fertility behavior diverged so much from that of other groups in the population.
To partially address the open questions, we now examine the dynamics of fertility under two
hypotheses about the shape f(a) of the distribution of utility parameters. First we suppose that f(a) is
uniform, a simple specification that yields a closed-form solution of the dynamic equation (16). Then
we suppose that f(a) is log-normal, a specification that may be more realistic but that does not yield a
closed-form solution of this equation.

Uniform Distribution: When the utility parameter a is uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 2µ],
the dynamic process (16) becomes:

choose a family size above the threshold K, making the allowance effectively proportional to the number of children.

30

(18)

1
St = S(St-1, λ) = ——— (µ + 2wSt-1)
2(b + w)

if a(St-1, λ) > 2µ

1
= ——— {µ + 2wSt-1 + cπ · [2µ - a(St-1, λ)]/2µ}
2(b+w)

if 0 < a(St-1, λ) < 2µ

1
= ——— (µ + 2wSt-1 + cπ)
2(b+w)

if a(St-1, λ) < 0.

The function S(St-1, λ) is continuous in St-1 and piecewise linear in its three ranges.
We are interested particularly in the possibility of a steady-state S° in the intermediate range,
where some women choose to have fewer children than the allowance threshold K, and some have
more than this threshold. The intermediate-range linear equation has the unique solution

(19)

1
S° = K + ———— [(µ + cπ/2)(µ + cπ/2 – 2bK)].
2bµ - wcπ

It can be shown that this steady state is locally stable if 2bµ > wcπ. Moreover, this intermediate
solution satisfies the required boundary conditions 0 < a(S°, λ) < 2µ if wµ + wcπ < b[2(b + w)K–
cπ/2] < wµ+ 2bµ. If the boundary conditions are not satisfied or the intermediate-range steady state
is not stable, the dynamic process converges to one of two polar steady states in which all women
choose to have families of size less than or greater than K. Inspection of (19) shows that if the
intermediate steady state exists and is locally stable, then S0 > K if and only if µ + cπ/2 > 2bK.
Figure 6 displays how the steady state varies with the magnitude π of the allowance. To
approximate the Israeli formula, we set the threshold at K = 4. We consider two groups, both with b

31
= 0.5, c = 1, w = 0.4. The groups differ only in the value of the parameter µ. The first group, meant
to represent the ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi, has µ1= 2.5; the other group has µ2 = 2. These figures
were selected so that S01 = 2.5, and S02 = 2 in the absence of allowances; this conforms with the pre1955 mean fertility rates reported earlier. It is evident that increasing the magnitude of the allowance
π rapidly widens the fertility gap between the two groups. With π = 3.5, for example, the steady state
fertility levels of the two groups become 5.6 and 3.0 respectively, increasing the fertility gap between
the two groups from 0.5 to 2.6. However, further increases in π narrow the gap.
S
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1

2

3

4

5 π

Figure 6 : The steady-state fertility as a function of the allowance for two groups, where:
c =1, w = 0.4, K = 4, b = 0.5, and a is distributed uniformly over [0, 4] and [0,5]

The figure illustrates our assertion that a piecewise linear child allowance program combined
with social interactions can generate fertility behavior that is qualitatively different from the linear
case. It can be shown that when w = 0 for both groups, the fertility gap is hardly affected by the
magnitude of the allowance. It is the force of the social interaction that initially (up to π = 3.2) holds
back women of the second group from adapting to the higher allowances by increasing their number
of children to above the threshold K = 4. And it is the same force that operates in the opposite
direction for the first group.

Log-Normal Distribution: Whereas the uniform distribution implies a unique steady state for all
values of π and K, a log-normal distribution may generate multiple steady states. Since we cannot

32
explicitly solve the steady-state equation (17) when f(a) is log-normal, we resort to a simple
illustrative example. Figure 7A plots the dynamic function St = S(St-1, λ) for particular values of λ.
A steady state, being a solution to the equation So = S(S0, λ), occurs when S(., λ) crosses the 45° line
shown on the figure. A steady state is stable if [∂S(., λ)/∂St-1] < 1 when evaluated at St-1 = So.
Figure 7A plots S(St-1, λ) for four values of λ. In all four cases, K = 4, c = 1, w = 0.5 and f(a)
is log-normal with mean 2.5 and standard deviation 1, for both groups. The two social groups differ
only in the parameter b, where b1 = 0.5 and b2 = 0.625, selected so that in the absence of allowances,
the steady-state mean number of children for the two groups are 2.5 and 2.0 respectively. The figure
displays three plots for the first group, for three alternative allowance values π = (3.25, 3.75, 4.25),
and one plot for the second group, for the middle allowance value: π = 3.75.
We find that when π = 3.75, the second group has a unique steady state at So = 2.4 children.
In sharp contrast, the first group has in this case three steady states, So = (3.69, 5.2, 6.25), of which
only the first and third are stable. However, when π = 3.25 or π = 4.25, the first group has a unique
steady state at So = 3.25 and So = 6.7 children, respectively. Thus, relatively small changes in
st

allowances can produce very significant qualitative and quantitative changes in mean fertility.
45°

7

S
6

6.5
6

5

5.5
4

5
3

4.5
St-1
3

4

5

6

7

3.2

3.4

3.6

π

3.8

4.2
3.5

Figure 7 Dynamic fertility behavior and steady state with a log-normal distribution

Figure 7B shows more fully how π affects the steady state fertility level for the first group. It shows

33
that the multiplicity of equilibria appears only when 3.59 < π < 3.99.

4. Attempted Structural Empirical Inference

This section describes our efforts to use the fertility model developed in Section 3 to interpret
the actual decisions made by Israeli women. Our objective was to estimate a version of the model
that could, with some degree of credibility, be applied to examine how Israeli child allowance policy
has affected family-size decisions. We were unable to achieve this objective, but the attempt was
instructive nonetheless. We explain here.

4.1. Identification in Theory and Practice

Even though it is idealized in many respects, the model developed in Section 3 still has more
than enough degrees of freedom to generate the main observed features of Israeli fertility. The
different rates of completed fertility observed in different ethnic-religious groups at different times
could be produced by
(i) cross-sectional and time series variation in the woman-specific utility parameters
(ii) cross-sectional and time series variation in the child allowance formula
(iii)social interactions within and across groups.
Indeed, the central problem that arises in empirical analysis of family-size decisions is that many
alternative combinations of these forces could have generated the observed patterns.
The basic identification problem is evident in equation (5), which shows that observation of a
woman’s chosen family size only partly reveals her preferences. Observation that woman j chooses
family size ktj implies only that the composite utility parameters (aj + 2ΣmwmjStm, bj + Σmwmj, cj)
satisfy the revealed preference inequalities

34

(20) (aj + 2Σm wmjStm)(ktj – k) - (bj + Σmwmj)(ktj 2 - k2) + cj[Atj(ktj) - Atj(k)] > 0, k ≠ ktj.

The identification problem is especially stark when the child allowance formula provides benefits
proportional to the number of children. In that case, equation (7) shows that choice of ktj children is
consistent with any value of the parameters (aj, bj, cj; wmj, m ∈ M) such that

aj + 2Σm wmjStm + cjπtj
(21) ktj - ½ <  < ktj + ½.
2(bj + Σmwmj)
Thus, the fertility preferences of Israeli women cannot be learned in an entirely empirical manner.
The available data on fertility choices must be combined with a priori restrictions on the distribution
of preferences.24
In an attempt to cope with the identification problem, we refined the model in a manner that
combined realism with tractability. To specify the timing of fertility decisions, we supposed that
women choose family size six-to-ten years following marriage, and base their utility calculations on
the average annual benefits in effect during that five-year period. This conjecture flows from the
idea that, although women may begin to bear children soon after marriage, they need not decide so
soon on completed family size.
We defined reference groups by the same criteria of ethnic origin and religiosity as were used
24

There are further difficulties that exacerbate the identification problem inherent in revealed preference analysis. Our
discussion has presumed that a researcher is able to observe not only the family sizes that women choose but also the
child allowance formulas that they face and the mean family sizes of the women in their reference groups. These are nontrivial problems in practice. Consider the child allowance formula. Our fertility model assumes that women choose
family size irrevocably sometime after marriage, based on the information available at the time. As discussed in Section
2, Israeli child-allowance benefits have varied over time. Hence the particular timing that we assume for family-size
decisions affects the allowance functions that we assume women use when computing the utility of alternative numbers of
children. Moreover, throughout its existence, the Israeli child allowance program has employed a formula that predicates
benefits on the number of children currently under age 18. This feature of the program, as well as the variation of the
formula over time, implies that the life-cycle magnitude of the child allowance associated with any number of children

35
in our description of fertility patterns in Israel in Section 2.3; moreover, we distinguished members
of these groups by their year of marriage. We focused on five ethnic-religious groups: ultra-orthodox
Mizrahi, non-ultra-orthodox Mizrahi, ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi, non-ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi, and
non-ultra-orthodox with Israeli-born parents. We neglected the ultra-orthodox with Israeli-born
parents because the available sample of such persons is too small to support empirical analysis. We
neglected the two Arab groups because their members generally did not receive child allowances
during the period of our analysis.
To simplify the analysis, we constrained the vector (wm, m ∈ M) of social interaction
parameters in two important ways. First, we assumed that women who marry in a given year are
influenced only by women who married in the five preceding years. Second, we assumed that they
give equal weight, say w0, to the fertility of all Jewish Israeli women married in the past five years
and an additional weight, say w1, to members of their own ethnic-religious group.
After considering a variety of specifications for the distribution of fertility preferences, we
chose to work with a specification that is flexible in some respects but restrictive in others. We
permitted the distribution of preferences to vary freely across ethnic-religious groups and year of
marriage. Thus ‘ultra-orthodox Ashkenazi women married in 1955’ could have one distribution of
fertility preferences and ‘non-ultra-orthodox Jews whose parents were born in Israel and who
married in 1970’ could have another. The flexibility afforded by this aspect of the model is
appealing because there is reason to think that fertility preferences in Israel have varied both across
groups and over time.25
The restrictive part of the specification is that we assumed all women who belong to the same
ethnic-religious group and who marry in the same year to have the same values of the utility
parameters (b, c, w0, w1). We permitted heterogeneity only in the utility parameter a, which we
actually depends on the spacing of their births.
25
Social scientists often hypothesize that fertility preferences vary with women’s schooling, family earnings capacity, and
perspectives on the morality of various forms of contraception. All of these factors, and more, have varied both across
ethnic-religious groups and over time in Israel.

36
assumed to be distributed normal across women who belong to the same group and marry in the
same year. This aspect of the specification was chosen for reasons of tractability; it implies that a
simple ordered-probit model describes the probability that a woman choose any given family size.
The above assumptions, as strong as they are, only identify the model of fertility decisions if
the child allowance is nonlinear in the number of children. They do not identify the model if the
benefit is proportional to family size. Consider women who belong to a given reference group, say g,
who marry in a given year, say t. For such women, let the parameter a be distributed N(µtg, σtg2). Let
Stg be the mean family size of members of group g who married in the past five years and let Sto be
the mean family size of all other Jewish Israeli women who married in this period. If the benefit is
proportional to family size and is the same for all women who marry in year t, (21) implies that the
probability of choosing k children is

(22) Ptg(k; γtg, δtg )

=

a + 2w 0tgSt0 + 2w1tgStg + ctgπt
Prob[k - ½ <  < k + ½.]
2(b tg + w0tg + w1tg)

= Φ[(k + ½)γtg - δtg] - Φ[(k – ½)γtg - δtg],

where

(23a) γtg

≡ 2(btg + w0tg + w1tg)/σtg

(23b) δtg ≡ (µtg + 2w0tgSt0 + 2w1tgStg + ctgπt)/σtg.

Equation (22) shows that the only identified quantities are the composite parameters γtg and δtg. Thus,
a necessary condition for identification of the parameters (µtg, σtg, btg, ctg, w0tg, w1tg) describing the

37
distribution of utility is that the benefit be nonlinear in family size.26
The Israeli child allowance benefit has, to varying degrees over the years, been piecewiselinear in family size. Nevertheless, when we attempted to estimate the model, we learned that
piecewise-linearity of the formula provides an insubstantial foundation for empirical analysis. In
particular, we found that the objective functions used in either maximum likelihood or least squares
estimation of the ordered-probit model were close to flat when evaluated at alternative parameter
values that would formally be observationally equivalent if the allowance benefit were proportional
to number of children. Hence, under the maintained assumptions, we were unable to obtain reliable,
stable estimates of the parameters describing the distribution of utility.
Although unpleasant, this empirical finding is instructive. It cautions against reliance on
nonlinearities in child allowance formulas to identify fertility preferences. The difficulties that we
encountered are reminiscent of those that have long afflicted attempts by empirical researchers to
learn the effects on labor supply of benefit/tax schedules that are nonlinear in hours worked.27

26

One of these parameters may be fixed in value to normalize the scale of women’s utility functions. We do not choose
a particular normalization here.
27

See Moffitt (1992) and the articles collected in the Journal of Human Resources Special Issue on Taxation and Labor
Supply in Industrial Countries, Volume 25, No. 3, 1990.

38

4.2. Structural Interpretation of “Approximate” Reduced-form Estimates

Although the assumptions imposed above did not yield usable estimates of the structural
parameters (µtg, σtg, btg, ctg, w0tg, w1tg), we recognized that strengthening the assumptions could, in
principle, make estimation possible. A simple, flexible way to explore the implications of adding
further assumptions is to estimate the composite parameters (γtg, δtg) for the various reference groups
g and years t. This done, we could attempt to structurally interpret the cross-sectional and timeseries variation in these estimates, via equation (23).
For each reference group g and year of marriage t, our merged Census and Birth Registry data
make it straightforward to estimate (γtg, δtg). In years when the child allowance benefit was
proportional to family size, equation (22) follows directly from our structural model of fertility
decision. Hence (22) is a reduced-form of the structural model and (γtg, δtg) are reduced-form
parameters related to the structural parameters (µtg, σtg, btg, ctg, w0tg, w1tg) by equation (23). When the
benefit was piecewise-linear in family size, equation (22) does not follow directly from the fertility
model; hence (γtg, δtg) are not formal reduced-form parameters. Nevertheless, it may be reasonable to
view (γtg, δtg) informally as “approximate” reduced-form parameters, with πt defined to be the
allowance per child averaged over a suitable range of family sizes.
We used a least-squares criterion to estimate (γtg, δtg) for group g and year of marriage t.
Specifically, we chose (γ, δ) to minimize the criterion function Σk [ftg(k) - Ptg(k; γ, δ)]2; here ftg(k) is
the observed frequency with which women of type (t, g) choose k children and Ptg(k; γ, δ)] is the
choice probability given in (22).28 We found that our estimated choice probabilities fit the observed

28

If equation (22) were a formal reduced-form throughout the period of analysis, conventional considerations of
asymptotic efficiency would suggest maximum likelihood as an alternative to least-squares estimation. However, with
(22) sometimes being only an approximate reduced-form, least-squares estimation seemed advantageous because it does
not emphasize a model’s ability to predict small probability events, as maximum likelihood does.

39
family-size frequencies very well. We achieved almost perfect fits for the non-orthodox groups,
where our observed choice frequencies are based on large samples of women per year; in these cases,
the value of the criterion function (i.e., the sum of square residuals) was generally in the range
[0.001, 0.01]. The fits were less exact but still good for the orthodox groups, where the observed
choice frequencies are based on samples of only ten to fifty women per year; here the sum of squared
residuals was generally in the range [0.01, 0.05].
With estimates of the reduced-form parameters in hand, we used equation (23) to interpret
their cross-sectional and time-series variation. We first explored specifications that impose no crossgroup restrictions on the distribution of utility, but do constrain the time-series variation in each
group’s preferences. The findings were disappointing. Estimates of the structural parameters were
statistically imprecise. Contrary to the basic theoretical prediction that utility should rise with
increasing child benefits, we often obtained negative estimates of the parameter ctg.
A qualitatively more “sensible” estimate of the effect of child allowances on fertility emerged
only when we imposed two assumptions that we find much too strong to be believable: (a) the
parameters (σtg, ctg, w0tg, w1tg) are constant over time and across groups and (b) the parameter µtg,
which describes the central tendency in private preferences for fertility, varies over time only with
the rate of high school completion by women in group g.29 Specifically, we set σtg = 1 to normalize
the scale of utility and let equation (23a) have the form

(24) δtg ≡ (µg + βH tg + 2w0St0 + 2w1Stg + cπt),

where H tg is the fraction of women of type (t, g) who complete high school and β is a parameter.
29

Demographers have long viewed women’s schooling as a primary determinant of fertility preferences. Israeli women
experienced very substantial increases in their rates of high-school completion during the period covered by our data.
Hence we thought it reasonable to focus on this as a source of time-series variation in fertility preferences. There are two
levels of high-school completion in Israel, a lower level in which a student obtains a diploma and a higher level in which
a student also passes a national examination known as the Bagrut. We measure high-school completion by successful
completion of the Bagrut.

40
This done, we used our estimates of δtg to obtain least-squares estimates of the common structural
parameters (βδ, w0, w1, c) and the group-specific parameters µg. Now, finally, the estimate of c was
positive and statistically precise by conventional standards.

5. Conclusion

To reiterate what we see as the main contributions of this research, we first called attention to
the complex time-series and cross-sectional pattern of Israeli fertility, which is much at odds with the
fertility transition that has occurred elsewhere in the world (Section 2). We next presented a
theoretical analysis of the social dynamics of fertility that shows how private preferences,
preferences for conformity, and piecewise linear child allowances could have combined to yield such
a complex fertility pattern (Section 3). We then explained the identification problem that makes it so
difficult to infer the actual Israeli fertility process from data on completed fertility (Section 4).
Although much about Israeli fertility remains puzzling at the end of our investigation, we
believe that our work casts new light on what has happened in the ultra-orthodox community. In a
recent study of fertility and labor supply in the Israeli ultra-orthodox community, Berman (2000) has
interpreted the trends toward increased fertility, decreased labor supply, and increased supply of time
to religious studies in this community as the behavior of a “club” that has strengthened its norms of
religious stringency in an attempt to maintain exclusion. Berman traces this increased stringency
back to the 19th century reaction of ultra-religious Jews to their exposure to modernity, and he
implicitly views recent changes as continuation of a process that has been underway since that early
time. Our empirical analysis cast doubt on Berman’s interpretation. We have found that in the
marriage cohorts prior to 1955, the fertility of Ashkenazi ultra-orthodox women was almost the same
as that of non-ultra orthodox Ashkenazi women. Hence we conclude that the current fertility

41
behavior of Israeli ultra-orthodox reflects a relatively recent phenomenon.30 We conjecture, but
cannot prove, that the reverse fertility transition that has occurred among the ultra-Orthodox would
not have happened were it not for the emergence of the Israeli welfare state.
Our work may also help to understand the conventional fertility transition. To recall,
demographers have questioned why the fertility transition has begun in different societies under
different economic conditions, and why it has been so rapid. It is intriguing that the reverse fertility
transition experienced by the Israeli ultra-orthodox has similarly been rapid. We have conjectured
that this reverse transition arose out of the combination of two key factors: non-continuity in private
behavior, due to the piecewise linearity of child allowances, and social interactions as each women is
influenced by the fertility decisions of other women. The same two factors are central to the recent
analysis by Kohler (2001) of the conventional fertility transition. In his work, non-continuity in
behavior is generated by a binary decision process, whether or not to use contraceptives, and the
social interaction occurs when each woman is influenced by the contraception decisions of other
women. The specifics of our research and that of Kohler differ in many respects, but each illuminates
how non-continuity in behavior and social interactions may combine to explain the social dynamics
of fertility.

30

The recent non-continuity in behavior is illustrated by a quote from an address by a noted Rabbi to young women in an
ultra-orthodox seminary: “Our mothers … have absorbed too much from the odor of European culture… Our slogan must
be: back to grandmother” [cited in Friedman (1988)].

42

Table A-1. Summary of Child Allowances Criteria
Allowance credit points
Child

Non-

order

Veterans

(k)

Percent of official standard adult poverty line income
Marginal allowance granted for kth child,

Veterans

cost of care

for those with veteran status
1975-

1983-

1994-

1982

1993

1999

2000

1965

1970

1975

1992

Marginal

1997

for kth
child

1

1

1

1

1

1

6.6

11.0

24.2

01

14.2

70

2

1

1

1

1

1

6.6

13.2

24.2

01

14.2

55

3

1.25

2

2

2

2

6.6

13.8

48.5

33.6

28.4

55

4

1.25

2.25

3.75

4.05

4.4

11.0

20.4

54.0

96.61

57.4

50

5

1.25

2.5

3.25

3.4

5

13.2

20.4

54.5

54.5

48.2

50

6

1.25

2.5

3.5

3.75

5

14.3

21.5

60.6

58.8

53.2

45

7+

1.25

2.5

3.5

3.5

5

16.5

21.5

60.6

58.9

49.6

40

Source: NII Statistical Quarterly and Yearbooks (various years).
1

In 1992 the allowances for the first two children were withdrawn for families with less than four children, unless

family income was below a low threshold.

43

References

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy, Social Economics: Market Behavior in Social
Environments, Harvard University Press, 2000.
Berman, Eli, “Sect, Subsidy and Sacrifice: An Economist’s View of Ultra-Orthodox Jews,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, August 2000, pp. 905-53.
Bongaarts, John and Susan Cotts Watkins, “Social Interactions and Contemporary Fertility
Transitions,” Population and Development Review, 22, December 1996, pp. 639-82.
Boyer, George R., "Malthus Was Right After All: Poor Relief and Birth Rates in Southern
England," Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1989, pp. 93-114.
Brock, William and Steven Durlauf, “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68, 2001, pp. 235-260.
Cleland, John and Christopher Wilson, “Demand Theories of Fertility Transition: an Iconoclastic
View,” Population Studies, 41, March 1987, pp. 5-30.
Dahan, Momi, “The Ultra-Orthodox Jews and Municipal Authority,” part I, The Jerusalem
Institute for Israel Studies, Jerusalem, Research series No. 79, 1998 (in Hebrew).
Doron, Abraham and Ralph M. Kramer, The Welfare State in Israel: The Evolution of Social
Security Policy and Practice, Westview Press, 1991.
Duncan-Jones, Richard, The Economy of the Roman Empire: Quantitative Studies, Cambridge
University Press, 1974.
Friedman, Menachem, “Back to Grandmother: The New Ultra-Orthodox Woman,” Israel Studies,
Spring 1988, pp.21-6.
Friedlander Dov and Carole Feldmann, "The Modern Shift to Below-replacement Fertility: Has
Israel's Population joined the process?" Population Studies, 47, 1993, 295-306.
Gauthier, Anne Helene and Jan Hatzius, “Family Benefits and Fertility: An Econometric
Analysis,” Population Studies, 51, November 1997, pp. 295-306.
Hammel, E.A., “A Theory of Culture for Demography,” Population and Development Review, 16,
September 1990, pp. 455-85.

44
Hotz, V. Joseph and Robert A. Miller, "An Empirical Analysis of Life cycle Fertility and Female
Labor Supply," Econometrica, January 1988, pp. 91-118.
Kohler, Hans-Peter, Fertility and Social Interaction: An Economic Perspective, Oxford
University Press, 2001
Malthus, Thomas Robert, An Essay on the Principle of Population (1798), reprint of 1st edition
with a new introduction by Samuel Hollander, London, Routledge, 1996.
Manski, Charles F. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,”
Review of Economic Studies, 60, 1993, 531-542.
Manski, Charles F., “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
14, 2000, 115-136.
Mayshar, Joram and Charles F. Manski, “Child Allowances and Fertility in Israel: Preliminary
Findings,” The Economic Quarterly, 47, 2000, 535-565 (in Hebrew).
Moffitt, R. (1992), “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 30, 1-61.
The National Insurance Institute, Quarterly Statistics and Annual Reports, Jerusalem, various
issues.
State of Israel, Commission on Tax Reform, Proposals for Changing the Direct Tax System,
translation of Hebrew original, Jerusalem, 1975.
State of Israel, Committee for Natality Problems, Report submitted to the Prime Minister,
Jerusalem, 1966 (in Hebrew).
Social Security Administration, U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security
Programs Throughout the World – 1999, Washington: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1999.
Walker, James R., "The Effect of Public Policies on Recent Swedish Fertility Behavior," Journal
of Population Economics, 8, August 1995, pp. 223-51.

