NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EDUCATION AND
ADULT MORTALITY IN THE UNITED STATES

Adriana Lleras-Muney

Working Paper 8986
http://www.nber.org/papers/w8986

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

I would like to thank Ann Bartel, Francisco Ciocchini, Ana Corbacho, Rajeev Dehejia, Phoebus Dhrymes,
William Gentry, Bo Honore, Kenneth Leonard, Manuel Lobato, Christina Paxson, Alexander Peterhansl,
Nachum Sicherman and the seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard University, Michigan
State University, MIT, Princeton University, University of Montreal, UNC-Greensboro, Princeton University,
UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign for their comments and
suggestions. I am especially grateful to my advisor Sherry Glied who fully supported me throughout this
project. All errors are mine. This research was partially funded by Columbia University’s Public Policy
Consortium, and the Bradley Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the United States
Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 8986
June 2002
JEL No. I12, I20, J10, J18, N32, N42

ABSTRACT
Prior research has uncovered a large and positive correlation between education and health. This
paper examines whether education has a causal impact on health. I follow synthetic cohorts using
successive U.S. censuses to estimate the impact of educational attainment on mortality rates. I use
compulsory education laws from 1915 to 1939 as instruments for education. The results suggest that
education has a causal impact on mortality, and that this effect is perhaps larger than has been previously
estimated in the literature.

Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
alleras@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Access to health care insurance,1 expenditures on health care,2 and even income levels3 have been
shown to have little eﬀect on health. On the other hand, there is a large and positive correlation
between education and health (Grossman and Kaestner 1997). This correlation is strong and
significant even after controlling for diﬀerent measures of socio-economic status, such as income
and race, and regardless of how health is measured (morbidity rates, self-reported health status
or other measures of health). Given that the measured eﬀects of education are large, investments
in education might prove to be a cost-eﬀective means of achieving better health,4 if education
indeed helps us to be healthier. But prior research has not ascertained whether the relationship
between education and health is causal.
The purpose of this paper is to determine whether education has a causal eﬀect on health,
in particular on mortality. The negative relationship between education and mortality, the most
basic measure of health, has become well established since the famous Kitagawa and Hauser
(1973) study, which found significant diﬀerences in mortality rates across educational categories
for both sexes. More recent studies (e.g. Christenson and Johnson, 1995, Deaton and Paxson,
1999) confirm these findings. Elo and Preston (1996) control for a variety of other mortality
factors such as income, race, marital status, region of residence, and region of birth. Rogers et
al. (2000) further control for access to health care, insurance, smoking, exercise, occupation, and
other factors. Figures 1 and 2 document this relationship using consecutive census data for the
US: in all cohorts, those who survive have higher education than those who do not.
The existing literature has explained this correlation in three ways. One controversial hypothesis is that education increases health, either because education makes people better decision1

See Newhouse (1993).

2

For example see Filmer and Prichett (1997).

3

Grossman (1975) shows that income does not aﬀect health beyond a certain threshold.

4

This was first suggested by Auster et al (1969).

1

makers (Grossman 1975) and/or because more educated people have better information about
health (Kenkel 1991, Rosenzweig and Schultz 1981). Another possibility is that poor health results in little education (Perri 1984, Curry and Hyson 1999). Finally, this correlation could be
caused by a third unobserved variable that aﬀects both education and health, for example genetic
characteristics or parental background. Many studies have attempted to include these factors.5
However, Fuchs (1982) argued that discount rates (which no study controls for) would also explain
the correlation: people who are impatient invest little in education and health, while people who
are patient invest a lot in both.6 Of course, these theories are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
In this paper I address this issue using a unique quasi-natural experiment: between 1915 and
1939, at least 30 states changed their compulsory schooling laws and child labor laws. If compulsory
schooling laws forced people to get more schooling than they would have chosen otherwise, and
if education increases health, then individuals who spent their teens in states that required them
to go to school for more years should be relatively healthier and live longer. The intuition that
compulsory education laws provide a natural experiment was put forward first by Angrist and
Krueger (1991). They argued that because compulsory education laws forced individuals to stay
in school until a certain age, those born in later quarters would stay in school longer. Although
they were criticized for their choice of quarter of birth as an instrument,7 the underlying principle
is appealing and implementable.

8

No other papers have used natural experiments to measure the eﬀect of education on mortality.
A few studies (Berger and Leigh 1988, Sander 1995, and Leigh and Dhir 1997) have used instrumental variable (IV) estimation with other measures of health, such as blood pressure, smoking
5 Wolfe and Behrman (1987), Duleep (1986) and Menchik (1993) find no education eﬀect once controls are
added.
6 Fuchs (1982) and Farrel and Fuchs (1982) examined this issue but their evidence is inconclusive. Munasinghe
and Sicherman (2000) do find that time preference plays an important role in the determination of smoking.
7

See Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995) and Bound and Jaeger (1996).

8

Harmon and Walker (1995) look at the eﬀects of the laws in the UK. Meghir and Palme (1999) used Swedish
data. Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) used US laws to determine the size of the social returns to education.

2

or exercise.9

But these studies are inconclusive because each paper’s choice of instrument is

questionable. For example, all of these studies use parents’ background/education as instruments,
but we know these are correlated with children’s health,10 and furthermore, we know that health
shocks during childhood or gestation have persistent health eﬀects into adulthood.11 Income and
education expenditures in state-of-birth could serve as instruments (Berger and Leigh 1988), but
again they might be correlated with state expenditures on health, state industrial composition
and other state characteristics that aﬀect health.
Using the 1960, 1970 and 1980 Censuses of the US, I select those individuals who were 14 years
of age between 1915 and 1939. I then construct synthetic cohorts and follow them over time to
calculate their mortality rates. I then match cohorts to the compulsory attendance and child labor
laws that were in place in their state-of-birth when they were 14 years old. The census data have
not been used to calculate mortality rates before in economic analyses.12 This method could be
used to analyze mortality experiences in periods where no other data are available.
Several IV estimations are presented, including an original two-stage procedure for grouped
data that can be applied when the first stage can be estimated at the individual level but the second
stage can only be estimated at the aggregate level. This procedure, inspired by the traditional
two-stage least squares (2SLS) method, can easily be applied to other cases as well.
The results provide evidence that suggests there is a causal eﬀect of education on mortality
and that this eﬀect is perhaps larger than the previous literature suggests. While GLS estimates
9 Berger and Leigh (1988) estimate the eﬀect of education on blood pressure using the NHANES I. They use
state-of-birth, income and education expenditures per capita from year-of-birth to age 6 in state-of-birth, and
dummies for ancestry as instruments for education. They also estimate the eﬀect of education on disability with
NLS data, using IQ and family background measures as instruments. In both cases schooling is significant. Using
a sample of older persons from the 1986 PSID, Leigh and Dhir (1997) use parental education, background, and
state-of-residence at age 16 to instrument for education in regressions for disability and exercise. Alternatively,
they include direct measures of time preferences and risk aversion. Education was not always significant. Finally
Sander (1995) examines the eﬀect of schooling on the odds of quitting smoking using the General Social Survey.
He uses parental schooling as an instrument for schooling and finds that the eﬀect of schooling is quite large for
whites.
10

Development studies show that family background aﬀects children’s health (see Strauss and Thomas, 1995).

11

For examples see studies that looked at the consequences of the Dutch famine on the health of adults conceived
during the famine, such as Hoek, Brown and Susser (1998) or Roseboom (2000).
12

However this methodology is used in epidemiology. For example see the work by Haines and Preston (1996).

3

suggest that an additional year of education lowers the probability of dying in the next 10 years
by approximately 1.3 percentage points, my results from the IV estimation show that the eﬀect is
much larger: at least 3.6 percentage points. However the results also suggest that the OLS and
the IV estimates are not statistically diﬀerent.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data used in this project, including
a description of how the census is used to obtain mortality rates. Section 3 shows that compulsory
attendance and child labor laws had an impact on the educational attainment of individuals, and
presents evidence that these laws are good instruments. Section 4 presents the general econometric
framework used for analyzing mortality. The results are presented and discussed in Section 5, and
conclusions are given in section 6.

2

Data

I use the U.S. censuses of 1960, 1970 and 1980, which are one percent random samples of the
population.13

The census provides information on age, sex, race, education, marital status,

urban location, state of residence and state of birth. My samples include all white persons born
in the 48 states,14 that were 14 years of age between 1914 and 1939, with no missing values for
completed years of education.15
I use the censuses to follow “synthetic cohorts.” Although I do not observe the same individuals
over time (so I cannot observe individual deaths), I do observe the same groups over time, which
allows me to estimate group death rates. I aggregate the censuses into groups defined according
to their gender/cohort and state-of-birth (descriptive statistics in Table 1). Using the 1960, 1970
and 1980 censuses, I can calculate two 10-year death rates for each group: one for 1960-1970, and
another for 1970-1980. For example, the 1960-1970 death rate for a group is the number of people
1 3 The data come from the IPUMS 1960 general sample, the 1970 Form 2 State sample (originally 15% state
sample), and the 1980 1% Metro sample (originally B sample).
14

Hawaii and Alaska were not then part of the Union.

15

For consistency across censuses, I recoded completed years of education to be a maximum of 18 years instead
of 20 in 1980.

4

alive in 1960 (N60 ) minus the number of people alive in 1970 (N70 ) divided by the population in
1960 (N60 ).
One issue that arises in estimating death rates by groups is measurement error. As Figure 3
shows, because of random sampling the number of deaths will be overestimated about half the
time and underestimated half the time for all cohorts. As a result, some estimated death rates are
negative. In the data, we observe more negative death rates for younger cohorts and fewer negative
death rates for older cohorts (see Figure 4A); this is a pattern we should expect. As we can see in
Figure 3B, with a zero death rate (no change in the population), two successive samplings of the
same population result in a negative death rates half the time. When the death rate increases (as
the population ages), the likelihood that the second sample will contain more observations than
the first falls, resulting in fewer negative death rates.We also observe fewer negative death rates
for states with large population (Figure 4B), which is also to be expected since the sampling error
is smaller for larger populations.
The negative death rates are not a source of concern for two reasons. First, the estimated death
rates will result in consistent estimates of the true death rates.16

Second, average cohort death

rates from the censuses are very similar to those obtained from individual data from the NHEFS
described below (see Figure 4C). Note that the graph suggests there is evidence of age heaping:
for ages that are multiples of 10, the death rates fall, because individuals tend to over-report their
age and chose a multiple of ten when doing so.
I also used the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey I Epidemiologic Follow-up
Study, 1992 (hereafter NHEFS). This survey followed 14,407 individuals who were between 25 and
74 years of age when interviewed for the first National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES I) between 1971 and 1974. The NHEFS followed individuals and recorded whether
they had died by 1985. The sample is composed of whites17 that were 14 years of age between
1 6 Also note that IV estimates are only consistent, not unbiased, estimates of structural parameters. A consistent
estimate of the dependent variable is suﬃcient for the IV estimators to be consistent.
17

Other researchers have suggested that blacks had significantly diﬀerent school experiences during the begining

5

1914 and 1939, who were alive in 1975 and followed successfully, with no missing observations for
years of completed education (N=4554). Table 1 shows the summary statistics for this data.
The data on compulsory attendance and child labor laws come from a number of sources.
There are eight years of state-level data (1915, 1918, 1921, 1924, 1929, 1930, 1935 and 1939) on
these laws,18 and some additional information for other years. I imputed missing observations
by using the older values. I also collected data on state-level factors that contributed to the
growth of secondary education from 1915 to 193919 or that could aﬀect mortality. These include
state expenditures on education, number of school buildings per acre, percent of the population
that was living in urban areas, percent of the white population that was foreign born, percent
of the population that was black, percent of the population employed in manufacturing, average
annual wages in manufacturing per worker, average value of farm property per acre, and number
of doctors per capita (See Lleras-Muney 2001 for information on data sources).
Each individual is matched to the laws and state characteristics that were in place in their
state-of-birth when they were 14 years old. I choose this age because it is the lowest common
drop-out age across states. This procedure assumes that individuals went to school in their stateof-birth. Inevitably some individuals were mismatched. However, Card and Krueger (1992) show
that mobility was low during this period. Also Lleras-Muney (2001) shows that mobility seems to
be uncorrelated to these laws and that restricting the sample to those that are still living in their
state-of-birth does not change the eﬀect of the laws.20
of the century. See Card and Krueger (1992). Also, Lleras-Muney (2001) suggests that compulsory schooling laws
and child labor laws did not aﬀect blacks.
18

Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) have gathered similar data. The data for this project was collected independently.

19

The state-level variables were suggested by the work of Goldin (1994) and Goldin and Katz (1997).

20

I regressed mobility between state-of-birth and state-of-residence in1960 as a function of education, compulsory
education laws and all other covariates used in this paper. The F statistic of joint significance of the laws has a
value of 1.17 (p value of 0.3151), suggesting the laws cannot explain mobility. Also Lleras-Muney (2001) shows
that restricting the sample to those that are still living in their state-of-birth yields estimates of the eﬀect of the
laws that are statistically identical to those presented here.

6

3

Did Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws aﬀect
schooling? First Stage

The validity of the methodology proposed in this paper rests on the crucial assumption that compulsory attendance laws and child labor laws can be used as instruments. This section estimates
the first stage, showing that the laws are good predictors of educational attainment both at the
individual and aggregate level. I also provide additional evidence here that the laws are good
instruments. These results will then be used in the two-stage (IV) estimations in Sections 4 and
5.

3.1

Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws

Since their inception in Massachusetts in 1852, compulsory attendance laws have been complex.
They specify a minimum and a maximum age between which school attendance is required; a
minimum period of attendance; penalties for non-compliance; and the conditions under which
individuals could be exempted from attending school, such as the completion of a given grade,
mental or physical disability, distance from school, and so on. The most common exemption
was for work. Work permits were available even for young children, generally even younger
than the minimum dropout age specified by compulsory education laws. Child labor laws, which
extensively regulated the employment of minors, also included several conditions for the granting
of such permits and for exemptions.
Child labor laws and compulsory attendance laws often were not coordinated. Each stipulated
diﬀerent requirements for leaving school. For example, in 1924 in Pennsylvania, the ages for compulsory attendance were 8 to 16, but the child labor laws allowed 14 year-olds to get work permits
and leave school.21

Continuation school laws, which forced children at work to continue their

education on a part-time basis, were the only laws that attempted to bridge this gap. Compulsory attendance laws and child labor laws were in place in all states by 1918, and were modified
21

During this early period work permits eﬀectively allowed children to leave school. See Woltz (1955).

7

frequently thereafter.
There is little agreement regarding the eﬀectiveness of these laws.22

Previous studies (in-

cluding my own)23 suggest that only three of the many aspects of these laws had an impact
on individual educational attainment: the age at which a child had to enter school (enter age),
the age at which the child could get a work permit and leave school (work age), and whether or
not the state required children with work permits to attend school on a part-time basis (contsch). Following Acemoglu and Angrist (1999), I combine the age at which a child had to
enter school and the age required for work permit into a single variable, childcom, defined as:
childcom = work age − enter age. This variable is the implicit number of years that a child had
to attend school, given that the entering age and the work permit age were enforced. It takes the
values of 0, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10. The other variable, contsch, takes the value of 1 if continuation
school laws were in place. Tabulations describing these laws throughout the period for each state
are shown in the Appendix. Importantly note that it is not always the case that more years of
compulsory schooling were required, although on average states required more schooling towrds
the end of the period.
The period from 1915-1939 is when compulsory education laws (hereafter I refer to both compulsory attendance laws and child labor laws as “compulsory education laws”) are more likely to
have aﬀected many individuals. Secondary schooling was experiencing remarkable growth, especially in the first 40 years of this century.24 Also, in the previous period (up to 1915), these laws
were perceived as ineﬀective.25

But social scientists agree that the laws were enforced by the

1920s26 and Schmidt’s work (1995)–the only study to concentrate on this period–confirms it.
22

For a detailed review of these studies see Lleras-Muney (2001).

23

See Lleras-Muney (2002), Angrist and Acemoglu (1999) and Schmidt (1996).

24

Goldin and Katz (1997) show that the percentage of young adults with high school degrees increased from 9
percent in 1910 to more than 50 percent in 1940.
25

Many state laws did not even provide enforcement mechanisms, and if they did, there were often insuﬃcient
means to enforce them, especially in rural areas. See Katz (1976) and Ensign (1921)
26

See Katz(1976).

8

Edwards (1978), and Angrist and Krueger (1991) suggest that the laws declined in importance
after the 1940s. So the first part of the 20th century provides the perfect window of opportunity
for using the laws as instruments. Finally, from a technical point of view, this period is interesting
because states were constantly changing their compulsory education and child labor laws.

3.2

The eﬀect of the laws on educational attainment

As preliminary evidence of the eﬀect of these laws on education, I graph the average education by
childcom for the entire sample (Figure 5) and by cohort, for every 5th cohort in the data (Figure
6). Both graphs show that average education is higher for those in states where more education
was compulsory. In order to add further controls, I turn to regression analysis. Pooling individual
data from the 1960 and 1970 census, I estimate the following model:
Eics = b + CLcs π + Xics β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εics .
The dependent variable is years of completed education for individual i of cohort c born in state s.
CL is a set of dummies for compulsory education laws in place in state s when the individual was
14, Xics are individual characteristics such as gender and region of current residence, Wcs is a set of
characteristics of individual i ’s state-of-birth at age 14 (such as manufacturing wages, expenditures
in education, per capita doctors, etc.), γ c are cohort dummies, αs are state-of-birth dummies. The
regression also includes interactions between region-of-birth and cohort, an intercept (b) and a
dummy for 1970. I also estimate the model by aggregating the data at the state-of-birth/cohort
and gender level. Both estimations will be used in Section 4 (first stage).
Table 2 shows the results. The first column estimates the relationship including only state
eﬀects, cohort eﬀects, a female dummy, and a set of dummies for the laws. The coeﬃcients are
fairly robust to the addition of other controls (see column 2).27 The last column shows the results
from estimating the equation using the data aggregated at the state-of-birth, cohort and gender
2 7 Inclusion of other variables, such as income, immigrant status of parents, has no impact on them. Also,
regressions by region-of-birth or by gender yield similar results. See Lleras-Muney (2001) for these results.

9

level. The estimations show that the laws increased the educational attainment of individuals. As
expected, all dummies for the laws are positive and significant and they generally increase as the
number of compulsory years increases. Overall, the implied increase in educational attainment
due to childcom is around 4.8 percent.28 This estimate is similar to those reported by Acemoglu
and Angrist (2000), Eisenberg (1988) and Angrist and Krueger (1991). Also, the continuation
school dummy is positive.29
Before turning to the eﬀect of education on mortality, I present evidence that the laws are
good instruments. At the bottom the Table 2, I report the F-test of joint significance of the
laws; it shows that the laws are always jointly significant at the 5% level for both specifications.
Additionally the F-statistic is greater than (or very close to) 5, which suggests that the instruments
are strong. I also report the partial R-squared coeﬃcient, another measure of the instruments’
strength.30

It has a value of 0.0001 or higher, which compares favorably to those reported by

Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995).
It is also worth pointing out that the changes in the laws that took place during this period
appear to have been exogenous to individuals. Although diﬀerent states might have had diﬀerent
tastes for education, the regressions here include a very large set of controls (cohort dummies, stateof-birth dummies and region-of-birth*cohort interactions are included) which should capture this
eﬀect. Also note that the addition of controls (compare column 1 and 2 of Table 2) has little eﬀect
on the coeﬃcients of the laws, suggesting that any excluded state-of-birth/cohort level variables are
not correlated with the laws. Furthermore, Lleras-Muney (2001) presents evidence consistent with
exogenous laws: her results suggest that the laws impacted only the lower end of the distribution
of education. She rejects the hypothesis that changes in the laws during this period resulted from
28

This was calculated by replacing the set of dummies by the continuous variable. See Lleras-Muney (2001).

29

Continuation school is not significant in this sample, but previous work (see Lleras-Muney, 2001) showed that
this law aﬀected white males and individuals born in the north and south of the U.S. Therefore I include it.
3 0 Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995) suggest that: 1-the F statistic on the excluded instruments in the first stage
should be statistically significant and large (Staiger and Stock (1997) further suggests that a value of less than 5
could signal weak instruments. This is a rule of thumb); 2-the partial r-square should be high.

10

(rather than caused) increases in education.31
A final concern is that the laws must aﬀect individual health only through their eﬀect on
education. There is no evidence that the laws included any clauses or restrictions that would have
aﬀected health independently. For example, there were no lunch programs provided as part of
school attendance. Also the states that led in education during this period (the prairie states32
) were not the same states that led in health (northeastern states).33

But again, the controls

included here are meant to rule out this possibility. Finally, exogeneity tests are performed in the
IV estimation (see next section).
Overall the results show that the laws did have an impact on educational achievement, and
that their predictive power is large, so they can be used as instruments. Therefore I turn now to
the question of the eﬀect of education on mortality.

4

Health and Education: Econometric model

4.1

Least Squares Estimation

The econometric model for the relationship between education and health can be written as a
linear system of simultaneous equations:
Hi

= X1i β 1 + Ei π1 + ε1i

(1)

Ei

= X2i β 2 + Hi π 2 + ε2i ,

(2)

where H i is individual i’s health stock, E is his education level, X 1 is a vector of individual
characteristics that aﬀect health, such as smoking, and genetic factors. X 2 is a vector of individual
characteristics that determine education, such as ability. X 1 and X 2 may contain common factors.
3 1 The test, inspired by Landes and Solomon (1972), consists of matching individuals to the laws in place in their
state-of-birth when they were 17, 18 and up to 26 years of age, when these laws should no longer have aﬀected
them.
32

See Goldin and Katz (1997).

33

Starr’s 1982 book provides anecdotal evidence that the northern states lead in a variety of health aspects.
My own data supports this conclusion. For example, the north had the highest number of doctors per capita
throughout the period. And the number of doctors per capita in the north did not decline from 1915 to 1939 but
did decline in the rest of the country. The north also had the highest declines in infant mortality rates during this
period. (Results available upon request.)

11

This general specification allows for causality to run from education to health and vice-versa.
The purpose of this paper is to determine only whether or not education aﬀects health (i.e.
π 1 = 0?). Therefore I only estimate the health equation. Although health is unobserved, mortality
is observable. Following Grossman’s model of health (reviewed in his 1999 paper), death occurs
when the stock of health falls bellow a certain threshold. In a less deterministic model, H i is
proportional to the underlying probability (index) of being alive, and death is the observed result.
This is the usual limited-dependent variable set-up.
This mortality equation can be estimated at the individual level using the NHEFS but not the
census. If individuals could be followed from the 1960 census to the 1970 census (or from 1970 to
1980), then (based on the previous discussion) the following individual linear probability model
could be estimated:
Dt,ics = b + Eics π + (Xt−1 )ics β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εics ,

(3)

where Dti is equal to one if the individual is deceased at time t. E ics is i ’s education (measured
by completed years of education), Xt−1 are other individual characteristics measured as of (t-1)
(including gender), Wcs is a set of characteristics of individual i ’s state-of-birth at age 14, γ c is a
set of cohort dummies, αs is a set of state-of-birth dummies, b is an intercept, and ε is the error
term.
Using the census, individuals cannot be tracked over time, but I can track groups that are
constant over time, and calculate their death rates by aggregating the data. I aggregate by
gender, cohort, and state-of-birth. This aggregation level uses all of the available individual
characteristics that are time invariant (except for education), and therefore it maximizes the
number of observations in the aggregate data. The aggregate model is derived from the individual
model by averaging over individuals in a given gender/cohort/state-of-birth group as follows:
Dtgcs = b + E gcs π + (Xt−1 )gcs β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εgcs ,

(4)

where Dtgcs represents the proportion of individuals that died in a given group or the death
12

rate for that group, and Xt−1 gcs represents the average characteristics of that group at (t-1 ) (for
example, the the percentage of people in that group living in urban areas).34
Note that I use a linear probability model for the estimation. The existence of negative death
rates makes it impossible to use a non-linear model such as a Logit or Normit. However, since the
dependent variable (the death rate) is not censored below by 0, the linear probability assumption is
less problematic in this case than in general. In this linear model the error term is heteroskedastic
however. A standard estimation procedure35 in this case is to run weighted least squares, where
the weights are constructed using the observed probablities. Again, due to random sampling
and the error it generates, these observed probabilities can be negative, so this estimation is not
possible. In order to address the heteroskedasticity problem I estimate the equation by GLS
(weighted least squares) using the number of individuals in the group as weights. To correct for
further heteroskedasticity, I use White’s estimator.

4.2

Eﬃcient Wald estimates

One obvious solution to correct for the bias in the GLS coeﬃcient is to use Instrumental Variables
(IV). Given that many instruments are available, Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) would be the
preferred estimation method. At the individual level, the 2SLS model is:
Dti
Eics

= b + Eics π + (Xt−1 )ics β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εi
= b + CLcs π + (Xt−1 )ics β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εics ,

where D is equal to one if the individual is deceased at time t. E is i ’s education (measured
by completed years of education), Xt−1 are other individual characteristics measured as of (t-1)
(including gender), Wcs is a set of characteristics of individual i ’s state-of-birth at age 14, γ c is a
set of cohort dummies, αs is a set of state-of-birth dummies, b is an intercept, and ε is the error
term, which is assumed to be normal N(0,σ 21 I). CL is the set of compulsory education laws that
34

Including a dummy for gender.

35

See Maddala p. 29, Green p. 895.

13

serve as instruments to identify the education equation. This model can be estimated using the
individual NHEFS data but not with the census.
Since the census data can be used only as grouped data, the Wald estimator is an alternative
estimator for the eﬀect of education. Angrist (1991) showed that the Wald estimator for grouped
data is eﬃcient and in fact equivalent to 2SLS using individual level data. In the case of many
explanatory variables the eﬃcient Wald estimator is found by GLS estimation of the following
equation:
Dcrl = E crl π + γ c + δ r + εcrl ,

(5)

where Dcrl is the death rate for individuals born in cohort c in region r under compulsory law l,
and E csl is the average education of individuals born in cohort c in region r under compulsory
law l. The weights are given by the population in each group. In other words, Wald is estimated
by grouping the data by gender/cohort/region-of-birth and compulsory education law. This procedure is equivalent to 2SLS at the individual level, where gender, cohort dummies and region
dummies serve as their own instruments (since they are exogenous), and compulsory education
laws serve as instruments for education, the endogenous variable. The estimates are referred to
as the eﬃcient Wald estimates.
Note that because compulsory education laws are defined at the state-of-birth and cohort level,
I cannot control for both state-of-birth and cohort when using this estimator. This is a drawback
of the Wald estimator, especially if one thinks that state-of-birth and the laws are correlated.
In order to alleviate this problem, I control instead for region-of-birth. But region-of-birth may
not be a good proxy for state-of-birth. Furthermore, other individual (Xt−1 ) and state-of-birth
characteristics (Wcs ) cannot be included in this specification.

4.3

Two-Stage Least Squares with Aggregate Data

Alternatively, I can estimate the 2SLS model at the data that has been aggregated at the state-ofbirth/cohort and gender level. Estimation at the aggregate level results in less eﬃcient estimates

14

(see Green pp. 433-434) but all the covariates (especially state-of-birth) can be included. Using
the aggregate data 2SLS is obtained by estimating the following model:
Dgcs

= b + E gcs π + Xt−1 gcs β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εgcs

E gcs

= b1 + CLcs π + Xt−1 gcs β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εgcs

where now Dtgcs is the proportion of individuals who died in a given gender/cohort and state-ofbirth, E gcs is the average education of that group and (Xt−1 )gcs are other average characteristics.
Again, the weights are given by the number of observations in each cell, and the excluded instruments from the mortality equation are the compulsory education dummies, CLcs . The first stage
(estimation of E gcs ) was shown in the previous section.

4.4

Mixed Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation

The census allows me to estimate the first stage using individual data. The intuition behind
Mixed-2SLS is that it might be possible to take advantage of this fact and gain eﬃciency (relative
to the previous 2SLS) by estimating the first stage at the individual level (as done in the previous
section) and then aggregating the data by gender/cohort/state-of-birth. (See Dhrymes and LlerasMuney, 2001.)36 Mixed 2SLS is obtained by estimating the following equation through weighted
least squares:
b gcs π + Xt−1 β + Wcs δ + γ c + αs + εgcs
Dgcs = b + E
gcs

Again Dgcs represents the proportion of individuals who died in a given gender/cohort and
state-of-birth group, X gcs represents the average characteristics of the group, but now I include
b gcs , the average predicted education for that group from the first stage.37
E

The weights are

given by the number of observations in each cell. The excluded instruments from the mortality
equation are the compulsory education dummies. The only diﬀerence between standard 2SLS with

3 6 Dhrymes and Lleras-Muney (2001) compare 2SLS and Mixed 2SLS estimators. The question of which estimator
has lower variance turns out to be data dependent, but it is possible for Mixed 2SLS to be more eﬃcient.
37

The expression for the first stage was given in the previous section.

15

aggregated data and Mixed-2SLS is in the predicted education term. 2SLS uses predicted average
education whereas Mixed-2SLS uses average predicted education.
More formally, let H be the matrix that transforms the data into group means and weights
b contains all the same variables as
each group mean by the number of individuals in the group. X
in the GLS estimation, but with education replaced by the predicted level of education from the
h
i
b = E
b | Xt−1 | γ c | αs . Then the estimator β Mixed can be expressed as:
first stage regression (X
³
´−1
b 0H 0H X
b
b 0 H 0 HD
β Mixed = X
X

This procedure also results in consistent estimates. As usual the variance-covariance matrix
needs to be corrected.38

5

Results

5.1

Least Squares Results

Although we have good reason to believe that GLS produces biased estimates, I report them here
as the benchmark for comparison with the IV results. Using the census, I estimate the GLS model
described above. The results are in the first column of Table 3. The estimated coeﬃcient of the
eﬀect of education on the death rate is about -0.012. The coeﬃcient is highly significant and is is
robust to the inclusion of more controls.39
The validity of the aggregation procedure rests on the assumption that the aggregate data can
be understood as coming from unobserved individual data. It is important that this intuition be
confirmed, so I compare aggregate results from the census with those obtained with the NHEFS
individual data. Using individual NHEFS data, I estimate a linear probability model and a probit
model, where the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether or not the person died
between 1975 and 1985. Then I aggregate the NHEFS data by gender, state-of-birth, and cohort
and again estimate the same linear model estimated with the census data. Because of the small
38

The standard errors were bootstrapped using 2000 replications.

39

Results available upon request.

16

number of observations in the NHEFS aggregating by gender, state-of-birth and cohort results in
very few observations per cell, so I also reproduce the results only aggregating by state-of-birth
and cohort. The results are shown in Table 3.
Comparing the results from LS regressions from the census with results from the NHEFS shows
that the census data gives extremely accurate estimates of the eﬀect of education. The census
LS estimates are very similar to those obtained using the NHEFS aggregated data, which in turn
are similar to those obtained at the individual level, using either LS or probit estimations. These
results suggest that sampling (and the measurement error it generates) does not significantly
aﬀect the estimates for education, that there is no aggregation bias and that the linear model is
a good approximation of the education-death rate relationship. The comparison is also useful in
terms of interpretation: a -0.012 coeﬃcient for education means that increasing the education of a
given cell by one year lowers its death rate by 1.2 percentage points. This coeﬃcient also implies
that increasing an individual’s education by one year will lower his probability of dying between
1960 and 1970 (or between 1970 and 1980) by 1.2 percentage points. This latter interpretation is
more intuitive and useful. Note again that the OLS eﬀect is quite large: at the mean, this result
implies that a 10 percent increase in education lowers mortality by about 11 percent, therefore an
elasticity of about -1.

5.2

IV results

The first column in Table 4 presents the 2SLS results using the NHEFS. This estimation is done
at the individual level and using standard 2SLS. The estimate is positive (the eﬀect of education
is about -0.02) but not significant: because this sample is small, the first stage estimation40 is
poor. Nonetheless, although the standard errors are high, the estimates from this sample are also
larger than the GLS estimates obtained from the same data.
The second column shows the results from the Wald estimation. The Wald estimate of the eﬀect
4 0 Results available upon request. Only two of the dummies for compulsory education laws were significant at
the 10% level, and the set of dummies was jointly insignificant.

17

of education is about -0.037 and significant at the 5 percent level. The third column presents the
results of 2SLS estimation using aggregated data at the gender/state-of-birth-and cohort level. The
eﬀect of education is about -0.045 and significant at the 10 percent level. The Mixed 2SLS results
(last column) show that the coeﬃcient on education is approximately -0.059 and is significant at
the 5 percent level. All of the previous estimates are significant at the 5% level using a one-tailed
test (that the eﬀect is negative) which is perhaps more appropriate in this set-up.41 Overall the
results suggest that increasing education by one additional year lowers the 10-year death rate by
at least 3.6 percentage points.42
For the last two estimators I perform a test of overidentifying restrictions. The χ2 statistic
for the aggregate 2SLS model is 2.42 and 1.49 for the Mixed 2SLS model. This statistic tests
the hypothesis that the model is well specified. It is calculated as the sample size times the R2
from a regression of the residuals from the second stage on all exogenous variables, including the
instruments. In both cases the overidentifying restrictions are not rejected at a 5 percent level
(critical value 14.06). This test in conjunction with earlier results from the first stage suggests
that compulsory education laws are legitimate instruments.
Additional checks are presented in Table 5. As a last attempt to address the potential endogeneity of the laws, I repeat the estimations above using a larger set of instruments that include
quarter of birth, compulsory attendance and child labor laws, and the interactions of quarter
of birth and the laws. Presumably these individual-level instruments will increase the eﬃciency
of the estimates, and they are perhaps less likely to be endogenous.43

The results (Panel A)

are identical to those presented above. The results are also very similar if only the interactions
between the laws and quarter of birth are used as instruments, and quarter of birth as well as
41

I thank Michael Grossman for this insight.

42

Estimates by region are comparable in size to those presented here except that they are generally not significant.

43

Note however that the use of these instruments might be questionable (see papers in footnote 10). Also
Lleras-Muney (2001) shows for example that the laws aﬀected whites but not blacks. However quarter of birth
does appear to aﬀect blacks’ educational attainment. This again raises the issue of whether quarter of birth has an
independent eﬀect on education unrelated to compulsory attendance laws.

18

compulsory schooling laws are included as controls in both the first and second stage.44

This

again suggests that the instruments are not endogenous.
Panel B presents the reduced form estimates, i.e. the direct eﬀect of the laws on mortality. The
results are consistent with previous estimations: if the eﬀect of childcom on education is about 5
percent, and the eﬀect of education on mortality is about 6 percent, then the direct eﬀect of the
laws on mortality should be about 0.3 percent, which is approximately what the reduced form
result shows.
Panel C shows the results excluding ages 40, 50 and 60 since the data showed evidence of age
heaping. This is a potential problem if age heaping is correlated with education. The IV results
are very similar to the previous results. Finally in Panel D I repeat the estimations by region
of birth. They are quantitatively identical to all the results presented before. So the previous
estimates are not purely based on diﬀerences between regions.
Since, it is well known that there exist persistent diﬀerences in mortality rates by gender I
reproduce results by gender in Table 6. The coeﬃcient on education is somewhat smaller for
females than for males, confirming the findings in the literature that the eﬀect of education is
larger for males. These results also suggest that World Wars I and II did not results in significant
selection bias for men. Also, in these estimations the eﬀect of marriage is negative as the literature
suggest, whereas the eﬀect is positive in the joint estimations. This is a composition eﬀect: males
are both more likely die and to be married.

5.3

Discussion

This section has presented four diﬀerent estimates of the eﬀect of education on mortality. Three
diﬀerent estimators, using two diﬀerent data sets and three diﬀerent levels of aggregation, were
used. Although each estimate has weaknesses, all estimates point to the same conclusion: the
eﬀect of education is causal and in fact larger than OLS suggests. Given this variety of estimates,
44

Results available upon request.

19

this result is very robust. The result is surprising for two reasons. The first is that the IV estimates
are larger than the LS estimates. The second is that the eﬀect of education is quite large. In this
section I discuss these two issues.
5.3.1

Larger IV estimates

In all the IV estimations presented here, the eﬀect of education is much larger than the LS
estimates suggest. The Mixed 2SLS estimates suggest the eﬀect is as large as -0.058, whereas
Wald estimates imply a coeﬃcient of about -0.036. At first, this could seem to be a surprising
result: the a priori expectation was that LS estimates would be too large. However there are two
important points to notice.
First note that the standard errors in the IV estimates are large. Even though the IV estimates
are significantly diﬀerent from 0, it is unclear whether they are statistically diﬀerent from the OLS
estimates. To test whether the IV and OLS estimates are diﬀerent, one can perform a DurbinWu-Hausman test. The F-statistic for this test is 1.51 (p-value 0.22). Therefore I cannot reject
the null hypothesis that OLS and IV are the same.
Note that an implication of this test is that education is in fact exogenous, since it suggests
that the IV estimates are no diﬀerent from the OLS estimates in a statistical sense. From this
test, I conclude that education appears to have a large causal eﬀect on mortality. Furthermore, I
conclude that the larger IV estimates are not of particular concern.
However, if one still thought that education was endogenous, then the most plausible explanation for the diﬀerence between the IV and the OLS estimates in this case is related to the
choice of instrument.45 Under the assumption that diﬀerent individuals face diﬀerent returns to
education due to unobserved characteristics, IV estimates reflect the marginal rate of return of the
4 5 Another explanation is that the omitted variable bias is smaller than the bias that results from measurement
error in education (Card 1995) The health literature has not been concerned with this potential problem although
there is evidence of measurement error in education . If the measurement error is random, then IV estimate will
be larger than the OLS estimate. Larger IV returns can also be explained if there exist health externalities from
education for example if average education aﬀects individual health. However note that the fact that individual
and agregate estimations using the NHEFS result in similar eﬀects for education suggests that externalities are not
the main reason for larger IV.

20

group aﬀected by the instrument (Angrist, Imbens and Rubin, 1996), in this case IV capture the
returns to those aﬀected by the compulsory schooling laws. If I estimate a regression of mortality
as a function of education and education squared, where both are instrumented with compulsory
schooling laws, I do indeed find some evidence that the relationship is convex. However I do
not place too much weight on these results given that a) under the hypothesis that education is
endogenous, the instruments can only identify a non-linear relation for those aﬀected by the laws,
rather than for the population at large, and b) education does not appear to be endogenous!
5.3.2

What is the eﬀect of education on health?

The second issue is that the eﬀect of education is quite large, and it is important to understand
why. I categorize the potential eﬀects of education into two categories: direct and indirect eﬀects.
Among the direct eﬀect, education provides individuals with critical thinking skills that are
useful in the production of health (Grossman’s hypothesis). There is some evidence to this eﬀect.
For example, Goldman and Smith (2001) find that the more educated are more likely to comply
with treatments for diabetes and Aids. Goldman and Lakdawalla (2001) suggest that the more
educated are better able to manage chronic conditions. These two papers suggest that education
matters when treatments are complex and there is scope for learning by doing. These mechanisms
have also been documented by Rosenzweig and Schultz (1989), who compared success rates of
diﬀerent contraception methods for women with diﬀerent levels of education: they find that success
rates are identical for all women for “easy” methods such as the pill, but the rhythm method is
only eﬀective for educated women.
If this is the case, then the interaction of education with a variety of factors might be relevant. For example, although access to information alone cannot explain health diﬀerences across
education groups (Kenkel, 1991), information available to the more educated will result in greater
benefits for them if they can use the information better. For example when analyzing the eﬀects
of the 1964 Surgeon General Report, Meara (2001) concluded that “the response to knowledge

21

plays a more important role than knowledge itself in creating diﬀerential health behavior”.
Another possibility is that the more educated might be more likely to adopt and use new
medical technologies.46

Since the rate of medical innovation dramatically increased in the last

century, especially for particular diseases such as heart disease (Cutler et al. 1998), it is reasonable
to think that the more educated were able to capture very high returns during this period. LlerasMuney and Lichtenberg (2001) for example show that the more educated are more likely to use
newer drugs.
There are a few indirect mechanisms through which education might aﬀect health which are
also consistent with the results in this paper. One obvious one is that being in the classroom is
less of a health risk than working, especially while growing up. I cannot with my data distinguish
the eﬀect from not working from that of being in school.
Also note that education gives you access to a higher income and diﬀerent types of jobs, both
of which aﬀect health. For example, only high school graduates in the first half of the century
had access to white collar jobs, which provided healthier work environments than manufacturing
or agriculture. Controlling for income (or occupation) does not change the results in this paper
(results are presented in Table 7). But, since income is endogenous, it is not possible (given that
I have no instruments for income) to distinguish the direct eﬀect of education on health from
its indirect eﬀect through income. The same is true for occupation. However, Grossman (1975)
showed that the eﬀects of income on health disappear once a certain level of income has been
reached, while the same is not true for education. Furthermore, standard results suggest that the
returns to education are about 10% and that the elasticity of mortality with respect to income is
about -0.3.47 If the sole eﬀect of education is through income, one more year of education should
46

See Nelson and Phelps (1966)

47

Deaton and Paxson (1999).

22

decrease mortality by 0.003 (for average mortality of 0.11),48 which is a much smaller eﬀect than
what was estimated here. With respect to occupation, I simply note here that since the eﬀect of
education is similar for men and women, it would appear that occupation is not the only channel
through which education aﬀects health.
Finally note that the cognitive psychology literature has documented that lack of education is
correlated with stress, depression and hostility, all of which have been shown to adversely aﬀect
health (Adler et al, 1994).
A final comment is that the results in this paper do not imply that time preferences do not
aﬀect health and education choices nor that there is no reverse causality from health to education.
They simply show that there is a causal eﬀect of education on health, and that this eﬀect is not
due to time preferences. However, as Becker and Mulligan (1997) argue, education could lower
the discount rate, making people more patient. This is yet another indirect mechanism that could
explain my results.

6

Conclusion

This paper has shown that there is a large causal eﬀect of education on mortality. While GLS
estimates suggest that an additional year of education lowers the probability of dying in the next
10 years by approximately 1.3 percentage points, my results from the IV estimation show that
the eﬀect is perhaps much larger: at least 3.6 percentage points. However it is worth noting
that the OLS and the IV estimates are not statistically diﬀerent. Nonetheless the eﬀects are
48

The calculation is done as follows: Deaton and Paxson (1999) estimate that
log(

Studies in labor have found that

d
) = −0.3 log(inc)
1−d
log(inc) = 0.1ed

so by replacing I find that:
log(
the marginal eﬀect is given by

d
) = −0.03ed
1−d

∂d
= −0.03d(1 − d)
∂ed
Evaluated at the mean (i.e for d=0.11) this eﬀect is about -0.003

23

large. To better understand the impact of education, I calculate how this eﬀect translates into life
expectancy gains. I find that in 1960, one more year of education increased life expectancy at age
35 by as much as 1.7 years (using the OLS estimate). This is a very large increase.
A few notes of caution on how to interpret these results for public policy purposes are necessary. First, in order to make policy recommendations, we need to know more about the specific
mechanisms by which education aﬀects health. This paper analyzes the eﬀects of increasing education from relatively low initial levels. It is unclear what the eﬀects would be at higher initial
levels of education. The average education level for white Americans born in 1901 was at most
8.87 years.49

Today many developing countries, including most Latin American countries, have

average levels of education that are similar. This paper implies that more aggressive education
policies could dramatically increase adult longevity in such countries. But cost benefit analysis of
such policies are extremely complex, since for example we do not know what the cost of increasing
education would be, or its eﬀectiveness. Questions such as these are beyond the scope of this
paper. But the results presented here suggests that the benefits of education are large enough
that we need to consider education policies more seriously as a means to increase health, especially
in light of the fact that other factors, such as expenditures on health, have not been proven to be
very eﬀective.
This evidence that education increases life expectancy implies that the returns to education,
measured only in terms of earnings increases, substantially underestimate the true returns to
education. In view of the large magnitude of the eﬀect of education on health, it is clear that more
attention needs to be devoted to the pathways of influence. Existing models of the relationship
between education and health are very imprecise about the mechanisms through which education
operates on health.
4 9 This is the average education level of that cohort in 1960. Data for the entire population in 1901 does not
exist for the US, but the average was probably much lower.

24

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, “How Large are the Social Returns to Education?
Evidence from Compulsory schooling Laws,” NBER Working Paper No. W7444, December
1999
Adler, Nancy E. et al, “Socioeconomic Status and Health, the Challenge of the Gradient,”
American Psychologist, vol 49, No. 1January 1994
Angrist, Joshua D., “Grouped Data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor Supply Models,” Journal of Econometrics, February-March 1991
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, “Does Compulsory School Attendance Aﬀect
Schooling and Earnings?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1991
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin, “Identification of Causal Eﬀects
Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1996
Auster, Richard, Irving Leveson and Deborah Sarachek, “The Production of Health, An
Exploratory Study,” Journal of Human Resources 4, 1969
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan, “The Endogenous Determination of Time Preference,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1997
Berger, Mark C. and J. Paul Leigh “Schooling, Self Selection and Health,” Journal of Human
Resources 24, 1989
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger and Regina Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
Variables is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, June 1995
Bound, John, and David A. Jaeger, “On the Validity of Season of Birth as an Instrument in
Wage Equations: A Comment on Angrist and Krueger’s “Does Compulsory School Attendance Aﬀect Schooling and Earnings”,” NBER Working Paper 5835, November 1996
Card, David, “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Progress on some Persistent Econometric Problems,” NBER Working Paper no.W7769, June 2000
Card, David, “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited,” Research in Labor Economics,
vol. 14, 1995
Card, David and Alan Krueger, “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and
the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy
100, January 1992
Christenson, Bruce A., and Nan E. Johnson, “Educational Inequality in Adult Mortality:
An Assessment with Death Certificate Data from Michigan,” Demography 32. May 1995
Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson, “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Low Birth weight,”American Economic Review, May 1999
Cutler, David, Mark McClellan, and Joseph Newhouse, “The Costs and Benefits of Intensive
Treatment for Cardiovascular Disease,” NBER Working Paper No.w6514
Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson, “Mortality, Education, Income and Inequality among
American Cohorts,” NBER Working Paper 7140, May 1999

25

Dhrymes, Phoebus and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2001), “Estimation of Models with Group
Data by Means of ‘2SLS’,” mimeo, Columbia University, 2001
Duleep, H.O., “Measuring the Eﬀect of Income on Adult Mortality Using Longitudinal
Administrative Record Data,” Journal of Human Resources 21, 1986
Edwards, Linda N., “An Empirical Analysis of Compulsory Schooling Legislation, 19401960,” Journal of Law and Economics, April 1978
Eisenberg, M.J. (1988) “Compulsory Attendance legislation in America, 1870 to 1915,”
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania
Elo, Irma T. and Samuel H. Preston, “Educational Diﬀerentials in Mortality: United States,
1979-85,” Social Science and Medicine 42(1), 1996
Ensign, Forest Chester, “Compulsory School Attendance and Child Labor,” Iowa City, IA:
The Athens press, 1921
Farrell, P. and Victor R. Fuchs, “Schooling and Health: The Cigarette Connection,” Journal
of Health Economics, 1982
Filmer, Deon and Lant Prichett, “Child Mortality and Public Spending on Health: How
Much does Money Matter?,” World Bank Policy Research Working Papers 1864, December
1997
Fuchs, Victor R., “Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study,: in Victor Fuchs,
Ed., Economic Aspects of Health, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982
Goldin, Claudia, “How America Graduated From high School: 1910 to 1960,” NBER Working Paper No 4762, 1994
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz, “Why the United States Led on Education: Lessons
from Secondary School Expansion, 1910 to 1940,“ NBER Working Paper 6144, August 1997
Goldman, Dana P. and James P. Smith, ”Can Patient Self-Management Exaplin the SES
Health Gradient,” RAND Working Paper, June 2001
Goldman, Dana P. and Darius Lakdawalla, ”Understanding Health Disparities Across Education Groups,” NBER Working Paper 8328, June 2001
Green, William H., Econometric Analysis, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall, New Jersey 1997
Griliches, Zvi, “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems ,” Econometrica, January. 1977
Grossman, Michael, “The Human Capital Model of the Demand for Health,” NBER Working
Paper 7078, April 1999
Grossman, Michael, “The Correlation between Health and Schooling,” in Household Production and Consumption, Ed N. E. Terleckyj, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 40,
Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. New York: Columbia University Press for
the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975
Grossman, Michael and R. Kaestner “Eﬀects of Education on Health,” in J.R. Berhman and
N. Stacey Eds. The Social Benefits of education, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor,
1997

26

Haines, Michael R. and Samuel H. Preston, “The Use of the Census to Estimate Childhood
Mortality: Comparisons from the 1900 and 1910 United States Census Public Use Samples,”
Historical Methods, Vol 30, no.2, Spring 1997
Harmon, Colm, and Ian Walker, “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling for the
United Kingdom,” American Economic Review, Volume 85, Issue 5, December 1995
Hoek, H. W., A.S. Brown and E. Susser, “The Dutch Famine and Schizophrenia Spectrum
Disorders,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Volume 33, Issue 8, 1998
Katz, Michael, “A History of Compulsory Education Laws,” Phi Delta Kappa Educational
Foundation 1976
Kenkel, Donald, “Health Behavior, Health knowledge and Schooling,” Journal of Political
Economy, Volume 99, Issue 2, April 1991
Kitagawa, E.M. & P.M. Hauser, Diﬀerential Mortality in the United States: A Study in
Socioeconomic Epidemiology, Harvard University Press, 1973.
Landes William and Lewis C. Solomon, “Compulsory Schooling Legislation: An economic
Analysis of Law and Social Change in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Economic History,
March 1972
Leigh, J. Paul and Rachna Dhir, “Schooling and Frailty Among Seniors,” Economics of
Education Review, Volume 16, No. 1, 1997
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, “Were State Laws on Compulsory Education Eﬀective? An analysis
from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 45, No. 2, Part 1, forthcoming.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana and Frank Lichtenberg, “The eﬀect of education on medical technology adoption: Are the more educated more likely to use new drugs?,” mimeo, Princeton
University, April 2002.
Maddala, G.S. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics, Econometric
Society Monographs No. 3, Cambridge University Press, 1997
Meara, Ellen, “Why is Health Related to Socio-Economic Status? The Case of Pregnancy
and Low Birth Weight,” NBER Working Paper 8231, April 2001
Meghir, Costas and Marten Palme, “Assessing the Eﬀect of Schooling on earnings Using a
Social Experiment,” Unpublished Working Paper, University College London, 1999
Menchik, Paul L., “Economic Status as a Determinant of Mortality among Black and White
Older Men: Does Poverty Kill?,” Population Studies, November 1993
Munasinghe, Lalith and Nachum Sicherman, “Why do Dancers Smoke? Time Preference,
Occupational Choice, and Wage Growth,” NBER Working Paper 7542, February 2000
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Technological Diﬀusion,
and Economic Growth,” American Economic Review, Volume 56, Issue1/2, March 1966
Newhouse, Joseph P., Free for All? Lessons from the Rand Health Insurance Experiment.
Cambridge: Harvard University press. 1993
Perri, Timothy J., “Health Status and Schooling Decisions of Young Men,” Economics of
Education Review, 1984

27

Rogers, Richard G., Robert A. Hummer and Charles B. Nam, Living and Dying in the USA,
Academic Press 2000
Roseboom, T.J. et al, “Coronary heart Disease after Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch Famine,
1944-45,” Heart, Volume 84, Issue 6, 2000
Rosenzweig M.R and T.P. Schultz, “Education and Household Production of Child Health,”
In Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Social Statistics Section) Washington, DC: American Statistical Association, 1991
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz “Schooling, Information and Nonmarket Productivity: Contraceptive Use and its eﬀectiveness,” International Economic Review, May 1989,
30920), pp. 457-77
Steven Ruggles and Matthew Sobek et. al., Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version
2.0 Minneapolis: Historical Census Projects, University of Minnesota, 1997
Sander, William, “Schooling and Quitting Smoking,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
77, 1995
Schmidt, Stefanie, “School Quality, Compulsory Education Laws, and the Growth of American High School Attendance, 1915-1935,” MIT Ph.D. Dissertation 1996
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,” Econometrica;65(3), May 1997
Starr, Paul, “The Social Transformation of American Medicine,” New York: Basic Books,
1982
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas, “Human Resources: Empirical Modelling of Household and Family Decisions,” in Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. III, Edited by J.
Behrman, T.N. Srinivasan. Elsevier Science 1995
Wolfe, Barbara and Jere R. Behrman, “Women’s Schooling and Children’s Health: Are
the Eﬀects Robust with Adult Sibling Control for the Women’s Childhood Background?,”
Journal of Health Economics 6 , 1987
Woltz, Charles, K.,“Compulsory Attendance at School,” in Law and Contemporary Problems, School of Law, Duke University Vol. 20 Winter 1955

28

Appendix: Trends for Compulsory education and Child Labor laws
Compulsory Attendance Laws
Age at which must enter school (enter age)

6
7
8
9
Total

States 1915
0
16
25
1
42

States 1928
2
28
17
1
48

States 1939
2
33
13
0
48

Child Labor Laws
Minimun age to get work permit (work age)

12
13
14
15
16
Total

States 1915
2
1
38
4
0
45

States 1928

States 1939

42
4
2
48

32
4
12
48

Continuation School Laws
Have Continuation School Laws
States 1915
0
36
1
12
Total
48

States 1928
20
28
48

States 1939
19
29
48

Constructed Variable: Implicit number of years had to attend school
Childcom = work age - enter age

0
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total

States 1915
8
1
2
21
14
2

48

States 1928

1
15
26
5
1
48

States 1939

9
23
7
8
1
48

Years of compulsory schooling

0

10

0

10

0

10

0

10

0

10

0

10

0

10

15

Vermont

Pennsylvania

New Mexico

Mississippi

Kentucky

Florida

Alabama

39
15

Virginia

Rhode Island

New York

Missouri

Louisiana

Georgia

Arizona

39
15

Washington

South Carolina

North Carolina

Montana

Maine

Idaho

Arkansas

15

Year

39

15

Wisconsin

Tennessee

Ohio

Nevada

Massachusetts

Indiana

Colorado

Graphs by State

39

West Virginia

South Dakota

North Dakota

Nebraska

Maryland

Illinois

California

39

15

Wyoming

Texas

Oklahoma

New Hampshire

Michigan

Iowa

Connecticut

39

15

Utah

Oregon

New Jersey

Minnesota

Kansas

Delaware

39

TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS
Census*

NEFS**

Variables

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Individual
10-year death rate
characteristics Years of completed education
1970 Dummy
Female
Married
Live in North
Live in West
Live in South
Live in an urban area
Age
Born in 1901
Born in 1902
Born in 1903
Born in 1904
Born in 1905
Born in 1906
Born in 1907
Born in 1908
Born in 1909
Born in 1910
Born in 1911
Born in 1912
Born in 1913
Born in 1914
Born in 1915
Born in 1916
Born in 1917
Born in 1918
Born in 1919
Born in 1920
Born in 1921
Born in 1922
Born in 1923
Born in 1924
Born in 1925

0.106
10.697
0.471
0.517
0.818
0.255
0.285
0.159
0.685
50.366
0.029
0.025
0.028
0.029
0.031
0.032
0.033
0.036
0.036
0.038
0.039
0.040
0.042
0.043
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.046
0.047
0.048
0.048
0.050
0.049
0.049
0.050

0.136
1.020
0.499
0.500
0.096
0.369
0.351
0.227
0.122
8.482
0.167
0.157
0.166
0.169
0.174
0.177
0.180
0.186
0.187
0.191
0.193
0.195
0.200
0.202
0.205
0.205
0.206
0.209
0.213
0.213
0.214
0.217
0.216
0.215
0.217

0.254
10.360

0.435
3.326

0.540
0.755
0.214
0.250
0.269
0.526
62.941
0.039
0.054
0.056
0.056
0.061
0.068
0.055
0.042
0.025
0.026
0.027
0.028
0.028
0.031
0.033
0.032
0.034
0.035
0.041
0.037
0.038
0.039
0.034
0.044
0.036

0.498
0.430
0.410
0.433
0.444
0.499
7.561
0.193
0.226
0.230
0.230
0.239
0.251
0.227
0.200
0.155
0.160
0.161
0.165
0.165
0.174
0.178
0.177
0.182
0.184
0.198
0.188
0.192
0.194
0.182
0.206
0.187

State-of-Birth % Urban
53.523
21.279
49.846
20.734
Characteristics % Foreign
11.737
8.523
11.489
8.434
% Black
8.983
11.901
10.108
13.652
% Employed in manufacturing
0.067
0.039
0.065
0.040
Annual Manufacturing wage
7161.911
1368.253
6971.696
1380.099
Value of farm per acre
540.048
276.353
549.371
292.371
Per capita number of doctors
0.001
0.000
0.0013
0.0003
Per capita education expenditures
96.474
42.142
86.305
44.411
Number of school buildings per sq. mile
0.174
0.090
0.173
0.092
*N=4795, corresponding to cells defined at the gender, state-of-birth, and cohort. All means calculated
using weights, where the weights are given by the number of observations in each cell. Monetary values
are in 1982-84 dollars. ** N: 4554. Monetary values are in 1982-84 dollars

Figure 1: Number of observations per cohort
25000
20000

1960 census
1970 census
1980 census

15000
10000
5000
0
1901 1903 1905 1907 1909 1911 1913 1915 1917 1919 1921 1923 1925
Birth year

Figure 2: Average years of education by cohort
12.00

11.00
1960 census
1970 census
1980 census
10.00

9.00
1901 1903 1905 1907 1909 1911 1913 1915 1917 1919 1921 1923 1925
Birth year

Note: Figures 1 and 2 follow the same cohorts from the 1960 census up to the 1980 census.
In Figure 1 we can observe that that 10-year mortality increases with age: for older cohorts the number
of individuals observed in 1980 is much smaller than in 1960 or 1970.
In figure 2 we can see that the average level of education is higher in 1980 than in 1960 for all cohorts,
suggesting that those who died in each cohort had bellow average levels of education.

Figure 3: Calculating Death Rates with the Census

The 1960 and 1970 census are 1/100 random
samples of the population, therefore the number
of individuals in any given group is always
observed with error. Because of this sampling
error the death rates for any given group are overestimated 50% of the time and underestimated
50% of the time. However, since the sampling is
truly random, the observed death rates are
consistent estimates of the true death rates.

Figure 3B: An example for a young cohort: 0 death rate

If the true death rate is 0 then I observe 50%
negative death rates. As cohorts age, the death
rate increases (see example above) the number
of negative death rates falls.

Figure 4A: Percentage of negative Death Rates per Cohort
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

1960-1970 Death Rate

0.3

1970-1980 Death Rate

0.2
0.1
0
1901

1904

1907

1910

1913

1916

1919

1922

1925

Birth Year

average number of observations in state

Figure 4B: Percentage of negative death rates by average state size
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

percentage of negative death rates

0.5

0.6

0.7

Figure 4C: Observed 10-year death rates by age
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

1960 Census
1970 Census
1975 NHEFS

0.2
0.1
0
35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73
-0.1

Age

Figure 5: Average education level by years of compulsory education
12
11
10
9
8
7
0

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Years of compulsory education

Figure 6: Average education level by compulsory education for
selected cohorts
13.00
12.00
11.00

1915
1920

10.00

1925
1930

9.00

1935
1939

8.00
7.00
6.00
0

4

5

6

7

8

Years of compulsory education

9

1

TABLE 2: EFFECT OF COMPULSORY EDUCATION LAWS ON EDUCATION
Variables
Dependent Variable

Education

Education Laws

Childcom Category 4(a)
Childcom Category 5
Childcom Category 6

Individual data

Individual data

Aggregate data

0.347**
(0.075)
0.323**
(0.090)

0.355**
(0.088)
0.260**
(0.099)

0.323**
(0.077)
0.321**
(0.098)

0.274**
(0.069)
0.385**
(0.070)
0.416**
(0.075)
0.580**
(0.076)
0.325**
(0.080)
0.027
(0.026)
0.116**
(0.014)

0.302**
0.266**
(0.087)
(.074)
Childcom Category 7
0.408**
0.369**
(0.087)
(0.074)
Childcom Category 8
0.398**
0.315**
(0.089)
(0.078)
Childcom Category 9
0.512**
0.470**
(0.092)
(0.084)
Childcom Category 10
0.328**
0.318**
(0.095)
(0.095)
Continuation School Required (=1)
0.017
0.027
(0.028)
(0.031)
Individual
Female
0.140**
-0.012
characteristics
(0.014)
(0.014)
Married
0.433**
-1.111**
(0.011)
(0.097)
Live in an urban area
0.968**
0.278**
(0.019)
(0.138)
State-of-Birth
% Urban
0.021**
0.028**
Characteristics
(0.004)
(0.005)
% Foreign
-0.002
0.004
(0.008)
(0.010)
% Black
0.024**
0.020**
(0.009)
(0.010)
% Employed in manufacturing
-0.350
-1.220**
(0.513)
(0.621)
Annual Manufacturing wage
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
Value of farm per acre
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
Per capita number of doctors
150.018**
188.615**
(71.840)
(66.2)
Per capita education expenditures
0.001**
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
Number of school buildings per sq. mile
-0.359
-0.166
(0.289)
(0.373)
3 region of residence dummies
No
Yes
Yes
Region of birth*cohort dummies
No
Yes
Yes
R-Squared
0.0811
0.1052
0.888
F-statistic on instruments
14.93**
8.37**
4.49**
Partial R-squared
0.0003
0.0001
0.0108
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. All regressions include a dummy for the 1970 census, stateof-birth dummies, cohort dummies and an intercept. For the individual-level regressions (1 and 2)
N=814805 and the standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the state-of-birth and cohort level.
(a) Childcom=work permit age - entry age. Childcom=0 is the excluded category.
(b) Data aggregated by gender/cohort/state-of-birth. Robust standard errors. N=4792

TABLE 3: EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON MORTALITY-LEAST SQUARE RESULTS
Variables
Data

Census

Method

NHEFS

WLS

(d)

OLS
(b)

Aggregate

Level

NHEFS
(a)

Probit

NHEFS

NHEFS

WLS

W LS
(b)

Individual Individual Aggregate

Aggregate(c)

Dependent
Variable

10-year
death rate

died
75-85

died
75-85

death rate
75-85

death rate
75-85

Individual
Education
characteristics
Female

-0.012**
(0.004)
-0.048**
(0.004)
0.227**
(0.030)
-0.136**
(0.044)

-0.012**
(0.002)
-0.147**
(0.013)
-0.044**
(0.016)
0.037**
(0.015)

-0.011**
(0.002)
-0.151**
(0.013)
-0.053
(0.015)
0.039**
(0.015)

-0.017**
(0.004)
-0.137**
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.030)
0.056**
(0.024)

-0.013**
(0.005)
-0.139**
(0.030)
-0.015
(0.037)
0.080**
(0.030)

0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.075
(0.105)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-2.043
(14.384)
0.000
(0.000)
0.045
(0.064)

-0.003
(0.005)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.014*
(0.008)
-0.085
(0.590)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
1.058
(48.228)
0.000
(0.000)
0.712**
(0.345)

-0.003
(0.005)
0.012
(0.008)
-0.012
(0.008)
-0.060
(0.563)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
17.451
(39.746)
0.000
(0.000)
0.744**
(0.334)

-0.002
(0.005)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.091
(0.621)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.762
(49.833)
0.000
(0.000)
0.725**
(0.360)

-0.002
(0.005)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.100
(0.640)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-2.139
(52.857)
0.000
(0.000)
0.758**
(0.380)

Married
Live in an urban area

State-of-Birth % Urban
Characteristics
% Foreign
% Black
% Employed in manufacturing
Annual Manufacturing wage
Value of farm per acre
Per capita number of doctors
Per capita education expenditures
# of school buildings per sq. mile

N
4792
4554
4554
1557
942
R-Squared
0.3685
0.1736
0.3952
0.5219
All regressions include 24 cohort dummies, 47 state of birth dummies, region-of-birth * cohort, region
of residence dummies and an intercept. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the state-of-birth
and cohort level. The census regressions also include a dummy for the 1970 census.
(a) The reported coefficients are the mean marginal effects. The standard errors are calculated using
the Delta Method.
(b) Data are aggregated at the cohort/gender and state-of-birth level.
(c) Data aggregated at the cohort and state-of-birth level only.
(d) All regressions at the aggregate level are weighted by the number of observations in the original
cell
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%.

TABLE 4: EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON MORTALITY-IV RESULTS
Variables
Data

NHEFS(b)

Census(a)(c)

Census(a)(b)(c)

Census(a)(b)(c)

Method

2SLS

Wald

2SLS

Mixed 2SLS

Level

Individual

Aggregate

Aggregate

Aggregate

Dependent
Variable

Died
1975-1985

10-year
death rate

10-year
death rate

10-year
death rate

-0.020
(0.054)

-0.037**
(0.006)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.071**
(0.004)

-0.045*
(0.026)
0.012**
(0.005)
-0.048**
(0.004)
0.190**
(0.041)
-0.126**
(0.045)

-0.059**
(0.027)
0.021**
(0.007)
-0.040**
(0.005)
0.266**
(0.031)
-0.080
(0.054)

0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.118
(0.113)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
6.078
(15.337)
0.000
(0.000)
0.051
(0.066)

0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.080
(0.137)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
6.675
(17.31)
0.000
(0.000)
0.044
(0.075)

Individual
Education
characteristics
1970 Dummy
Female
Married
Live in an urban area

State-of-Birth % Urban
Characteristics
% Foreign
% Black
% Employed in manufacturing
Annual Manufacturing wage
Value of farm per acre
Per capita number of doctors
Per capita education expenditures
Number of school buildings per sq. mile

-0.142**
(0.030)
-0.040
(0.027)
0.046
(0.055)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.008)
-0.089
(0.605)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
7.298
(62.347)
0.000
(0.000)
0.698**
(0.350)

State-of-birth Dummies
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Region of Birth Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Cohort Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Region-of-birth*cohort
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Region of residence dummies
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
N
4554
1396
4792
4792
All regressions include an intercept.
(a) Regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the original cell.
(b) Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the state-of-birth and cohort level and have been
corrected in the second stage.
(c) Note: P2SLS and aggregate 2SLS use data aggregated at the gender/cohort/state-of-birth. Wald
uses data aggregated at the gender/cohort/region-of-birth/compulsory education laws level.
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%.

TABLE 5: ADDITIONAL ESTIMATIONS
A: Effect of education on mortality:
Quarter of birth, laws and interactions used as instruments

Dependent
Variable

10-year death rate

Individual

Education

2SLS

Mixed 2SLS

-.067**
(.0260)

-.062**
(.024)

B: Effect of compulsory schooling on education:
Reduced form Results (OLS)
Dependent
Variable

10-year death rate
Childcom
Continuation school

-0.0027**
(0.0013)
-0.0032
(0.005)

C: Effect of education on mortality: Results corrected for Age Heaping:
(Exclude ages 40, 50, and 60)

Dependent
Variable

10-year death rate

Individual

Education

2SLS

Mixed 2SLS

-.040
(.026)

-.052
(.026)

D: Effect of education on mortality:
Results by region of birth
Dependent Variable10year death rate

North
South
West
Midwest

* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%.

2SLS

Mixed 2SLS

-0.047
(0.060)
-0.044
(0.038)
-0.078
(0.071)
-0.045
(0.043)

-0.083
(0.108)
-0.061*
(0.033)
-0.071
(0.095)
-0.014
(0.095)

TABLE 6: EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON MORTALITY-IV RESULTS BY GENDER

Variables
Dependent
Variable

2SLS

2SLS

Mixed 2SLS Mixed 2SLS

Males

Females

Males

Females

-0.047
(0.051)
-0.292**
(0.082)
0.025
(0.009)
-0.096
(0.059)

-0.044
(0.063)
-0.311**
(0.059)
-0.057**
(0.011)
-0.102
(0.067)

-0.077
(0.040)
-0.263**
(0.087)
0.032**
(0.009)
-0.002
(0.079)

-0.054
(0.039)
-0.297**
(0.065)
-0.052**
(0.011)
-0.036
(0.078)

0.002
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
-0.095
(0.328)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
22.270
(24.002)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.018
(0.148)

0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.128
(0.264)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-6.219
(32.441)
0.000
(0.000)
0.078
(0.155)

0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.056
(0.182)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
27.940
(22.782)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.057
(0.103)

0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.103
(0.194)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-5.860
(26.29)
0.000
(0.000)
0.094
(0.106)

10-year death rate

Individual
Education
characteristics
Married
Dummy for 1970
Live in an urban area

State-of-Birth % Urban
Characteristics
% Foreign
% Black
% Employed in manufacturing
Annual Manufacturing wage
Value of farm per acre
Per capita number of doctors
Per capita education expenditures
Number of school buildings per sq. mile

N
2397
2395
2397
2395
All regressions include 24 cohort dummies, 47 state-of-birth dummies, region-of-birth * cohort
interactions, region-of-residence dummies and an intercept. All regressions are weighted by the number
of observations in the original cell. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are robust.
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%.

TABLE 7: IS THE EFFECT OF EDUCATION ONLY THROUGH INCOME OR OCCUPATION?
Dependent Variable: 10-year death rate
Method

2SLS

Mixed-2SLS

-0.045*
(0.026)

-0.059**
(0.027)

-0.046*
(0.027)
-1.00e-06**
2.32e-07

-0.051**
(0.023)
-9.79e-07**
2.33e-07

-0.036
(0.029)
-8.4e-07**
(2.3e-07)

-0.042
(0.029)
-8.6e-07**
(2.3e-07)

-0.358**
(0.060)
-0.034
(0.107)
0.004
(0.064)
-0.151
(0.099)
-0.278**
(0.069)
-0.006
(0.054)
0.111
(0.073)
0.034
(0.085)

-0.242**
(0.116)
-0.099
(0.073)
0.090
(0.059)
-0.182**
(0.091)
-0.294**
(0.072)
-0.065
(0.069)
0.074
(0.067)
0.041
(0.075)

Education only (from table 4)
Education

Education and income
Education
Family Income

Education, Income and occupation dummies
Education
Family income
Occupations(*)
Professional
Managers
Clerks
Sales
Operatives
Service
Household services
Farmer and farm laborers

All regressions include controls for all variables included in previous estimations (see Table 4). All
regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the original cell. Standard errors (in
parenthesis) are clustered at the state-of-birth and cohort level. Estimated using census data aggregated
at the gender/state-of-birth/cohort level. N=4792
Note: Total Family income: Mean 16647.16, S.E. 14280. (*)Occupation not available is the left-out
category

