                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             RISK SHARING AND ASSET PRICES:
                         EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT


                                            Anusha Chari
                                           Peter Blair Henry


                                          Working Paper 8988
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8988


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




Henry gratefully acknowledges the financial support of an NSF CAREER award and the Stanford Institute
of Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). This is a revised version of NBER WP 8265. We thank Geert
Bekaert, and Campbell Harvey for extensive comments on previous versions of this paper. We also thank
Michael Brennan, Steve Buser, Kalok Chan, Judy Chevalier, Eugene Fama, Harrison Hong, Michael Melvin,
Rich Lyons, Lubos Pastor, Paul Romer and seminar participants at the AFA, Chicago, Kansas, Michigan,
NBER, North Carolina, Ohio State, Stanford, Virginia, and WFA for comments. Any remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence From a Natural Experiment
Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 8988
June 2002
JEL No. F3, F4, G12



                                               ABSTRACT

        When countries liberalize their stock markets, firms that become eligible for purchase by
foreigners (investible), experience an average stock price revaluation of 10.4 percent. Since the
covariance of the median investible firm’s stock return with the local market is 30 times larger than its
covariance with the world market, liberalization reduces the systematic risk associated with holding
investible securities. Consistent with this fact: 1) the average effect of the reduction in systematic risk
is 3.4 percentage points, or roughly one third of the total effect; and 2) variation in the firm-specific
response is directly proportional to the firm-specific change in systematic risk. The statistical significance
of this proportionality persists after controlling for changes in expected future profits and index inclusion
criteria such as size and liquidity.




Anusha Chari                                                       Peter Blair Henry
University of Michigan Business School                             Stanford University
701 Tappan Street                                                  Graduate School of Business
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                                Stanford, CA 94305-5015
achari@umich.edu                                                   and NBER
                                                                   pbhenry@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

       A central tenet of asset pricing theory is that capital will be allocated in such a

way that risk-adjusted returns are equalized across assets. The level of expected stock

returns should vary cross-sectionally according to the level of firms' exposure to

systematic risks. Implications for changes in expected returns follow directly from the

theory in levels. Whenever there is a change in the level of systematic risk, stock prices

should change in such a way that risk-adjusted returns are equalized once again.

       This prediction is testable empirically. In recent years a number of countries have

undertaken stock market liberalizations. A stock market liberalization is a decision by a

country’s government to allow foreigners to purchase shares in that country’s stock

market. Opening the stock market to foreign investors enables domestic agents in a small

open economy to share risk with the rest of the world. Since liberalizations alter the set

of non-diversifiable risks for the representative investor, stock prices should move in line

with the change in systematic risk.

       It is important to understand whether stock prices respond to changes in

systematic risk, because stock prices provide public signals of real investment

opportunities (Fischer and Merton, 1984; Morck, 2000; Stulz, 1999a; Tobin and

Brainard, 1977; Summers, 1985). If liberalization decreases the riskiness of a firm, then,

all else equal, its stock price should increase. This price increase signals to managers that

they can increase shareholder welfare by investing in physical capital. On the other hand,

if liberalizations are associated with stock price increases that are unrelated to changes in

risk, then the optimal investment response is less clear (Blanchard, Rhee and Summers,

1993; Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1990). Therefore, an empirical analysis of whether




                                                                                           1
stock prices move in line with changes in systematic risk also provides a first step toward

understanding whether physical investment is efficiently reallocated when barriers to

capital movements are removed.

       This paper focuses on an experiment in which the level of systematic risk changes

unexpectedly and examines whether expected returns move in a direction that is

consistent with the theory.      Specifically, firm-level, cross-country data are used to

evaluate whether the stock price revaluations that occur when emerging economies open

their stock markets to foreign investors are driven by changes in risk. The capital asset

pricing model (CAPM) predicts that two effects will drive the stock price revaluation of

each publicly traded firm within a given country (Stulz, 1999a, b, c). The first effect is

common to all firms: a fall in the risk-free rate as the country moves from financial

autarky to financial integration with the rest of the world (Lucas, 1990). The second

effect is specific to any given firm. The greater the covariance of a firm’s stock return

with the local market relative to the covariance of its returns with the world market, the

larger the firm-specific component of that firm’s stock price revaluation.

       When countries liberalize their stock markets, some publicly listed firms become

eligible for foreign ownership (investible firms), while others remain off limits (non-

investible firms). This investible/non-investible aspect of the data generates two testable

implications of the theory. First, take two firms that are identical except that one is

investible and the other is non-investible. Theory predicts that the revaluation effect for

the investible firm should be more strongly related to its covariance structure of returns

than in the case of the non-investible firm. Second, the fall in the risk-free rate effect is a

common shock to all firms in the economy. Therefore, this effect should be the same




                                                                                             2
across investible and non-investible firms. This second implication provides a further

consistency check of the theory.

           Panel data estimations show that the data are consistent with both of these

predictions.     The firm-specific revaluations of investible securities are significantly

related to the difference in the covariance of their returns with the local and world

markets. An investible firm, whose historical covariance with the local market exceeds

that with the world market by 0.01, will experience a firm-specific revaluation of 3.4

percent when the stock market is liberalized.               In contrast, there is no firm-specific

revaluation for non-investible firms. The estimations also confirm that the common

shock is indeed the same for investible and non-investible firms, as predicted by the

theory.

           The use of firm-level data in this paper departs from studies that use aggregate

data to document the stock market revaluation that occurs when emerging economies

liberalize (Bekaert and Harvey, 2000; Henry, 2000a; Kim and Singal, 2000).                            The

evidence in these papers suggests that liberalizations substantially reduce the cost of

capital.     However, these papers are silent about whether this reduction stems from

increased risk sharing. In principle, the observed revaluations could be driven entirely by

changes in the risk-free rate. The problem is that we observe only one aggregate stock

price revaluation per country when stock market liberalizations occur. This means that

analyses of aggregate data do not provide sufficient degrees of freedom to disentangle the

contribution of changes in the risk-free rate from those of risk sharing.1 In contrast, firm-

level data provide more than sufficient degrees of freedom with which to disentangle the


1
  This is a specific example of the more general point made by Stulz (1995a). Tests based on stock market
indices have limited power in assessing the importance of barriers to international investment.


                                                                                                            3
common shock from that of the risk-sharing effect, thereby enabling the data to speak to

the issue of whether diversification drives the revaluation of domestic securities.

       However, the results need to be interpreted with caution, because the natural

experiment studied in this paper has some limitations. The decision to liberalize may be

endogenous. Policy makers may choose to open up when the stock market is doing well.

In aggregate studies, endogeneity may result in upward-biased estimates of the mean

liberalization effect. With cross-country, firm-level data, this bias should be picked up by

the country-specific fixed effects. However, if the bias also has a component that is

correlated with the firm-specific covariance structure of returns, then the point estimates

may overstate the magnitude of the portion of the total revaluation effect induced by risk

sharing. On the other hand, the results may understate the full impact of liberalization on

stock prices, because the revaluation is measured as the stock price change that occurs on

the implementation date. Liberalizations may be anticipated by the market, and prices

may have adjusted prior to that date.

       Finally, stock price revaluations may be driven by changes in discount rates or

expected future cash flows. Unexpected stock price changes are a reasonable proxy for

changes in required rates of return only if earnings growth is unaltered by liberalization.

However, liberalizations may affect expected future cash flows. If this is the case, then

firms may experience stock price revaluations that are unrelated to discount rates. The

analysis controls for expected future profitability by using firm-level data on the actual

growth rate of real earnings per share following liberalizations. Studies that focus on

aggregate data use variables such as GDP growth rates to proxy for expected future cash

flows. In comparison, firm-level data on actual earnings growth outcomes would seem to




                                                                                          4
provide a more direct, albeit imperfect, measure of future earnings prospects.

          Despite these limitations, studying this liberalization experiment through the lens

of the stock market has at least two advantages. First, there is ample evidence that an

unbiased assessment of the effects of public information releases is incorporated into

stock prices (Fama, 1976). In particular, stock prices in the subset of countries relevant

for this paper respond to news of major economic policy reforms (Henry, 2000a, b).

Second, the stock market evidence is useful for evaluating whether theories of risk

sharing have any empirical relevance. For example, although the revaluation estimates

are noisy, they are economically and statistically significant. This fact suggests that risk

sharing may be of quantitative importance.

          The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the theoretical

motivation and presents descriptive evidence. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4

outlines the empirical methodology and reports the results. Section 5 discusses the

results, their relationship to previous studies on international risk sharing and potential

implications for future work in asset pricing and macroeconomics.



2. Theoretical Motivation and Descriptive Findings

          The analysis builds on Stulz (1999c). Assume a small country whose equity

market is completely segmented from world equity markets. Investors are risk-averse

and care only about the expected return of their investment and the variance of that

return.    Also assume that all investors have identical risk aversion.       With this last

assumption, the price of risk in the country is a constant, which we denote by γ . Since

the country’s investors care only about the expected return and volatility of their invested




                                                                                           5
wealth and that country’s capital market is segmented from the rest of the world, it

follows that the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) holds for that country. This implies

that the aggregate risk premium on the small country’s equity market before stock market

liberalization is ( RM − r f ) = σ M2 * γ , where RM is the expected return on the market, rf

is the risk-free rate, and σ M2 is the variance of the return on the small country’s market

portfolio. It follows that the risk premium for a given firm i before liberalization is

β iM σ M2 γ , where β iM is the beta coefficient of firm i before liberalization. Therefore,

we may write:

                                E[ Ri ] = rf + β iM σ M2 γ                                (1)

Where E[ Ri ] is the required rate of return on firm i ' s stock.



2A. Complete Liberalization

        Now consider the impact on firm i ' s required rate of return when the country

opens its stock market to the rest of the world and also allows its residents to invest

abroad. Assume also that the expected value and variance of the profits from domestic

production activities are not affected by liberalization.           To eliminate the impact of

differences in risk aversion, also assume that all investors in the world have the same

constant relative risk aversion.

        As a country opens up its stock market to foreign investors and lets its residents

invest abroad, the residents of the country no longer have to bear all of the risks

associated with the economic activities of the country. After liberalization, the small

country’s equity market becomes part of the global equity market and expands the




                                                                                            6
diversification opportunities for foreign investors. Since the country is small, adding that

country to the world portfolio does not increase the risk premium on the world market

portfolio.

       Let us assume that the liberalization is symmetric in the sense that now domestic

residents can also invest abroad for purposes of international diversification.       With

completely open capital markets, the capital asset pricing model holds for the global

equity market, so that the risk premium on any risky asset depends on its beta coefficient

with respect to the world market portfolio. Let E[ Ri* ] be the required rate of return on

firm i in the integrated capital market equilibrium. It follows that

                         E[ Ri* ] = rf* + β iW ( RW − rf* )                             (2)

where β iW denotes firm i ’s beta with the world market, RW denotes the expected real

rate of return on the world equity market portfolio and rf* the world risk-free rate. The

risk premium on the world market portfolio is E[ RW ] − rf* = γσ W2 , where σ W2 is the

variance of the return on the world portfolio. Therefore, the required rate of return on

firm i after liberalization is given by

                                   E[ Ri* ] = rf* + β iW σ W2 γ                         (3)

       The link between the liberalization-induced change in the required rate of return

on firm i and its diversification properties can now be made transparent by subtracting

equation (3) from equation (1).            Performing a few steps of algebra and using the

definitions of local and world betas yields the following result:

        ∆Ri = E[ Ri ] − E[ Ri* ] = (rf − rf* ) + γ DIFCOV                               (4)




                                                                                          7
Where      ∆Ri     is the change in the required rate of return on impact and

DIFCOV = [Cov ( Ri , RM ) − Cov ( Ri , RW )] .          Equation (4) highlights the two channels

through which liberalization affects firm-level required rates of return. The first effect, a

change in the risk-free rate, is common to all firms.2 The second effect of liberalization is

idiosyncratic to firm i and depends on the quantity in brackets on the right-hand side of

equation (4): the covariance of firm i ’s stock return with the local market minus the

covariance of firm i ’s stock return with the world market.



2B. Partial Liberalization

         In practice, when countries liberalize, only some firms become eligible for foreign

ownership. What drives the change in the required rate of return for the non-investible

securities?      The risk associated with holding a single non-investible security before

liberalization depends on its covariance with the entire domestic market.                             The risk

associated with holding a non-investible security after liberalization depends on its

covariance with the portfolio of non-investible securities (Errunza and Losq, 1985).

Therefore, the change in the required rate of return for the non-investible security will

depend on the difference between the two covariances. Specifically, define the variable

DIFCOV1 as DIFCOV 1 = [Cov( Ri , RM ) − Cov ( Ri , RN )] where RN is the expected return

on the portfolio of non-investible securities. All else equal, the repricing of the non-

investible securities should be positively correlated with DIFCOV1.

2
  A priori, the impact of this common shock may be ambiguous. If countries are capital scarce in autarky,
the average cost of capital may fall if the liberalization results in a net capital inflow. On the other hand, if
countries have followed policies of financial repression and interest rates were kept artificially low, the
average cost of capital may increase if the stock market liberalization is accompanied by domestic financial
deregulation. See Henry (2000b) for a more detailed discussion of these issues.



                                                                                                                8
2C. Mapping Theory to Data: Descriptive Findings

         Under the assumption that firms’ expected future cash flows are unaffected by

liberalization, the unexpected response of firm i ' s stock price to news of the

liberalization will mirror the change in the required rate of return on firm i ' s stock. The

stock price will increase if liberalization lowers the required rate of return, and

conversely, the stock price will decrease if liberalization raises the required rate of return.

Accordingly, the unexpected stock price response to liberalization can be used as a proxy

measure for confronting the theory with data.

         Specifically, equation (4) predicts that the revaluation will have an intercept effect

and a slope effect. The intercept term should be the same across investible and non-

investible firms within a given country. However, in order to test the theory we pool the

data from several countries. The intercept term in this pooled sample should be the same,

only after controlling for country-fixed effects. Therefore, the intercept term should be

ignored in the description of the raw data. Examination of the intercept is deferred until

Section 4, which does control for country-fixed effects. Equation (4) also predicts that the

revaluation should be an increasing function of DIFCOV for the investible firms.3

         Figure 1 reveals that the stock price revaluation for investible firms is an

increasing function of DIFCOV, as theory predicts. It plots the unexpected stock price

change for investible firms on the y-axis and DIFCOV on the x-axis. The statistical

relationship between the revaluation of investible firms and DIFCOV is given by the

following equation (robust t-statistics in parentheses, R-Squared= 0.27, N=248):


3
 Since the coefficient of relative risk aversion is assumed to be the same across countries, the slope
coefficient is also implicitly the same and therefore does not require a country-specific adjustment.


                                                                                                         9
        ∆ ln( StockPriceijInvestible [0]) = −0.05 + 9.20 * DIFCOVij                    (5)
                                             (-1.3) (4.0)

where ∆ ln( StockPriceijInvestible [0]) is the liberalization-month stock price change for

investible firm i in country j .

       Figure 2 presents the scatter plot for non-investible firms.        The statistical

relationship between the revaluation of non-investible firms and DIFCOV is given by the

following equation (robust t-statistics in parentheses, R-Squared= 0.06, N=181):

        ∆ ln( StockPriceijNon − Investible [0]) = 0.053 + 3.69* DIFCOVij               (6)
                                                   (3.2) (2.3)

Like Figure 1, this graph also reveals a positive statistical relationship between the

revaluation of non-investible firms and DIFCOV.

       However, there are also some distinct differences between Figure 1 and Figure 2.

First, the positive relationship between the revaluation and DIFCOV is more pronounced

for investible firms (Figure 1) than non-investible firms (Figure 2). The slope of the line

in equation (5) is 9.20 whereas the slope of the line in equation (6) is 3.69. Second, the

difference in covariance explains almost 30 percent of the cross-sectional variation in

investible firms’ stock price revaluations, but only 6 percent for non-investible firms.

Thus, a first pass at the data indicates that DIFCOV has more predictive power for the

revaluation of investible firms than non-investible firms.

       Figure 3 examines whether the repricing of non-investible firms is related to the

difference between their covariance with the local market portfolio and their covariances

with the entire portfolio of non-investible securities. Figure 3 plots the unexpected stock

price change for investible firms on the y-axis and DIFCOV1 on the x-axis.             The

statistical relationship between the revaluation of non-investible firms and DIFCOV1 is


                                                                                        10
given by the following equation (robust t-statistics in parentheses, R-Squared= 0.01,

N=181):

         ∆ ln( StockPriceijNon− Investible [0]) = 0.07 + 1.44 * DIFCOV 1ij              (7)
                                                   (3.6) (1.5)

It appears that DIFCOV1 has no explanatory power for the repricing of non-investible

securities.

         This initial perusal of the data suggests that there are differences between

investible and non-investible firms, but only so much can be inferred from pictures.

Section 4 of the paper pools the data for both sets of firms and formally tests for

differences between the two sets of firms. For that matter, both figures should be treated

with caution because they merely plot the raw data. For example, the unexpected stock

price change is a reasonable proxy for the change in required return if earnings growth is

unchanged by liberalization.         If this assumption is not reasonable, then it may be

important to control for changes in the expected growth rate of earnings.

         Additionally, there is a more general concern. The goal is to estimate the impact

of liberalization on a randomly selected firm from the population of all firms. If the

investible firms are not randomly selected, then they may have unobservable

characteristics that cause them to respond differently to liberalization than non-investible

firms.    These issues can be explored more transparently once the data have been

described in more detail. This data description takes place in the next section of the

paper.



3. Data




                                                                                         11
        This section of the paper discusses the data in some detail. The analysis requires

three types of data: stock returns for the countries in question; stock market liberalization

dates; a means of discriminating between those firms that become eligible for foreign

ownership when the market is liberalized and those that do not. Section 3A describes the

basic stock returns data. Section 3B gives the stock market liberalization dates. Section

3C explains the procedure for discriminating between investible and non-investible firms.

Section 3D presents descriptive statistics on the two sets of firms. Section 3E discusses

the potential importance of selection bias issues in examining investible versus non-

investible firms.



3A. The Basic Stock Returns Series

        The principal source of stock market data is the International Finance

Corporation’s (IFC) Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB).4 Stock price indices for

individual firms are the dividend-inclusive, U.S. dollar-denominated, IFC Global Index

(IFCG). The IFC selects stocks for inclusion in the IFCG index by reviewing a stock’s

trading activity. Any share selected must be among the most actively traded shares in

terms of value traded during the annual review period; it must have traded frequently

during the review period (i.e., one large block trade might skew the value traded

statistics); and it must have reasonable prospects for a continued trading presence in the

stock exchange (e.g., it must not be in imminent danger of being suspended or delisted).

Stocks are selected in order of trading criteria until the market capitalization coverage

target of 60 percent to 75 percent of total market capitalization is met. Once the actively

4
  IFC data is used instead of Morgan Stanley Capital Index (MSCI) data, because MSCI company level
coverage for emerging markets begins only in January 1992 and therefore post-dates almost all of the
liberalizations. Worldscope coverage begins even later than MSCI coverage.


                                                                                                       12
traded and market capitalization requirements are met, IFC analysts may suggest

substituting one company’s shares for another on the list if the suggested shares have

reasonably similar trading characteristics, but represent an industry group which may be

underrepresented in the current composition of the IFCG index (IFC, 1999).

       In order to be included in the sample, a firm must have been actively traded for at

least five years prior to the liberalization date. This ensures that there are at least five

years worth of data with which to calculate historical covariances. Each country’s U.S.

dollar-denominated total return index is deflated by the U.S. consumer price index (CPI),

which comes from the IFS. All of the data are monthly. Returns are calculated as the

first difference of the natural logarithm of the real stock total return index.

       Calculation of the covariance of firm-level stock returns with the local and world

markets requires data on market returns as well as firm-level returns. For each country,

the real, dollar-denominated IFCG Total Return Index is used as the benchmark local

market index. The world benchmark market index is the real, dollar-denominated MSCI

World Total Return Index.



3B. Identifying Stock Market Liberalization Dates

       A stock market liberalization is a decision by a country’s government to open its

stock market to foreign investors. When a stock market liberalization occurs, some of the

firms in the domestic economy become eligible for purchase by foreigners, while others

remain off-limits. Establishing the liberalization date is the first step in the process of

distinguishing between these two types of firms. These dates are listed in Table 1. The

entire sample consists of 429 firms in 11 countries. The 11 countries are: Argentina,




                                                                                         13
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, India, Korea, Mexico, Pakistan, Taiwan, Turkey, and

Venezuela.



3C. Discriminating Between Investible and Non-Investible Firms

       Investible firms are defined to be that subset of firms in the IFCG that are also in

the IFC Investible Index (IFCI). The IFCI’s determination of investibility is a three-step

process. First, the IFC determines which securities foreigners may legally hold. Next,

the IFC applies two further screening criteria for practicality of investment. Both screens

must be passed for IFCI index eligibility. The first criterion screens for a minimum

investible market capitalization of $50 million or more over the 12 months prior to a

stock’s addition to an IFCI index. This investible market capitalization is determined

after applying the foreign investment rules and after any adjustments because of cross-

holdings or government ownership.

       The second criterion screens firms for liquidity. A stock must trade at least $20

million over the prior year for inclusion in an IFCI index. It must also have traded on at

least half the local exchange’s trading days.      Thus, the IFC Investible indexes are

designed to measure the returns that foreign portfolio investors might receive from

investing in emerging market securities that are legally and practically available to them.

       The IFCI was initiated in December of 1988. This fact implies that for stock

market liberalizations that occurred prior to December of 1988, it is not possible to

discriminate between those firms that became investible and those that did not. The

countries and dates in Table 1 reflect this constraint. Specifically, Table 1 lists the




                                                                                          14
earliest stock liberalization date occurring after December of 1988 for every country that

implemented at least one country-wide stock market liberalization after this date.



3D. Descriptive Statistics on Investible and Non-Investible Firms

       The average size of DIFCOV is 0.018 for investible firms and 0.0096 for non-

investible firms. This feature of the data suggests that investible firms should experience

larger revaluations than non-investible firms, given the common shock. Table 2 explores

whether the raw differences in the stock price revaluations of investible and non-

investible firms are roughly consistent with this prediction. The table shows that the

average stock price revaluation is 15.1 percent in real dollar terms for investible firms

and 9.9 percent for non-investible firms. The last column of the table reports that the 5.2

percentage-point difference between these two means is statistically significant. There

are two possible concerns with these numbers.

       First, they are reported in dollar terms. This choice of unit may lead to an

overstatement of the revaluations if liberalizations are accompanied by large

appreciations of the domestic currency vis-à-vis the dollar. In order to see if the dollar-

denominated revaluations are driven by domestic currency gains, the behavior of

exchange rates in the sample countries was examined. On average, countries actually

experience a 1.2 percent depreciation of their exchange rates during the liberalization

month. The average depreciation during the month after liberalization is 1.5 percent.

This suggests that the dollar-denominated numbers may actually understate the true size

of the revaluation in local currency terms. Second, the numbers may understate the true




                                                                                        15
revaluations if the liberalization events are anticipated.5 Analysis of returns during the

months preceding the liberalization revealed no evidence of significant stock price

appreciation in anticipation of the liberalizations.

         Turning to comparisons of medians, the median revaluation for investible firms is

12.1 percent. Forty-three of the 248 investible firms in the sample had liberalization-

month stock price changes below their median monthly stock price change. The p-value

is 0.00 for observing at most this many investible firms with liberalization-month stock

price responses below their median monthly stock price change for non-liberalization

months.6 The median revaluation for non-investible firms is 8.6 percent. Eighty-three of

the 181 non-investible firms experienced liberalization-month stock price changes below

their median monthly stock price change. The p-value is 0.15 for observing at most this

many stock price responses below the median. Hence, sign tests confirm that the stock

price revaluations for investible firms are more uniformly positive than for non-investible

firms.



3E. Is There a Sample Selection Problem?

         Those firms that become investible may not represent a random sampling from

the distribution of all firms in the IFCG, which are themselves not randomly selected. To

explore whether selection bias may prejudice the results, this section systematically

examines the structural differences between investible and non-investible firms.

         Table 3 provides a comparison of ex-ante observable differences in investible and

non-investible firms, as a second step in exploring the extent to which selection bias may

5
 If the news is anticipated, this biases against finding any revaluation effect.
6
  The null hypothesis is that liberalization-month stock price responses come from the same distribution as
non-liberalization-month stock price changes.


                                                                                                         16
prejudice inferences about the differential impact of liberalization on the two sets of

firms. Summary statistics on six variables are provided for investible and non-investible

firms in the pre-liberalization period: SIZE, market capitalization as a fraction of total

market capitalization; LIQUIDITY, the turnover rate; EARNINGS, the growth rate of

real earnings per share; MARKET TO BOOK, the ratio of the market value of equity to

the book value of equity; RETURN, the average real return in dollars; and DIFCOV, the

difference in covariance between the local and world markets. There is no significant

difference between the size of investible and non-investible firms. Investible firms are

significantly more liquid than non-investible firms.

       The average growth rate of real earnings per share for investible firms is

significantly higher than that of non-investible firms.         Investible firms also have

significantly higher market-to-book ratios than non-investible firms. This may indicate

that investible firms have higher expected future profitability than non-investible firms.

If higher market to book ratios and historical growth rates of real earnings per share

rationally forecast that investible firms have higher expected profitability than non-

investible firms, then we should see differences in ex-post earnings growth outcomes, on

average.

       Hence, Table 4 reports a comparison of the actual growth rate of real earnings per

share for investible and non-investible firms in each of the three years following

liberalization ([+1], [+2], [+3]), as a further means of exploring selection bias. In the

second and third years after liberalization, there are no significant differences. In the year

after liberalization, the growth rate of earnings per share for non-investible firms is

significantly lower than for investible firms. Although there are no dramatic differences




                                                                                           17
in ex-post profitability of investible and non-investible firms, overall the data do suggest

that there are some differences between these two types of firms. The empirical analysis

in Section 4 controls directly for the influence of earnings on the revaluations, so some of

these differences will be accounted for. However, it is possible that these differences

could be correlated with characteristics that influence the way in which investible and

non-investible stock prices respond to liberalization.

           Another possible concern is the process by which firms become legally investible.

If decisions concerning the permissibility of foreign ownership are made at the country

level (by government officials), then stock market liberalization may be an exogenous

event from the perspective of any given firm. On the other hand, if legal investibility is

determined on a firm-by-firm basis, then sample selection may be an issue. For example,

if a firm must lobby the government to allow foreign institutions to buy its shares, then

those firms that are most attractive to foreigners will be most likely to engage in the

lobbying process. This discussion suggests that those firms that are “investible” may not

represent a random sampling from the distribution of all firms in the IFCG.

           The extent to which liberalization may be regarded as exogenous was

investigated. The variation in the “degree open factor” across firms for each country was

examined. For 10 of the 11 countries in the sample, the degree open factor was identical

across all firms at the time of the stock market liberalization.7 The uniformity of the

degree of openness across firms within a given country suggests that either the

liberalization decision is exogenous to any given firm, or all firms within a given country

uniformly prefer the same degree of permissible foreign ownership.                           However, the

government’s decision about which firms to make investible may be a function of firm-
7
    The exception is Brazil where the investible weights range from 5 percent to 56 percent across firms.


                                                                                                            18
specific characteristics that determine the likely impact of liberalization on that firm,

even if the liberalization decision is exogenous from the firm’s perspective.



4. Methodology and Empirical Results

        This section of the paper addresses the following question. Do diversification

fundamentals help predict the unexpected stock price change in response to the news of

stock market liberalization? The benchmark regression specification is as follows:

∆ ln( StockPriceij [0]) = α + β1INVESTij + γ 1DIFCOVij + γ 2 ( DIFCOV * INVEST )ij
                                                                                               (8)
+CNTRY j + ε ij

        The left-hand-side variable is the Month “0” unexpected stock price change.

Month 0 is defined as the month in which a given stock market liberalization is

implemented. The IFC records the value of a country’s stock market index at the end of

the month, and the data on liberalization events do not provide the day of the month on

which programs are implemented. These two facts imply that the implementation of a

given liberalization may occur after the day of the month on which the IFC recorded

prices. In such cases, the change in the stock market index in month [0] may not reflect

the news of the liberalization event. Accordingly, the analysis looks at the cumulative

unexpected change in the real dollar value of the stock market index in months [0, +1] as

well as the change in month [0].

        The unexpected stock price change for a given firm, i , is computed as the real

dollar return for firm i in the liberalization month minus firm i ’s average, pre-

liberalization, monthly return.         The symbol DIFCOV is an abbreviation for

[Cov ( Ri , RM ) − Cov ( Ri , RW )] , the difference between the historical covariance of firm i ’s




                                                                                                19
stock return with the local market and its covariance with the MSCI world stock market

index. INVEST is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one for investible firms and

zero for non-investible firms. CNTRY is a set of country specific dummies to account

for country-fixed effects.

        This specification facilitates examination of the revaluation effect for a pooled

group of 429 investible and non-investible firms. The joint estimation procedure allows

testing of the view that risk sharing drives the stock price revaluations that accompany

stock market liberalizations for both investible and non-investible firms. The constant

intercept term, α , imposes the assumption that the change in the risk-free rate is the same

across all countries, after controlling for country-fixed effects. If the theory is correct, α ,

the average change in the risk-free rate after removing country-fixed effects, should be

the same for investible and non-investible firms. The coefficient on the dummy variable

INVEST measures the marginal effect on α of being investible. If the theory is correct,

the coefficient on INVEST should not be significantly different from zero.

       In principle, estimating equation (8) without country-fixed effects would yield an

estimate of the average change in the risk-free rate across all 11 countries. In practice, an

estimate of α without fixed effects could pick up other level effects related to country-

specific differences that are not addressed by the theory. Without a clear framework for

interpreting such differences, it seems preferable not to try and interpret the country-fixed

effects as country-specific changes in the risk-free rate. Rather, the empirical analysis

simply asks whether the common shock is the same across all firms after controlling for

country-fixed effects.




                                                                                             20
       The usual assumption that the error term is random and uncorrelated across firms

requires further discussion. Equation (8) is estimated using a panel regression with

country-fixed effects. In aggregating abnormal returns, the standard assumption for panel

estimation requires that the abnormal returns on individual securities be uncorrelated in

the cross section. This is a reasonable assumption if there is no clustering, that is, the

event windows of the included securities do not overlap in calendar time. However, this

is not true for country-wide stock market liberalizations. All firms within a given country

share the same liberalization date in addition to other country-specific factors. Therefore,

the standard assumption that abnormal returns are uncorrelated across firms may no

longer obtain. This means that the standard distributional results for the aggregated

abnormal returns may not be applicable in this context. The variance-covariance matrix

used to calculate the standard errors was adjusted to account for clustering.           The

estimation procedure also corrects for potential heteroscedasticity across firms.



4A. Benchmark Regression Results

       Table 5 shows the results. Panel A presents the estimates for the month [0]

windows. Column (1a) shows the results for the benchmark specification given by

equation (8). The estimate of the constant captures the common shock for both the

investible and the non-investible firms. The magnitude of this coefficient is 0.06 and is

significant at the 1 percent confidence level.      The INVEST dummy is statistically

insignificant. This indicates that the common shock is in fact the same for both sets of

firms, as theory would predict.




                                                                                         21
       The intercept term was also estimated without country-fixed effects. In this case,

the point estimates ranged from -0.01 to 0.03, but were statistically insignificant in all

specifications. The standard errors on the point estimates without fixed effects were on

the order of 0.3, as opposed to standard errors on the order of 0.01 with fixed effects.

These numbers suggest that there is a great deal of variation in the common shock from

country to country. This could be due to large differences in domestic and world risk-

free rates, but it could also be due to other country-specific effects.     Henceforth the

analysis only discusses the estimates that include fixed effects.

       The coefficient on DIFCOV gives the effect of risk sharing conditional on being

non-investible. The sum of the coefficients on DIFCOV and DIFCOV*INVEST gives

the total effect of risk sharing conditional on being investible.         The sum of the

coefficients on DIFCOV and DIFCOV*INVEST in this benchmark specification is equal

to 2.74 and is significant at the one percent confidence level. This means that if DIFCOV

equals 0.01, then an investible firm can expect a stock price revaluation of 0.274 or 2.74

percent in the month that the stock market liberalization takes place. Panel B presents the

estimates for the month [0, +1] window. Column (1b) shows that the conditional effect

of DIFCOV for non-investible firms is equal to –0.4 and is statistically insignificant. The

conditional effect for investible firms is equal to the sum of –0.4 and 4.42, which is 4.02.

Therefore, if DIFCOV equals 0.01, a firm can expect a total stock price revaluation of

4.02 percent over the two-month window.

       It is also important to note that the marginal effect of DIFCOV conditional on

being an investible firm is captured by the coefficient on DIFCOV*INVEST. Therefore,

the point estimates in the benchmark specifications (1a and 1b) also indicate that the




                                                                                         22
marginal effect of DIFCOV for investible firms is significantly different from that of the

non-investible firms. Overall, the empirical results from the benchmark specifications

are consistent with the a priori theoretical predictions. The stock price revaluation of

investible firms is positively and significantly related to DIFCOV. There is no significant

statistical relationship between the stock price revaluation of non-investible firms and

diversification fundamentals. The finding for non-investible firms is consistent with the

prediction in the case where the stock market liberalization does not allow domestic

residents to invest abroad.

4B. Controlling for Earnings Growth

        Stock price revaluations may be driven by changes in earnings or discount rates.

If liberalization coincides with good news about earnings, then firms may experience

stock price revaluations that are unrelated to liberalization-induced changes in the

discount rate. Specifications (2a) and (2b) of Table 5 explore whether the differences in

the effect of DIFCOV on the stock price revaluation of investible and non-investible

firms reported in specifications (1a) and (1b) are driven by shocks to the growth rate of

earnings. The deviation of the growth rate of earnings from its pre-liberalization mean in

year [+1] is added to the right-hand side of equation (8) as a proxy for changes in

expected future profitability.8

        After controlling for earnings in Panel A, the sum of the coefficients on DIFCOV

and DIFCOV*INVEST increases to 3.3 in column (2a). This is up from the estimate of

2.74 in the benchmark specification (1a). After controlling for earnings in Panel B, the

sum of the coefficients on DIFCOV and DIFCOV*INVEST increases to 4.5 in


8
 Estimations were also performed using years [0], [+1], [+2], and [+3]. These results are not reported
because earnings in [0], [+2], and [+3] have no explanatory power.


                                                                                                         23
specification (2b).     This is greater than the estimate of 4.02 in the benchmark

specification (1b). The point estimate on DIFCOV, the risk-sharing effect for non-

investible firms, remains statistically insignificant in both Panel A and Panel B. The

coefficient on DIFCOV*INVEST in (2a) and (2b) indicate that the marginal effect of

DIFCOV for investible firms remains significantly larger than that of the non-investible

firms.

4C. Can Size or Liquidity Explain the Results?

         Regulatory guidelines within asset management companies often restrict portfolio

managers to holding stocks that are included in investible indices such as IFCI. In order

to be included in the IFCI, firms must pass minimum size and liquidity screens, in

addition to being legally investible. It is possible that the results thus far overstate the

effects of diversification because DIFCOV proxies for omitted structural characteristics

such as size and liquidity that are important practical determinants of asset demands.

         In order to account for the potential impact that size and liquidity considerations

may have on the results, this subsection adds size and turnover measures to the right-hand

side of equation (8). The following regression examines the effect of DIFCOV on

revaluation after controlling for size:

∆ ln( StockPriceij [0]) = α + β1Investij + γ 1DIFCOVij + γ 2 ( DIFCOV * INVEST )ij
                                                                                         (9)
+γ 3 Earnij + γ 4 ( SIZE * INVEST )ij + γ 5 ( SIZE * NONINVEST )ij + CNTRY j + ε ij

For a given firm, SIZE is defined as the ratio of that firm’s market capitalization to the

total domestic market capitalization as of one year prior to the liberalization date.

         Specification (3a) reports the results. The revaluation for investible firms remains

positively and significantly related to DIFCOV after controlling for SIZE. In Panel A,

the point estimate of DIFCOV is 3.47 and significant at the 1 percent level. After


                                                                                          24
controlling for SIZE in Panel B, the point estimate of DIFCOV is 4.64 and significant at

the 1 percent level. In both Panels A and B, the conditional effect of DIFCOV for

investible firms remains statistically insignificant. The coefficient on DIFCOV*INVEST

indicates that the marginal effect of DIFCOV for investible firms continues to be

significantly larger than that of the non-investible firms. The coefficient on the SIZE

variable is not significant in any of the specifications

       The following regression explores whether the positive relationship between the

unexpected stock price change and the change in covariance persists after controlling for

liquidity, as measured by turnover:

∆ ln( StockPriceij [0]) = α + β1Investij + γ 1DIFCOVij + γ 2 ( DIFCOV * INVEST )ij
+γ 3 Earnij + γ 4 (TURNOVER * INVEST )ij + γ 5 (TURNOVER * NONINVEST )ij +              (10)
CNTRYij + ε ij

For a given firm, the variable TURNOVER is defined as the sum of the dollar value of all

shares traded over a 12-month period before the liberalization (t= -24 to t= -12) divided

by that firm’s total market capitalization. The total market capitalization number for the

firm is taken at t=-12.

       Regression (4a) in Panel A of Table 5 shows that after controlling for the effect of

liquidity on the stock price revaluation for investible firms, the sum of the coefficients on

DIFCOV and DIFCOV*INVEST is 3.25 and significant at the 1 percent level.

Regression (4b) in Panel B of Table 5 shows that the sum of the coefficients on DIFCOV

and DIFCOV*INVEST is 4.44 and significant at the 1 percent level. In both Panels A

and B, the conditional effect of DIFCOV for investible firms remains statistically

insignificant. The coefficient on DIFCOV*INVEST indicates that the marginal effect of

DIFCOV for investible firms continues to be significantly larger than that of the non-


                                                                                          25
investible firms. The variable TURNOVER is statistically insignificant for the investible

firms and enters negatively and significantly for the non-investible firms.



4D. Summary

       On balance, the evidence suggests that risk sharing helps explain the revaluation

effect for investible firms only. The marginal effect of DIFCOV for investible firms is

significantly larger than that of the non-investible firms in all specifications.          The

hypothesis that the impact of DIFCOV on the stock price revaluation is the same for

investible and non-investible firms is rejected in the benchmark specification as well as

those that include controls for earnings, size, and liquidity. The common shock, as

measured by the coefficient on the constant term, is positive and significant in all

specifications. Importantly, the marginal effect of INVEST on the constant term is

statistically insignificant in all specifications. This means that the intercept term is in fact

the same for investible and non-investible firms. This second piece of evidence provides

further confirming evidence in support of the theory.

       It is useful to check the plausibility of the results by performing some crude

calculations and comparing them to the raw data. For investible firms, the sample

average of DIFCOV is 0.018. Multiplying this number by 2.74 (the estimate from Panel

A (Column 1) in Table 5) gives 0.049, the total effect of DIFCOV for investible firms.

Adding 0.049 to the coefficient on the constant, which is 0.06, yields 0.109. Thus, the

total predicted revaluation for the investible firms is 10.9 percent in real dollar terms.

The average revaluation in the raw data for investible firms is equal to 15 percent. The

analogous calculation for the non-investible firms yields a predicted revaluation of 6.3




                                                                                             26
percent. The average revaluation in the raw data for non-investible firms is equal to 9.9

percent.



5. Discussion

       Typical analyses of the gains from international trade in risky assets calibrate the

hypothetical welfare losses associated with the lack of risk sharing (French and Poterba,

1991; Lewis, 1999; Tesar, 1995; Tesar and Werner, 1998;). This paper takes a different

approach. It analyzes the revaluation of the prices of publicly traded shares that actually

occurs when emerging economies open their stock markets to foreign investors. Strictly

speaking, stock price revaluations measure the change in real wealth that accrues to

domestic shareholders, not utility gains per se. Nevertheless, stock market liberalizations

provide useful natural experiments, because changes in real equity prices have

implications for other macroeconomic variables that have broader welfare implications

(Frankel, 1994; Henry 2000b; Stulz 1999a; Tesar and Werner, 1998).

       Asset pricing theory predicts that levels of expected stock returns should vary

cross-sectionally according to the level of firms' exposure to systematic risks. Research

in the last several years has produced little empirical evidence in support of this claim

(for surveys see Campbell, 2000; Cochrane, 1999; Fama, 1991). Systematic risk factors

show little indication that they are priced cross-sectionally. Many firm characteristics

that are priced cross-sectionally do not resemble systematic risk. Much of the research in

this area has focused on the predictive ability of the CAPM for levels of systematic risk

and expected returns.    This paper focuses on an experiment in which the level of




                                                                                        27
systematic risk changes and demonstrates that expected returns move in a direction that is

consistent with the theory.

        It is important to understand whether stock prices respond to changes in risk,

because stock prices provide public signals of real investment opportunities.                 If

liberalization leads to a fall in the riskiness of a firm, then, all else equal, its stock price

should increase. In theory, the jump in stock prices that occurs at liberalization is the

most direct signal that the policy change has reduced the cost of capital. All else equal,

the optimal response to a fall in the cost of capital is to increase investment.        On the

other hand, if the stock price increases associated with liberalization are unrelated to

diversification, then the optimal investment response is less clear (Blanchard, Rhee and

Summers, 1993; Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1990; Wurgler, 2000).

        Morck et al. (2000) document evidence that stock prices in emerging economies

contain relatively little firm-specific information.      This conclusion may be right in

general. However, this paper suggests that emerging market stock prices do convey

information about firm-specific changes in risk when the economy is opened to foreign

portfolio investment. More generally, the result that stock prices move in line with

changes in systematic risk provides a first step toward understanding whether physical

capital is efficiently reallocated when barriers to capital movements are removed.




                                                                                             28
References

Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas. (1983). “International Portfolio Choice and
       Corporate Finance: A Synthesis,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 925-84.

Bekaert, Geert and Harvey, Campbell. (2000). “Foreign Speculators and Emerging
       Equity Markets,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 2, pp. 565-613.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Rhee, C., and Lawrence Summers (1993). “The Stock Market,
      Profit, and Investment” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp. 115-36

Campbell, John Y. (2000). “Asset Pricing at the Millenium” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55,
     No. 4, pp. 1515-1567.

Cochrane, John. (1999).“New Facts in Finance” Economic Perspectives Federal Reserve
      Bank of Chicago, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 36-58.

Cutler, David, James Poterba, and Lawrence Summers. (1989). “What Moves Stock
        Prices?” Journal of Portfolio Management, Vol. 15, pp. 4-12

Errunza, Vihang and Etienne Losq. (1985). “International Asset Pricing under Mild
       Segmentation: Theory and Test,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 105-24.

Fama, Eugene F. (1976). Foundations of Finance. New York: Basic Books.

Fama, Eugene F. (1991). “Efficient Capital Markets: II,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 46,
      No. 5, pp.1575-1617

Fischer, Stanley and Robert C. Merton. (1984). “Macroeconomics and Finance: The
       Role of the Stock Market,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
       Policy, Vol. 21, pp. 57-108.

Frankel, Jeffrey (1994). “Introduction” in The Internationalization of Equity Markets.
       Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, pp.
       231-71.

French, Kenneth R. and James M. Poterba. (1991). “International Diversification and
       International Equity Markets,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp.
       222-26.

Henry, Peter Blair. (2000a). “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and
       Emerging Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 2, pp. 529-64.

Henry, Peter Blair. (2000b). “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment
       Booms?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58, Nos. 1-2, pp. 301-334.




                                                                                         29
International Finance Corporation. (1999). The IFC Indexes: Methodology, Definitions,
        and Practices. Washington, D.C.

Kim, Han E. and Vijay Singal. (2000). “Stock Market Openings: Experience of Emerging
      Economies,” Journal of Business, Vol. 73, No. 1, pp. 25-66.

Lewis, Karen K. (2000). “Why Do Stocks and Consumption Imply Such Different
       Gains from International Risk Sharing?” Journal of International Economics,
       Vol. 52, pp. 1-35.

Lewis, Karen K. (1999). “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,”
       Journal of Economic Literature, pp. 571-608.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1990). “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”
       The American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 92-96.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu. (2000). “The Information Content of
      Stock Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price
      Movements?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58, pp. 215-260

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1990). “The Stock Market and
      Investment: Is the Market a Sideshow?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
      pp. 157-215.

Obstfeld, Maurice. (1994). “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification and Growth,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 5, pp. 1310-29.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. (1996). Foundations of International
       Macroeconomics, Ch. 5, pp. 269-347, Cambridge and London, MIT Press.

Stulz, Rene M. (1995a). “International asset pricing: An integrative survey," Handbook
        of Modern Finance, R. Jarrow, M. Maximovich and W. Ziemba, eds. North
        Holland-Elsevier, pp. 201-223.

Stulz, Rene M. (1995b). "Globalization of Capital Markets and the Cost of Capital:The
        Case of Nestlé," Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, pp. 30-39.

Stulz, René M. (1999a). "International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets" in Martin
        Feldstein, ed. International Capital Flows. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Stulz, René M. (1999b). “Globalization, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of Capital"
        Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, vol. 12, pp. 8-25.

Stulz, Rene M. (1999c). “Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital,”
        Working Paper, Dice Center, Ohio State University.




                                                                                        30
Stulz, René M., Bong-Chan Kho, and Dong Lee. (2000). “U.S. Banks, Crises, and
        Bailouts: From Mexico to LTCM” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No.2,
        pp.28-31

Summers, Lawrence H. (1985). “On Economics and Finance” Journal of Finance,
     Vol. 40, No. 3, 633-635.

Tesar, Linda. (1995). “Evaluating the Gains from International Risk Sharing,” Carnegie
       Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 42, pp. 95-143.

Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid Werner (1995). “U.S. Equity Investment in Emerging Stock
       Markets,” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 9, pp. 109-129.

Tesar, Linda L. (1999). “The Role of Equity in International Capital Flows” in Martin
       Feldstein, ed. International Capital Flows. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
       pp. 235-55.

Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid M. Werner. (1998). “The Internationalization of Securities
       Markets Since the 1987 Crash” in Robert E. Litan and Anthony M. Santomero
       eds.: Brookings –Wharton Papers on Financial Services (Brookings Institution
       Press, Washington)

Tobin, James and William C. Brainard. (1977). “Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital”
       in Balassa, B. and Nelson, R. (Eds.), Economic Progress, Private Values, and
       Public Policy. North Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 235-62.

Wurgler, Jeffrey (2000). “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of
      Financial Economics, Vol. 58, pp. 187-214




                                                                                         31
                                                              Figure 1. Differences Between Covariances with the Market and World Portfolio Help Explain the
                                                                                               Repricing of Investible Firms


                                                                   2




                                                                  1.5
Stock Price Response to Liberalization in Month [0]




                                                                   1




                                                                  0.5




                                                                   0
                                                      -0.02             0         0.02            0.04            0.06            0.08             0.1       0.12   0.14



                                                                 -0.5




                                                                   -1
                                                                                Covariance with Market Portfolio- Covariance with World Portfolio (DIFCOV)




                                                                                                                                                                           32
                                                              Figure 2. Differences Between Covariances with the Market and World Portfolio Do Not Help Explain
                                                                                             the Repricing of Non-Investible Firms

                                                                                                      1.2


                                                                                                        1
Stock Price Response to Liberalization in Month [0]




                                                                                                      0.8


                                                                                                      0.6


                                                                                                      0.4


                                                                                                      0.2


                                                                                                        0
                                                      -0.06          -0.04           -0.02                   0              0.02               0.04          0.06   0.08

                                                                                                      -0.2


                                                                                                      -0.4


                                                                                                      -0.6
                                                                                Covariance with Market Portfolio- Covariance with World Portfolio (DIFCOV)




                                                                                                                                                                           33
                                                              Figure 3. Differences Between Covariances with the Market and Non-Investible Portfolio Do Not Help Explain the
                                                                                                  Repricing of Non-Investible Securities

                                                                                                                                                    1.2



                                                                                                                                                      1
Stock Price Response to Liberalization in Month [0]




                                                                                                                                                    0.8



                                                                                                                                                    0.6



                                                                                                                                                    0.4



                                                                                                                                                    0.2



                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                      -0.12         -0.1            -0.08           -0.06            -0.04           -0.02                 0          0.02     0.04

                                                                                                                                                    -0.2



                                                                                                                                                    -0.4



                                                                                                                                                    -0.6



                                                                                                                                                    -0.8

                                                                           Covariance with Market Portfolio - Covariance with Non-Investible Portfolio (DIFCOV1)




                                                                                                                                                                               34
Table 1. Stock Market Liberalization Dates
                               Date of Stock Market
  Country
                                   Liberalization
 Argentina
                                September 1989

 Brazil                           May 1991

 Chile                            October 1989

 Colombia                         December 1991
 India
                                  November 1992
 Korea
                                  January 1992
 Mexico
                                  May 1989
 Pakistan
                                  February 1991
 Taiwan
                                  January 1991
 Turkey
                                  August 1989
 Venezuela
                                  January 1990
Note: Each date corresponds to the earliest stock
market liberalization that occurs after 12/88, which is
the month when the IFC introduced its IFCI index.




                                                          35
 Table 2. Comparison of Mean and Median Stock Price Responses to Liberalization for Investible and Non-Investible Firms
                                   Panel A                                                   Panel B                                                         T-test of
                                  Investible                                             Non-Investible                                                      difference
                                    Firms                                                     Firms                                                           in means
               Number      Mean Lib       Median      Number           Number        Mean Lib       Median       Number                                        Investible
                 Firms       Return          Lib     Negative           Firms          Return        Lib         Negative                                         vs.
                                           Return                                                   Return                                                       Non-
                                                                                                                                                               Investible
 Entire               248          0.151          0.121            43                  181           0.099             0.086         83                         Yes*
 Sample                                                            (0.00)                                                            (0.149)


 Argentina             14           0.639         0.609             0                   10            0.391            0.302          0                         Yes**
                                   (8.466)                         (0.5)                             (5.07)                          (0.000)

 Brazil                21          -0.052         -0.048           10                   23          -0.198            -0.048         11                         Yes*
                                  (-1.029)                         (0.00)                           (-3.802)                         (0.5)

 Chile                  9           0.048         0.071             4                   17            0.141            0.177          8                         Yes**
                                   (1.20)                          (0.5)                             (5.023)                         (0.5)

 Colombia               5           0.354         0.419             2                   15            0.287            0.310          7                         No
                                   (4.223)                         (0.5)                             (6.312)                         (0.5)

 India                 39           0.208         0.172             7                   23           -0.024           -0.054         17                         Yes***
                                   (4.663)                         (0.00)                           (-0.435)                         (0.994)

 Korea                 66           0.551         0.584             7                     6           0.069           -0.047          3                         Yes***
                                  (11.37)                          (0.00)                            (0.406)                         (0.656)

 Mexico                 5           0.288         0.319             2                   36            0.247            0.223         12                         No
                                   (5.48)                          (0.5)                             (8.813)                         (0.033)

 Pakistan               5          -0.239         -0.136            1                   38            -.01             0.004         19                         Yes***
                                  (–2.154)                         (0.188)                          (-0.478)                         (0.564)

 Taiwan                69           0.329         0.332             4                     0           N/A             N/A             N/A                       N/A
                                  (11.899)                         (0.00)

 Turkey                10           0.654         0.577             4                     5           0.509            0.577          2                         Yes***
                                   (8.532)                         (0.00)                           (10.01)                          (0.5)

 Venezuela              5           0.446         0.451             2                     8           0.478            0.451          4                         No
                                   (4.223)                         (0.5)                             (4.723)                         (0.637)
Notes: The mean liberalization return is the average stock price change in Month [0]. T-statistics are given in parentheses. The median liberalization return is the
median stock price change in Month [0]. Column 4 in Panels A and B reports the number of firms that experienced liberalization month returns that were below their
own historical median return. P-values for sign tests for the median returns are shown in parentheses. The final column reports results from a T-test of the difference in
mean returns across investible and non-investible firms in Month [0]. (*), (**) and (***) refer to 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels of significance, respectively.
 Table 3 Comparison of Investible and Non-Investible Firms Before Stock Market Liberalization

                                   Investible Firms                                                     Non-InvestibleFirms                               Significant
                                                                                                                                                          Difference?

               Mean       Median      Min            Max         St. Dev             Mean       Median      Min             Max        St. Dev            (t-test Mean)



 Size           0.015      0.006       0.0004         0.129      0.023                  0.014    0.006        0.0002          0.135      0.019            No


 Liquidity      2.66       0.43        0.003          26.9       5.11                   0.249    0.083        0               2.35       0.364            Yes***


 Earnings       0.18       0.08       -4.20           5.80       1.02                   0.10     0.05        -4.01            6.50       1.11             Yes**
 Growth

 Market         3.30       1.72       -1.27           78.0       6.12                   1.48     1.03        -3.30            7.75       1.50             Yes***
 to Book

 DIFCOV         0.018      0.01       -0.001          0.123      0.017                  0.01     0.004       -0.038           0.069      0.016            Yes***


Notes: Size=market capitalization as a fraction of total market capitalization, liquidity =annual turnover, earnings growth=annual growth rate of real earnings, market to
book = market value of equity to book of equity, and DIFCOV = difference in covariance between the local and world markets. The final column reports results from a t-
test of statistical difference of the means of the two sub-samples. (*), (**) and (***) refer to 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels of significance, respectively.
Table 4. Average Annual Growth Rate of Real Earnings Per Share Around
Liberalization
                                                     Significant
                 Investible     Non-Investible       difference?
                                                       (F-Test)

[+1]                 -0.217***              -0.393***                    Yes**
                     (0.066)                (0.090)

[+2]                 -0.230***              -0.113                         No
                     (0.068)                (0.099)

[+3]                 -0.106                 -0.014                         No
                     (0.068 )               (0.101)

Constant              0.027                 -0.036
                     (0.024)                (0.035)
Notes: [+1], [+2] and [+3] report growth rates of real earnings in the first, second and
third year following the liberalization. Country-fixed effects are included in all
regressions but are not reported. The F-test reports results about the statistical
significance of the difference in the mean growth rates for investible and non-
investible firms. (*), (**) and (***) refer to 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent
levels of significance, repectively.
Table 5. Does Diversification Drive Stock Price Revaluations?
                                          Panel A:                                                                                                     Panel B:
                                     Month [0] Window                                                                                             Month [0,+1]Window

                            (1a)             (2a)               (3a)             (4a)             (5a)                    (1b)              (2b)             (3b)             (4b)            (5b)
 DIFCOV                      0.331            -0.122            -0.660            0.294            -0.283                   -0.403            0.840           0.421             1.13            0.696
                            (1.01)            (1.31)            (1.361)          (1.315)           (1.3648)                 (1.231)          (1.66)          (1.73)            (1.68)          (1.75)

 DIFCOV*                     2.41***           3.41***           4.132***         2.956**           3.741***                 4.42***          3.67**          4.22**            3.31**          3.897**
 INVEST                     (0.897)           (1.229)           (1.339)          (1.250)           (1.351)                  (1.09)           (1.56)          (1.71)            (1.60)          (1.73)


 Earnings                                      0.015             0.016            0.016             0.018                                     0.037**         0.038**           0.038**         0.039**
 Surprise [+1]                                (0.013)           (0.013)          (0.013)           (0.013)                                   (0.017)         (0.017)           (0.017)         (0.02)


 SIZE*INVEST                                                    -0.59                              -0.72                                                     -0.791                            -0.86
                                                                (0.57)                             (0.57)                                                    (0.723)                           (0.73)

 SIZE*                                                           0.381                              0.387                                                    -0.128                            -0.114
 NONINVEST                                                      (0.752)                            (0.749)                                                   (0.96)                            (0.959)


 TURNOVER*                                                                       -0.002            -0.003                                                                      -0.000          -0.00
 INVEST                                                                          (0.003)           (0.003)                                                                     (0.004)         (0.00)


 TURNOVER*                                                                       -0.104*           -0.11**                                                                     -0.076          -0.082
 NONINVEST                                                                       (0.052)           (0.05)                                                                      (0.067)         (0.07)


 Constant                    0.059***          0.054***          0.06***          0.066***          0.071***                 0.073***         0.093***        0.102***          0.10***         0.11***
                            (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.019)                  (0.018)          (0.02)          (0.022)           (0.021)         (0.02)

 Invest                      0.006            -0.026             0.004           -0.06             -0.032                    0.039            0.008           0.054            -0.010           0.036
                            (0.029)           (0.032)           (0.04)           (0.03)            (0.043)                  (0.036)          (0.041)         (0.050)           (0.044)         (0.055)

 Adjusted R-                 0.18              0.14              0.12             0.13              0.12                     0.16             0.16             0.13             0.15            0.13
 Squared

 Number Obs.                410              317                316              317              316                     410               317              316              317             316
 Notes for Table 5: The LHS side variable in Panel A is the abnormal return in the liberalization month. The LHS variable in Panel B is the cumulative abnormal return in the liberalization month
 plus one month. The symbol DIFCOV is the difference between the historical covariance of firm i's stock return with the local market and its covariance with the Morgan Stanley Capital Market
 Index (MSCI) world stock market index. Country-fixed effects are included in all regressions but are not reported. INVEST is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one for investible firms and
 zero for non-investible firms. SIZE is defined as the ratio of that firm’s market capitalization to the total domestic market capitalization as of one year prior to the liberalization date. TURNOVER is
 defined as the sum of the dollar value of all shares traded over a 12-month period before the liberalization (t= -24 to t= -12) divided by that firm’s total market capitalization. Earnings Surprise [+1]
 is the deviation of the growth rate of earnings from its pre-liberalization mean in year [+1] following the liberalization. (*), (**) and (***) indicate significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent and 1
 percent, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering within parentheses.
