                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ARE FINANCIAL ASSETS PRICED LOCALLY OR GLOBALLY?


                                          G. Andrew Karolyi
                                            René M. Stulz


                                          Working Paper 8994
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w8994


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




Prepared for the Handbook of the Economics of Finance, George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René
M. Stulz, eds., North-Holland. We are grateful to Dong Lee and Boyce Watkins for research assistance, and
to Michael Adler, Kee-Hong Bae, Warren Bailey, Soehnke Bartram, Laura Bottazzi, Magnus Dahlquist,
Craig Doidge, Cheol Eun, Vihang Errunza, Jeff Frankel, Thomas Gehrig, John Griffin, Cam Harvey, Mervyn
King, Paul O’Connell, Sergio Schmukler, Ravi Schukla, Enrique Sentana, Bruno Solnik, Christof Stahel,
Lars Svensson, Linda Tesar, Frank Warnock, and Simon Wheatley for comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Are Financial Assets Priced Locally or Globally?
G. Andrew Karolyi and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 8994
June 2002
JEL No. G11, G12, G15



                                             ABSTRACT

        We review the international finance literature to assess the extent to which international factors
affect financial asset demands and prices. International asset pricing models with mean-variance investors
predict that an asset’s risk premium depends on its covariance with the world market portfolio and,
possibly, with exchange rate changes. The existing empirical evidence shows that a country’s risk
premium depends on its covariance with the world market portfolio and that there is some evidence that
exchange rate risk affects expected returns. However, the theoretical asset pricing literature relying on
mean-variance optimizing investors fails in explaining the portfolio holdings of investors, equity flows,
and the time-varying properties of correlations across countries. The home bias has the effect of
increasing local influences on asset prices, while equity flows and cross-country correlations increase
global influences on asset prices.




G. Andrew Karolyi                                                        René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business                                               Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University                                                    Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue                                                         2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144                                                  Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                                                         and NBER
                                                                         stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

    Over the last forty years, financial markets throughout the world have steadily become more

open to foreign investors. Yet, most academic research on portfolio choice and asset pricing

focuses only on local factors when investigating the determinants of portfolio choice and of

expected returns on risky assets. For instance, a vast literature looks at the relation between the

U.S. risk premium and the volatility of the U.S. stock market even though in global markets the

U.S. risk premium ought to depend at least on the relation between U.S. stocks, a global market

portfolio, and possibly exchange rates. In this paper, we examine the lessons from the theoretical

and empirical finance literature on the extent to which global factors -- i.e., foreign stock markets

and exchange rates -- affect asset demands and prices, and on when these factors can be ignored

or have to be taken seriously.

    We start this paper by examining how portfolios would be chosen and asset prices determined

in a world where financial markets are assumed to be internationally perfect. In such a world, an

asset has the same price regardless of where it is traded and no finance is local. Markets where

assets have the same price regardless of where they are traded are said to be integrated, while

markets where the price of an asset depends on where it is traded are said to be segmented. In

examining the empirical evidence on asset pricing models that assume financial markets to be

internationally integrated, a case can be made for studying the cross-section of expected returns

without regard for international influences, at least for large markets like the U.S. But, the case

for ignoring international determinants of national stock market risk premiums and how they

evolve over time has no basis.

    Models with internationally perfect financial markets have severe limitations in explaining

portfolio holdings and how portfolio holdings change over time. The home bias puzzle, which

refers to the phenomenon that investors overweight the securities of their country in their

portfolio, is inconsistent with models where investors have the same information across countries

and where financial markets are assumed to be perfect. Recent research provides a wealth of

                                                  1
empirical results on how foreign investors choose their asset holdings and on their performance.

The picture that emerges from this literature is that there are systematic patterns in ownership of

foreign stocks that are hard to reconcile with models assuming perfect financial markets. The

only way to rationalize these patterns would be to argue that the gains from international

diversification are too small to make holding foreign assets worthwhile. Though there is evidence

suggesting that the gains from international diversification have become weaker over time, only

investors with extremely strong priors against the hypothesis that assets are priced in

internationally integrated markets are likely to conclude that international diversification is not

worth it. The home bias decreases the relevance of international determinants of domestic stock

prices.

      The 1990s showed that cross-country equity flows are highly volatile and raised important

questions about whether and how flows affect stock prices. In 1998, net equity flows to Latin

America amounted to $1.7 billion in contrast to $27.2 billion in 1993. Yet, at the same time, net

capital flows to Latin America in 1998 were more than twice their amount in 1993. In other

words, both the amounts of net equity flows and net equity flows in proportion to total capital

flows are highly variable. Further, from 1994 to 1995, net equity flows to Latin America fell by

roughly 40% while net equity flows to East Asia increased by a bit more than 40%.1

      The growing importance of capital flows in the 1990s has led to concerns about contagion.

Since national stock markets are correlated because of interdependence among countries, one

would naturally expect a shock in one country to affect other countries. Some have called this

transmission of shocks contagion, even though it has little to do with the traditional definition of

contagion in epidemiology according to which a healthy individual is made sick by a disease

transmitted in some way from a stricken individual. Contagion that makes a healthy country sick

has been a source of concern in the 1990s, leading many to believe that such irrational or non-



1
    See Edison and Warnock (2001), table 1.

                                                  2
fundamental contagion can destabilize economies. Neither the high volatility of equity flows nor

contagion is consistent with models where investors act rationally, are similarly informed, and

trade in financial perfect markets. Some models suggest that factors that have been advanced to

explain the home bias can also help explain the volatility of equity flows and perhaps some forms

of contagion. However, the volatility of equity flows and contagion increase the importance of

international determinants of stock prices – at least for the countries affected by such phenomena.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the various international asset pricing

models that assume internationally integrated financial markets, shows the conditions under

which assets can be priced locally with these models, and surveys the empirical evidence on these

models. Section 3 discusses the home bias. Section 4 addresses the issues of the volatility of

equity flows and contagion. Section 5 concludes.



2. The Perfect Financial Markets Model

    How would individuals choose portfolios and how would asset prices be set in a world with

perfect financial markets? In an international setting, the most important implication of perfect

financial markets is that all investors face the same investment opportunity set because there are

no barriers to international investment. However, in a world of perfect financial markets, the

assumptions one makes about how goods prices in different currencies are related have important

implications for how individuals choose portfolios and how asset prices are determined. If

consumption opportunity sets are the same across countries, it does not matter where an investor

is located. An investor can achieve the same expected lifetime utility given his wealth anywhere

in the world. If consumption opportunity sets differ across countries and investors are not mobile,

then an investor’s expected lifetime utility depends on where she is located. In that case, an

investor may hold a different portfolio depending on her country of residence. We consider

successively the case where investors have the same consumption opportunity sets across

countries and the case where they do not. We then present a general approach that encompasses

                                                   3
the special cases we discuss in the first two parts of this section. We conclude the section with a

discussion of the empirical evidence on the predictions of the perfect markets model for security

returns.

2. A. Identical Consumption Opportunity Sets Across Countries

    Consider a world where goods and financial markets are perfect, so that we have no

transportation costs, no tariffs, no taxes, no transaction costs, and no restrictions to short sales.

Grauer, Litzenberger, and Stehle (1976) modeled such a world using a state-preference

framework. We assume further that there is only one consumption good.2 In such a world, every

investor has the same consumption and investment opportunity sets regardless of where she

resides. Further, the law of one price holds for the consumption good, so that if e(t) is the price of

foreign currency at date t, P(t) is the price of the good in the domestic country, and P*(t) is the

price in the foreign currency, it must be that P(t) = e(t)P*(t). In such a world, an investor can use

the consumption good as the numéraire, so that all prices and returns are expressed in units of the

consumption good.

    We now consider a one-period economy in which real returns are multivariate normal and

there is one asset that has a risk-free return in real terms, earning r. Investors care only about the

distribution of their real terminal wealth. The properties of the multivariate normal distribution

(see Fama, 1976, Chapters 4 and 8) imply that:



                               E(ri ) − r = αi + β id [ E(rd ) − r ] ,                    (1)




2
  The consumption good can be a basket of goods where the spending proportions on each good are
constant.

                                                   4
where E(.) denotes an expectation, ri is the real return on asset i, rd is the real return on the

                                                                                Cov(ri , rd )
domestic market portfolio, β id is the domestic beta of asset i defined as                    where
                                                                                 Var(rd )

Cov(.,.) denotes a covariance and Var(.) denotes a variance, and αi is a constant. If domestic

investors can only hold domestic assets and if foreign investors cannot hold domestic assets, then

we know that αi must be equal to zero for all assets because then the capital asset pricing model

(CAPM) must hold in the domestic country. However, in a world where domestic investors have

access to foreign assets, the CAPM must hold in real terms using the world market portfolio.

Consequently:



                                  E(ri ) − r = β iw [ E(rw ) − r ] ,                    (2)




where rw is the real return on the world market portfolio, β iw is the world beta of asset i defined

     Cov(ri , rw )
as                 . We call equation (2) the “world CAPM” to contrast it with the traditional
      Var(rw )

implementation of the CAPM that uses the domestic market portfolio, which we call the domestic

CAPM.

     We now build on Stulz (1995) to analyze the mistake in using the domestic CAPM when the

world CAPM is appropriate. Equations (1) and (2) imply that αi must satisfy:




                                α i =  β iw − β dw β id  [ E(rw ) − r ] .           (3)




     Equation (3) shows that systematic mistakes are possible when one uses the domestic CAPM

and when domestic investors have access to world markets. At the same time, though, equation

(3) puts a bound on the economic importance of these mistakes. Since the domestic market


                                                      5
portfolio has a beta of one, the weighted average of the alphas in equation (3) must be equal to

zero. To understand the nature of the mistakes, we have to understand how the world beta of asset

i, β iw , differs from the product of the world beta of the domestic market, β dw , and of the

domestic beta of asset i, β id . Using the multivariate normal distribution, we can write the return

of asset i as:



                                ri − r = α i + β id [ rd − r ] + ε id .                  (4)



    Similarly, the return of the domestic market portfolio can be written as:



                                   rd − r = β dw [ rw − r ] + ε dw .                     (5)



    Substituting equation (5) into equation (4), we have:



                         ri − r = α i + β id  β dw [ rw − r ] + ε dw  + ε id .       (6)




    The world market beta of asset i is therefore:



                                                        Cov(ε id , rw )
                                  β   i
                                       w
                                           =β β
                                             i
                                              d   w
                                                  d   +                 .                (7)
                                                         Var(rw )



    Substituting (7) into (3), we get the result of Stehle (1977) that the pricing mistake from using

the domestic CAPM when the global CAPM is appropriate is:




                                                       6
                                            Cov(ε id , rw )
                                     αi =                   [ E(rw ) − r ] .               (8)
                                             Var(rw )



    Equation (8) shows that the domestic CAPM understates the return of assets whose market

model residual is positively correlated with the world market portfolio. However, the domestic

CAPM correctly prices those assets whose market model residual is uncorrelated with the world

market portfolio. If high domestic beta stocks have risk diversifiable internationally but not

domestically, using the domestic CAPM inappropriately would lead one to conclude that the

security market line is too flat. One would expect multinational corporations to have returns

correlated with foreign markets in such a way that the domestic market portfolio return does not

capture all their systematic risk.

    Our analysis so far shows that, even when the assumptions required for the CAPM to hold are

made, the domestic CAPM does not hold in global markets. One inevitably makes pricing

mistakes using the domestic CAPM as long as Cov(ε id , rw ) is not zero for every security. There

exists an upper bound on the absolute value of the pricing mistakes. Let R ij2 be the R-square of a

regression of the return of asset i on asset j. With this notation, the bound can be written as:



                                                            Var (ri )
                          α i ≤ (1 − Rid2 )(1 − Rwd
                                                 2
                                                    )                 [ E (rw ) − r ] .    (9)
                                                            Var (rw )



    Consider an asset that has a variance that is four times the variance of the world market

portfolio. If the variance of security i is four times the variance of the world market, the R-square

of a regression of the security on the domestic market portfolio is 0.3, the R-square of a

regression of the world market on the domestic market is 0.2, and the world market risk premium

is 6%, the bound is 9%. Consider now an asset with the same volatility but in the U.S., where a


                                                        7
regression of the world market portfolio on the domestic market portfolio would have an R-

square of at least 0.8. In this case, the bound would be 4.49%. If we are willing to make

assumptions about the correlation between the domestic market model residual of an asset and the

return of the world market portfolio that is not explained by the domestic market portfolio, we

can compute the limits of the pricing mistakes. Consider, for example, a correlation of 0.2. In this

case, the asset in a country whose market portfolio is poorly explained by the world market

portfolio has a pricing mistake no greater than 1.8%, while the U.S. asset has a pricing mistake of

0.88%.

    It follows from this analysis that using a domestic CAPM is more of a problem in countries

whose market has a lower beta relative to the world market portfolio. Since the U.S. is a country

where the R-square of a regression of the world market portfolio on the domestic market portfolio

is high, the mistakes made by using the domestic market portfolio for U.S. risky assets are

smaller than for risky assets of other countries where the R-square of similar regressions is much

smaller. Further, the mistakes are likely to be less important for larger firms simply because the

domestic market portfolio explains more of the return of these firms.

    We now turn to the issue of the determinants of the market risk premium. We keep the same

assumptions, but now we have an investor who chooses her portfolio to maximize her expected

utility of terminal real wealth, E[U(W)], with U(W) strictly increasing and concave in W.

Consider first an investor who can only hold U.S. assets, so that the investor holds the U.S.

market portfolio. Using a first-order Taylor-series expansion, the first-order conditions of the

investor’s portfolio choice problem imply that:



                                    E(rd ) − r = T R Var(rd ) ,                        (10)




                                                  8
where TR is the investor’s coefficient of relative risk tolerance. Equation (10) implies that the risk

premium on the domestic market portfolio increases with the variance of the return of the

domestic market. This equation has been the basis for a large literature starting from Merton

(1980). However, equation (2) provides a different formula for the risk premium on the domestic

market portfolio:



                                  E(rd ) − r = β dw    [ E(rw ) − r ] .                  (11)



    With equation (11), the risk premium on the domestic market portfolio depends on its world

beta. Since stock markets typically have a positive correlation with the world market portfolio, an

increase in the variance of the domestic market portfolio will increase its risk premium. However,

if one were to look at the cross-section of expected returns across national stock markets, there is

no reason for markets with higher variances to have higher risk premiums since a higher variance

for a country’s market portfolio does not imply that the country’s market has a higher correlation

with the world market portfolio. In fact, one would expect the opposite, in that emerging markets

tend to have high variances but low correlations with the world market portfolio (see Harvey,

1995). So far, we considered a one-period model. If one is willing to assume that equation (11)

holds each period, the volatility of the domestic market portfolio could increase at the same time

that the risk premium on the domestic market portfolio could fall. This could happen because the

correlation of the domestic market portfolio with the world market portfolio falls or the risk

premium on the world market portfolio falls.



2.B. Different Consumption Opportunity Sets Across Countries

    In the previous section, we considered a model where all investors have the same

consumption opportunity set. In such a model, the residence of an investor who maximizes the



                                                   9
expected utility of terminal wealth and whose terminal wealth consists only of the value of

securities held is irrelevant. In the presence of inflation, purchasing power parity must hold under

such conditions. With purchasing power parity, a percentage depreciation of the domestic

currency is offset by an equivalent percentage increase in domestic prices. There is a large

literature in international economics that documents that purchasing power parity does not hold –

at least for countries with moderate and low inflation.3 The assumption that consumption

opportunity sets are the same across countries is stronger than the assumption of purchasing

power parity. It requires that the relative price of any two consumption goods be the same in each

country at all times. Even with purchasing power parity holding, it would be possible that a

particular good is not available in one country but is available in another country. The law of one

price would not apply for that good even though it has to apply for every good when all investors

have the same consumption opportunity set. The empirical evidence shows that there are

significant departures from the law of one price across as well as within countries, but keeping

distance constant, the departures are more volatile across countries than within countries.4

    A simple way to model a world with departures from the law of one price is to assume that

there is a different consumption good in each country.5 This approach was first used by Solnik

(1974) to derive an asset pricing model where foreign exchange rate risk is priced. Such an

assumption implies that trade takes place in intermediate goods. Solnik (1974) assumes that there

is no inflation, so that the price of the consumption good in a country is fixed and the price of a

foreign currency is simply the price of the foreign good in terms of the domestic good. With such



3
  Froot and Rogoff (1995) state that “price level movements do not begin to offset exchange rate swings on
a monthly or even annual basis.” (p. 1648). In a comprehensive study using 64 real exchange rates,
O’Connell (1998) concludes that “no evidence against the random walk null can be found.”
4
  See Froot and Rogoff (1995) and Sarno and Taylor (2001) for reviews of the evidence. Engel and Rogers
(1996) examine deviations from the law of one price across cities in the U.S. and Canada. They find that
the volatility of deviations increases as distance between two cities increases but there is also a substantial
border effect on this volatility.




                                                      10
an approach, investors in each country use their consumption good as the numéraire. If one

considers the portfolio choice of a domestic investor in this model, there is only one difference

from the model discussed in the previous section but it is of critical importance. In the previous

section, the consumption good had the same price everywhere using the same numéraire. This

meant that all investors would evaluate the riskiness of an asset in the same way. Now, this is no

longer true. Consider an asset that is riskless in terms of the domestic good. This asset is riskless

for a domestic investor, but it is not so for a foreign investor.

    Let r be the return per unit of time of the domestic risk-free asset in domestic currency and r*

be the return of the foreign currency risk-free asset in foreign currency. For a domestic investor,

the instantaneous domestic currency return on the foreign currency riskless asset depends on the

exchange rate dynamics. We assume that the exchange rate follows a geometric Brownian

motion, so that:



                                          de
                                             = µe dt + σ e dz e ,                              (12)
                                          e



where µe is the instantaneous expected rate of change of the exchange rate, σ e is the

instantaneous volatility of the rate of change of the exchange rate, and dz e is the increment over

dt of a Brownian motion with zero drift and unit volatility. With this assumption about the foreign

exchange dynamics, the instantaneous domestic currency return on the foreign risk-free asset is

r*dt + (de/e), while the foreign currency return on the foreign risk-free asset is r*dt. In contrast,

the foreign currency return on the domestic risk-free asset is rdt – (de/e) + σ e2 dt. The volatility




5
  Alternatively, there could be many consumption goods but all investors would consume the goods in the
same constant proportions so that the basket of goods they consume is constant. Such an extension would
lead to the same results as Solnik’s model provided that the price of a country’s basket of goods is constant
in the currency of that country.

                                                      11
term comes from Jensen’s inequality: the price of the domestic currency for foreign investors is a

convex function of the domestic currency price of the foreign currency.

    Whenever a domestic investor holds a foreign asset, her return in domestic currency depends

on the exchange rate, so that she bears exchange rate risk. Let Ifj be the price in domestic

currency of foreign asset j and let I*fj be the price of the same asset in foreign currency. The

instantaneous return in domestic currency on foreign asset j is:



                                    dIfj       dI*fj                   de
                                           =     *
                                                       + σ fj,e
                                                           *
                                                                dt +      ,               (13)
                                     Ifj        Ifj                    e



σ fj,e
  *
       is the instantaneous covariance of the foreign currency return of foreign asset j with the rate

of change of the exchange rate. A domestic investor can make the domestic currency return on

her holdings of foreign assets uncorrelated with the rate of change of the exchange rate, so that

she does not have to bear foreign exchange rate risk if she does not wish to do so. Let I*ff be the

value in foreign currency of a domestic investor’s investment in foreign risky assets. If the

investor shorts n units of the foreign risk-free asset per unit of investment in the foreign risky

assets and puts the proceeds of the short sale in the domestic risk-free asset, the domestic

currency return on the investor’s holdings of foreign currency risky assets over dt is:



                        dIdf dI*ff de                           de       
                             = * +    + σ ff* ,e dt − n  r*dt +    − rdt  .             (14)
                         Idf   Iff e                            e        



                                                σ ff* ,e
    If the investor chooses n to be equal to 1 + 2 , the domestic currency return of the
                                                σe

investor’s investment in the foreign currency risky assets is uncorrelated with the exchange rate.

                                                         12
In the risk management literature, n is the hedge ratio – i.e., the ratio of the size of the hedge

relative to the size of the position being hedged. In Solnik’s model, the returns of risky assets in

their own currency are assumed to be uncorrelated with the rate of change of the exchange rate,

so that the optimal hedge ratio is one. Sercu (1980) relaxes this assumption of Solnik’s model.

We call the extended model the Solnik/Sercu model in the following discussion. With multiple

countries, each risky asset is exposed to the risk of multiple currencies, so that an asset has an

optimal hedge ratio with respect to each foreign currency.

    Since the investor can hedge her foreign stocks against exchange rate risk, the two decisions

of how much foreign exchange rate risk to bear and of how much foreign equity to hold are

                       σ ff* ,e
separable. Empirically, 2 is close to 0, so that an investor hedges the foreign exchange risk of
                       σe

a foreign currency investment by shorting the currency in which the risky assets are denominated

for an amount approximately equal to her holdings of these risky assets. If our investor chose to

take on no foreign exchange rate risk, she would therefore sell short an amount of the foreign

risk-free asset roughly equal to her holdings of foreign risky assets. Foreign investors would have

to hold an amount of the foreign risk-free asset equal to the amount of that asset shorted by

domestic investors. If the domestic investor holds some foreign exchange risk, she does not hedge

all her holdings of foreign stocks and, consequently, foreign investors hold a smaller amount of

the foreign risk-free bond.

    Perold and Schulman (1988) argued in an influential article that hedging is a free lunch since

it reduces volatility at no cost in expected return because on average there is no compensation for

bearing foreign exchange rate risk. Their argument is controversial on empirical grounds because

generally high interest rate currencies earn a risk premium (see Froot and Thaler, 1990, for a

review of the evidence). If correct, however, their argument would imply that the exchange rate

exposure of stocks would not affect their expected returns, so that one could ignore exchange

rates when considering the cross-section of expected returns for common stocks.

                                                 13
    To consider the validity of the Perold and Schulman argument on theoretical grounds, note

that it implies that foreign investors short the domestic currency for an amount equal to their

holdings of domestic currency risky assets. Domestic investors must be the counterparties of

these short sales, so that if foreign investors hedge all their domestic exchange rate risk, domestic

investors must hold an amount of the domestic risk-free asset equal to the short position in

domestic risky assets of foreign investors.        In this case, foreign investors take no foreign

exchange risk. This makes sense if foreign investors receive no reward for being long the

domestic currency, which requires that the expected excess return of the domestic currency risk-

free asset over the foreign risk-free asset is zero.

    The excess return of the domestic currency risk-free asset over the foreign risk-free asset is

rdt + σ e2 dt – de/e – r*dt. Foreign investors will not take a long position in the domestic risk-

free asset if the expected excess return of the domestic currency risk-free asset over the foreign

risk-free asset for that investor is zero. That is, the following condition must hold: rdt + σ e2 dt –

µedt – r*dt = 0. For the Perold and Schulman argument to be theoretically valid, it must be that

when this condition is satisfied, domestic investors do not take exchange rate risk either.

However, the excess return on the foreign risk-free asset over the domestic risk-free asset for a

domestic investor is r*dt + de/e – rdt, so that the expected excess return for a domestic investor

on a long position in the foreign risk-free asset is r*dt + µedt – rdt. If the expected excess return

of holding the domestic risk-free asset is zero for foreign investors, then the expected excess

return of holding the foreign risk-free asset is positive and equal to σ e2 dt for a domestic investor.

Consequently, it is not possible for both domestic and foreign investors to contemplate an




                                                       14
expected excess return of zero when investing in the other country’s risk-free asset.6 In a

symmetric world, one would think neither domestic nor foreign investors would be rewarded for

bearing exchange rate risk since rewarding one group of investors would seem to penalize the

other group of investors. Jensen’s inequality makes this reasoning incorrect. If foreign investors

receive no reward for being long the foreign currency risk-free asset, then domestic investors are

rewarded for being long the foreign currency risk-free asset. In equilibrium, in a symmetric world

where consumption opportunity sets differ across countries, there will therefore exist some

reward for taking currency risk, so that exposures to foreign exchange rates will be priced in

assets.

    To present a key insight of Solnik’s model, let’s use his assumption that the domestic risky

assets have domestic currency returns uncorrelated with the exchange rate and that the foreign

risky assets have foreign currency returns uncorrelated with the exchange rate. In this case, the

domestic investor can hedge her holdings of the foreign risky assets against exchange rate risk by

borrowing an amount in foreign currency equal to her holdings of foreign currency risky assets.

Similarly, foreign investors hedge their currency risk by borrowing in domestic currency an

amount equal to their holdings of domestic currency risky assets. If there is no reward for taking

foreign currency risk, domestic investors will short the foreign currency risk-free asset for an

amount exactly equal to their investment in foreign currency risky assets and will bear no foreign

exchange rate risk. As the reward for taking foreign exchange rate risk increases, domestic




6
  This result holds more generally and is known as Siegel’s Paradox (Siegel (1972)). This Paradox states
that it is not possible for the forward exchange rate to be an unbiased predictor of the spot exchange rate
from the perspective of investors in the domestic as well as in the foreign country. If the forward exchange
rate is F and the spot exchange rate at maturity of the contract is e, the forward exchange rate is an unbiased
predictor from the perspective of the domestic country if F = E(e). However, from the perspective of
investors in the foreign country, the forward exchange rate is an unbiased predictor if (1/F) = E(1/e).
Because of Jensen’s inequality, E(e) is not equal to 1/E(1/e) as long as e is random. Black (1990) argues
that investors bear exchange rate risk in equilibrium because of Siegel’s paradox. Solnik (1993) clarifies
the implication of Siegel’s paradox for the pricing of exchange rate risk.

                                                      15
investors decrease the extent to which they hedge the foreign exchange risk associated with their

holdings of assets risky in foreign currency.

    We assume that there are N risky assets for each investor. Let the N-th risky asset be the

foreign currency risk-free asset for a domestic investor and the domestic currency risk-free asset

for a foreign investor. Define w diN as the fraction of her wealth the i-th domestic investor puts in

the N-th domestic risky asset, which is the foreign currency risk-free asset for her, and w fjN be the

fraction of her wealth the j-th foreign investor puts in the N-th foreign risky asset, which is the

domestic currency risk-free asset for her. Solving for these asset demands, we have:



                                              r* + µe − r 
                                 w diN = Tid               − wf ,
                                                                di
                                                                                          (15)
                                                  σ 2
                                                     e     

                                           r − µe + σ e2 − r * 
                              w fjN = Tjf                       − wd ,
                                                                     fj
                                                                                          (16)
                                                  σe
                                                    2
                                                                



where Tid and Tjf are, respectively, the relative risk tolerances of the domestic investor and of the

foreign investor, and w dif and w fid are, respectively, the fraction of the wealth of the i-th domestic

investor invested in foreign risky assets and of the wealth of the i-th foreign investor invested in

domestic risky assets. Let Td be the wealth-weighted average of the risk-tolerances of the

domestic investors and Tf the corresponding quantity for foreign investors. Further, let Wd be the

aggregate wealth of domestic investors, Wf the aggregate wealth of foreign investors, and Ww

equals the sum of Wd and Wf.

    We can use equations (15) and (16) to obtain the equilibrium risk premium on an investment

in a foreign risk-free bond financed through risk-free borrowing in the domestic currency.

Assuming that there is no net supply of the risk-free asset, the domestic holdings of the domestic

risk-free asset must correspond to the short position of foreign investors in the same asset.

                                                   16
Another way to put this is that a dollar invested in the domestic risk-free asset by domestic

investors is a dollar that foreign investors borrow from domestic investors. Equilibrium in the

market for the domestic risk-free asset therefore requires that:



     W d − w dw W w + T f W f r* + µe − r
                             =            ,                                               (17)
        Td W d + Tf W f           σ e2



where w dw is the weight of domestic currency risky assets in the world market portfolio. The

numerator on the right-hand side of this equation is the domestic currency expected excess return

on an investment in the foreign risk-free bond. Alternatively, it is the expected gain from a long

forward position to buy the foreign currency. This is the forward risk premium for a domestic

investor.

    An important implication of equation (17) is that the forward risk premium can be different

from zero when (1) the foreign exchange rate is uncorrelated with equities in their own currency

and (2) there is no net supply of riskless bonds in either domestic or foreign currency.7 In such a

world, there would be no risk premium for foreign exchange in the world CAPM in real terms.

The domestic currency return on foreign stocks would depend on the exchange rate, but the real

return of foreign stocks would not. Consequently, the beta of foreign exchange with respect to the

world market portfolio would be zero. In contrast, foreign exchange rate risk would be priced in

Solnik’s model so that the markets for the foreign currency and domestic currency risk-free assets

are in equilibrium. Using the domestic CAPM leads to pricing mistakes in this model not only




7
  One might argue that assuming no riskless bonds outstanding is unrealistic since there are government
bonds outstanding. However, government bonds are obligations of domestic residents, so that in a world
where the Ricardian equivalence result holds, one can view domestic residents as supplying these bonds
(see Barro, 1974).

                                                   17
because the market portfolio should include foreign assets, but also because it omits the foreign

currency risk factor when the assumptions that lead to Solnik’s model hold.

    To understand the determinants of the risk premium on foreign exchange, consider an

increase in domestic wealth, Wd. As a result of this increase, the demand for foreign stocks by

domestic investors increases. Absent increased borrowing in foreign currency, the foreign

currency exposure of domestic investors increases. To reduce this foreign currency exposure,

domestic investors want to borrow more abroad to hedge holdings of foreign stocks. Keeping all

expected returns the same, there is now excess demand for borrowing in foreign currency. To

reduce that excess demand, the reward for bearing foreign currency risk has to increase for

domestic investors, so that they borrow less to hedge their foreign stock holdings. An increase in

the value of domestic stocks means that the weight of domestic stocks in the portfolios of foreign

investors increases and hence these investors want to borrow more in domestic currency to reduce

their foreign currency exposure. To reduce the excess demand for borrowing in domestic

currency by foreign investors, the expected excess return of the domestic risk-free asset in foreign

currency has to increase, which is equivalent to a decrease of the expected excess return of the

foreign risk-free asset in domestic currency.

    This pricing of foreign exchange risk is the central feature of Solnik’s model. It is important

to note, however, that his model takes exchange rate dynamics as exogenous. In an equilibrium

model, the exchange rate and its dynamics would be functions of more primitive quantities. In

such a model, there would be no exchange rate risk premium – the risk premium paid for taking

on foreign exchange rate risk would be the risk premium for taking on exposure to the primitive

variables that affect the exchange rate. However, it would still be correct that taking on foreign




                                                 18
exchange rate risk could be rewarded even when there is no correlation between the return on

foreign exchange and the return on the market portfolio.8



2.C. A General Approach

    Merton (1973) provides a general representation of the demand function for risky assets when

the investment opportunity set changes over time. His approach was subsequently extended to the

case where commodity prices change randomly over time. Let S be a vector of state variables that

describe the investment and consumption opportunity sets. We now assume that there are K

countries, with nj assets in country j, and N risky assets in domestic currency. V is the

instantaneous variance-covariance matrix of returns of the assets risky in domestic currency, VS is

the instantaneous covariance matrix between asset returns and the changes in the state variables,

and µ is the vector of instantaneous expected excess returns using the domestic currency as the

numéraire. Investors are assumed to maximize their expected lifetime utility of consumption of

goods. Let J(W,S,t) be the indirect utility function of lifetime consumption as a function of

wealth, the state variables, and time. With this notation, the asset demands for the i-th investor of

country k must satisfy:



                                           −J kiw                   − J wS
                                                                        ki
                             w ki =               V −1
                                                       µ + V −1
                                                                VS ki       ,             (18)
                                      J kiww W ki                 J ww W ki



where J kiw is the partial derivative of J(W,S,t) with respect to wealth. J kiww and J kiwS are,

respectively, the partial derivatives of J kiw with respect to wealth and the vector of state variables.



8
  International asset pricing models that make the exchange rate endogenous include Lucas (1982),
Svensson (1985), and Stulz (1987) for monetary economies. Uppal (1993) extends the model of Dumas
(1992), where it is costly to transport the only consumed good between two countries. In his model, the
exchange rate is the relative price of the foreign good in terms of the domestic good.

                                                      19
Equation (18) has a straightforward interpretation. All investors’ holdings of risky assets can be

decomposed into holdings of the so-called tangency portfolio, V −1µ , and S so-called hedge

portfolios, where the weights of these portfolios sum to one through riskless borrowing and

lending. The hedge portfolios hedge the investor against the impact of unexpected changes in

state variables on her marginal utility of wealth.

    The asset demands of equation (18) accommodate any assumptions about consumption

opportunity sets. Note that all investors can solve their portfolio choice problem using domestic

currency as their numéraire. We can use equation (18) to understand the asset demands of the

model discussed in Section 2.A. With that model, all investors consume the same good, the price

of the good differs across countries, the law of one price applies to the good, and the investment

opportunity set is constant. The real wealth of the investor depends only on the price of the good

in the numéraire currency. If the price dynamics of the good in that currency are exogenously

specified and the price of the good is a sufficient statistic for the consumption opportunity set,

then the price of the good in the numéraire currency is the only state variable. If there is a risk-

free asset in real terms, then a nominal risk-free bond is a perfect hedge against unanticipated

changes in the price of the good. Hence, equation (18) can be used to characterize asset demands

when there is a risk-free asset in real terms as well as when such an asset does not exist. This

equation shows how inconsequential exchange rates are in the model of Section 2.A. A foreign

currency risk-free asset is treated no differently than any other risky asset in the asset demand

equations. In other words, there is nothing special about exchange rates in that model.

    If the assumptions of Solnik/Sercu model are used to characterize asset demands using

equation (18), then the only state variables are exchange rates. Each investor consumes only one

commodity, but that commodity depends on the country of residence of the investor. The indirect

utility function of an investor depends only on her wealth and on the exchange rate of her

country. This means that the indirect utility function of investors will vary across countries



                                                     20
because they care about different prices. The role of the exchange rate is not trivial in that model

because the price of each currency relative to the numéraire currency is a sufficient statistic for

the consumption opportunity set of investors from the country of that currency.

    Using the domestic currency as the numéraire, there is a perfect hedge against fluctuations of

the exchange rate of country i, namely the risk-free bond of country i. Since that hedge is part of

the risky securities, each column of VS is also a row of V in the Solnik/Sercu model, so that V-1VS

is an identity matrix. An investor from the j-th country would therefore add to her holdings of the

                                       −J wSj
tangency portfolio an investment of             in the risk-free bond of her country. Interestingly, in
                                      J WW W

this model, all investors hold the same tangency portfolio and in addition take on a position in the

risk-free bond of their country to hedge against changes in the price of the commodity they

consume. Since stocks are not used to hedge, every investor in the world holds two different

stocks in the same proportion. Consider an investor from country j. In addition to her holdings of

                                                                                −J wSj
the risk-free bond of her country through the tangency portfolio, she holds              in the risk-free
                                                                               J WW W

asset of her country. We could construct the asset demands in any currency that we want. If we

use currency k for the asset demands for the i-th investor in country k, then no state variable

enters the investor’s indirect utility function of wealth. This investor will put TkiWki in the

tangency portfolio and (1 – Tki)Wki in the risk-free asset of country k.

    Consider then stock j that has a weight of wwj in the world market portfolio. Since there is no

hedging demand for stocks in the Solnik/Sercu model, it must be that:



                                                K
                                w wj W W = w Tj ∑ T i W i =w Tj λW W ,                     (19)
                                                 i




                                                     21
where w Tj is the weight of asset j in the tangency portfolio, Ti is the wealth weighted average of

risk tolerances in country i, Wi is the country i wealth, λ is the wealth weighted average of risk-

tolerances across countries, and WW is world wealth. It follows from this that the weight of a

stock in the tangency portfolio is 1/λ times its weight in the world market portfolio. We can now

get to the weight of country q’s risk-free bond in the tangency portfolio. The risk-free bond has

zero capitalization but has a hedging demand from investors of country q. Let the weight in the

tangency portfolio of the risk-free bond from country q be w Tq . Consequently:

                                                            K
                                   (1 − T q )W q + w Tq ∑ T i W i = 0 .            (20)
                                                            i



We can solve for w Tq to find out the exposure to currency q in the tangency portfolio. Black

(1990) created a considerable amount of controversy by using the currency exposure in the

tangency portfolio to point out that, in a symmetric world, there is a universal hedge ratio. To

understand the issues raised by Black (1990), it is better to follow Solnik (1993) and consider the

amount of the risk-free bond sold in the tangency portfolio as a fraction of the share of the risky

assets of country q in the tangency portfolio, which we write as wTq. This expression, which has

the interpretation of a hedge ratio, is:



                                             − w Tq       (1 − T q )W q
                                      hq =            =                 ,              (21)
                                             w Tq              Mq



where Mq is the market capitalization of country q. Suppose that we are in a symmetric world

with relative risk tolerance less than one. In such a world, there cannot be net foreign investment,

so that Wq = Mq, and everybody has the same risk tolerance. Hence, the hedge ratio is the same

for stocks of every country – it is exactly 1 – T, where T is the common risk tolerance. Black

(1990) called this the universal hedge ratio.


                                                      22
    In general, the world is not as simple as we presumed in the analysis just concluded, so that

hedge ratios differ for stocks of different countries. For instance, differences in risk tolerance

across countries or net foreign investment render the universal hedge ratio formula useless. More

importantly, the result relies on the assumption that investors hold the log portfolio and the

riskless asset when they compute their asset demands in their own currency. In general, this is not

the case because investors want to hedge a variety of risks. For example, a major limitation of the

Solnik/Sercu model is that it assumes away inflation. Introducing inflation makes it possible to

distinguish between nominal exchange rate changes and real exchange rate changes. If there is

inflation, investors will attempt to hedge against the effects of inflation. Adler and Dumas (1983)

develop a model where the price level in each country evolves randomly and where deviations

from purchasing power parity are possible. In their work, they make clear the role of the utility

function of investors, of price level changes, and of deviations from purchasing power parity in

international portfolio choice and international asset pricing.

    More generally, the instantaneous distribution of the rate of change of the exchange rate can

change over time, consumption baskets may differ across investors, the investment opportunity

set can change over time, investors may have non-investment income, and so on. In such a world,

Stulz (1981a), building on Breeden (1979), shows that instantaneous expected excess returns

must satisfy:



                                                          β Ii ,c
                                      µi − r − σ I ,P =            µ M − σ M,P  ,       (22)
                                                  i
                                                          β M,c 



where µi is the instantaneous domestic expected currency return on a position in asset i financed

by borrowing in the risk-free asset of the country of asset i, r is the instantaneous domestic

nominal rate of interest, σ I    ,P
                                      is the instantaneous covariance between the return on the position
                             i




                                                           23
in asset i and the domestic rate of inflation, β Ii ,c is the instantaneous consumption beta of the

return of the position in asset i, where c is real consumption in the domestic country, β M,c is the

instantaneous consumption beta of portfolio M, µ M is the instantaneous expected excess return

of portfolio M, and σ M,P is the instantaneous covariance between the excess return of portfolio

M and the rate of inflation. This equation holds regardless of the composition of the reference

portfolio M, so that it holds if that portfolio is the world market portfolio. The CAPM is a special

case of this equation that obtains when the market portfolio has a return perfectly correlated with

consumption.

    It is immediately clear from equation (22) that the domestic CAPM cannot hold if investors

hold internationally diversified portfolios because consumption will not be perfectly correlated

with the domestic market portfolio. Yet, if domestic assets are not correlated with the residual of

a regression of consumption on the domestic market portfolio, the relative pricing of domestic

risky assets will still be correct when using the domestic market portfolio. More generally,

however, even foreign assets can be priced domestically when using the consumption beta model.

As emphasized in Stulz (1981a), with the consumption capital asset pricing model, one does not

have to make a priori assumptions about foreign exchange rate dynamics to price assets since the

same version of the model is consistent with any type of foreign exchange rate dynamics. Further,

one does not have to make assumptions about the importance of global factors on asset pricing

since the consumption capital asset pricing model implemented with domestic consumption holds

regardless of the importance of these factors. The model can be used to price foreign exchange

risk and implies that the risk premium on foreign currency increases with the consumption beta of

the exchange rate. Finally, the earlier models of Grauer, Litzenberger, and Stehle, of Solnik, and

of Sercu, as well as the Adler and Dumas model, obtain as special cases of equation (22).




                                                 24
2.D. Empirical Evidence on Asset Pricing Using Perfect Market Models

    How well do these international asset pricing models perform? The empirical literature can be

classified into those studies that provide tests of the world CAPM single-factor model (Section

2.A), those that examine multi-factor asset pricing models, such as the international arbitrage

pricing model or the Solnik/Sercu international asset pricing model (IAPM) with currency

hedging portfolios (Section 2.B), and finally, the general intertemporal or consumption-based

asset pricing models (Section 2.C). We assess each of these separate classes of studies in this

section, but it is worthwhile to note several common themes. First, empirical tests for each class

of models adopted unconditional approaches early on. Over time, the focus shifted to conditional

tests that assume the model holds period by period and thus allow the joint distribution of asset

returns to change dynamically over time. Second, studies in each class differentiate themselves

according to the test assets that are under examination by the authors. For example, while equities

are often the focus and, usually, in the form of national indexes, there are some studies with

individual stocks and portfolios constructed using various stock characteristics, such as growth,

value, size, and industry group. Further, some of the international models are tested with fixed

income securities, currency futures, and forward contracts. Finally, tests employ a return horizon

that is dictated by data availability and low frequency quarterly and monthly returns are most

commonly featured. However, a number of more recent tests consider higher frequency daily or

weekly returns. Overall, the evidence shows that country risk premiums change dynamically and

predictably over time with their covariance with the world market portfolio return, a result that is

supportive of international asset pricing. However, it is much less clear how the cross-section of

expected returns across global securities is affected by global factors when one goes from a

purely-domestic asset pricing model to an international asset pricing model.

    The early empirical studies of international asset pricing models provide unconditional tests

of the world CAPM with monthly returns on national stock indexes. Stehle (1977) evaluates the

world CAPM for the U.S. and eight other national indexes to investigate whether U.S. assets are

                                                 25
priced internationally. He tests whether the risks that are diversifiable internationally but that are

not diversifiable domestically are priced. He finds support for this hypothesis, but in his sample

the zero-beta portfolio return is too high and the international security market line slope is too flat

to be consistent with the model. Overall, this rather weak inference in favor of international

pricing stems from the low power of his tests. After all, there is strong collinearity between the

U.S. index and the world index with more than 40 percent weight of the world market portfolio

placed on the former. This challenge motivates Jorion and Schwartz (1986) to focus on the North

American case, using monthly returns on about 750 individual stocks in Canada. They take

advantage of a control sample of Canadian stocks that were also listed on U.S. exchanges and use

an orthogonalization of the world market portfolio (NYSE Composite index) relative to the

domestic market portfolio (Toronto Stock Exchange 300). They find that, while national factors

are priced, risk exposures to the U.S. market are not priced for Canadian stocks, even for those

cross-listed in the U.S. Mittoo (1992) finds evidence, using the CAPM and the arbitrage pricing

model, that Canadian stocks were priced as in a segmented market from 1977 to 1981, but as in

an integrated market from 1982 through 1986. Results supportive of international pricing are

found in Korajczyk and Viallet (1989) who provide evidence using over 6,000 individual stocks

from the U.S., Japan, and the U.K. with 15 years of monthly data. They show that the world

CAPM outperforms the domestic CAPM in that average model mispricing errors are smaller.

However, in their various tests, they also find that the world CAPM model still retains large

pricing errors for small stocks, that these average pricing errors are significant for the world

CAPM for each market in at least one specification, and that the world CAPM dominates only in

the more recent (1979-83) subperiod.

    A number of recent studies investigate the world CAPM model in a conditional setting with

time-varying expected returns, variances, and covariances. This is an important feature that can

have important implications for the empirical performance of asset pricing models. The first

efforts in this regard by Mark (1988), Giovannini and Jorion (1989), and McCurdy and Morgan

                                                   26
(1992) investigate the risk premium in currency forward contracts. They all find that the

conditional covariances implied by the world CAPM indeed have some success in forecasting the

conditional risk premia over time. Unfortunately, the risk premia are quite large in certain

subperiods and the overidentifying restrictions implied by the world CAPM are rejected easily.

Giovannini and Jorion, in particular, use weekly returns constructed from government bonds

denominated in six currencies and a simple multivariate GARCH specification. They find that

there are negligible differences in the huge statistical rejections for either the static

(unconditional) world CAPM or those specifications with more general covariance dynamics.

However, their tests and others like theirs make the additional assumption that government bonds

are net wealth. Rejecting the world CAPM in such tests can be due to this critical auxiliary

assumption. Harvey (1991) employs a conditional framework using monthly returns on a number

of Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) stock indexes allowing the expected excess

index returns, their betas, and even the world market price of risk to vary over time. Estimated

with GMM and local and world instrumental variables, the conditional world CAPM model is

useful for predicting expected excess returns. Although the overidentifying restrictions of the

model cannot be rejected for the G-7 countries, model pricing errors associated with several

countries, and especially Japan, suggest either these markets are not integrated with world

markets or the model fails to capture some important priced risks.

    Chan, Karolyi, and Stulz (1992) test implications of the world CAPM using daily data for the

1980s with a multivariate GARCH structure for time-varying conditional expected excess returns

and covariances. They cannot reject the world CAPM restriction in a model with a domestic

(U.S.) and foreign (MSCI EAFE index) portfolio, but they find that a simple two-beta model

where each portfolio is a source of risk outperforms the world CAPM. One of the limitations of

their approach is the low cross-sectional power of the tests. As a result, De Santis and Gerard

(1997) extend this multivariate GARCH approach to eight national MSCI indexes with a more

parsimonious but less general dynamic GARCH structure. Their tests cannot reject that the price

                                                27
of risk is equal across markets or that the model pricing errors equal zero. Moreover, they cannot

reject that country-specific risks are zero. The results are somewhat sensitive to bear market

conditions and high interest rate economic environments. The relevance of economic cycles for

conditional risk and expected returns is featured in the specification tests of Zhang (2001) that are

applied to size and book-to-market portfolios of stocks from the U.S., the U.K., and Japan. She

shows that the world CAPM (equation (1)) is not rejected with these business cycle conditioning

instrumental variables. Strikingly, she does not find that exchange rate risk is priced.

    The inability of the world CAPM to explain the cross-section of global security expected

returns may stem from the potential importance of sources of priced risk other than the world

market portfolio in international asset pricing models. A number of studies establish the

conditions under which a multi-beta model, such as the APT or intertemporal CAPM, can hold

internationally (see, for instance, Solnik, 1983) assuming a perfect markets model with identical

consumption and investment opportunity sets across countries (Section 2.A above). Cho, Eun,

and Senbet (1986) are the first to provide tests of the international APT. They employ factor

analysis with monthly returns for 349 stocks from 11 countries and find that three or four factors

are reliably identified. However, the cross-sectional tests (equality of intercepts across pairings of

country groups of stocks) lead them to reject international market integration and the APT.

Curiously, the results are not sensitive to the currency denomination of the returns and the model

does reliably hold for certain pairings of country groupings. Gultekin, Gultekin, and Penati (1989)

and Korajczyk and Viallet (1989) show that the performance of the international APT depends on

the sample period because markets were less open in the 1970s or the early 1980s than they are

later on. For example, Korajczyk and Viallet find that the international APT outperforms the

world CAPM in terms of average pricing errors (though strangely both models are dominated by

the domestic APT) but the international APT performs best with capital control dummies during

the 1969-74 period. Finally, building on the early success of the three-factor model of Fama and

French (1993) in capturing market, size, and book-to-market effects in the U.S., Fama and French

                                                  28
(1998) propose a similar multi-beta model for the cross-section of global stock returns of the

MSCI universe of 7,500 stocks from thirteen countries between 1975 and 1995. They show that,

while the world CAPM fails, a world two-factor model (world market beta and value-growth

beta) can explain the cross-section of expected returns, including most of the annual 7.68 percent

average global value premium for size and book-to-market portfolios during this period. Griffin

(2001) finds that the success of the world value-growth factor for some countries stems from the

domestic components of that factor.

    The world CAPM would perform poorly if differences in consumption baskets across

countries play an important role in the cross-section of expected returns. In this case, the

consumption asset pricing model or the Solnik/Sercu model would perform better. Despite the

conceptual superiority of the consumption-beta model, only a few papers have attempted to

implement tests of that model, and even fewer have done so for international stock returns

because of the problems of measuring consumption flows. Nevertheless, Wheatley (1988) and

Cumby (1990) provide evidence that the Stulz (1981a) consumption beta model (equation 22)

works reasonably for monthly MSCI national index returns during the 1970s and 1980s.

Wheatley tests the model's restrictions on unconditional mean returns, and shows that the model

performs well for all but certain markets (France, Hong Kong, and Italy) and for all but the early

1980s. Cumby employs vector autoregressions to test the model's restrictions on conditional

mean returns, and finds the model works well during the 1980s, although not during the late

1970s.

    Conditional tests of international APT or multi-beta asset pricing models have been the focus

of most recent studies and have consistently shown a lot of promise. Campbell and Hamao

(1992), Bekaert and Hodrick (1992), Ferson and Harvey (1993, 1994, 1995, 1997), and Harvey

(1995) allow cross-sectional variation using extra-market factors related to macroeconomic and

fundamental stock characteristics and show consistently that expected returns of individual

countries are forecastable. Each of these studies examine national index returns for developed

                                                29
markets and, in the case of Harvey (1995), emerging markets, but their focus is typically on the

role of local versus global conditioning information and exposures to pre-specified factors for

expected returns and not the ability of the various multi-beta models to explain the cross-section

of expected returns. In fact, Ferson and Harvey (1994) and Harvey (1995) show that both the

international CAPM and the multi-beta models they study fail to explain the cross-section of

expected returns for 21 national equity markets and new emerging equity markets in Europe,

Latin America, Asia, Mideast, and Africa. Rouwenhorst (1999) offers further evidence of the

importance of local factors, such as momentum, turnover, size, and value, using data from

emerging markets. Griffin (2001) shows that size and book to market are local factors as well.

Finally, Ilmanen (1995) presents conditional tests for long-maturity government bonds in six

countries using a small set of global instruments and a latent factor model, like Bekaert and

Hodrick (1992). He demonstrates significant predictable variation in excess bond returns, but he

identifies one global risk factor that captures the cross-section of expected returns that is strongly

correlated with a world excess bond return factor.

    When exchange rates are perfectly correlated with relative prices of goods as in the model of

Section 2.B and the only hedging portfolios investors hold are foreign-currency denominated

bonds, expected asset returns depend on the covariances of assets with the return of the world

market portfolio and with currency returns. Nevertheless, remarkably few of the empirical

tests have paid attention to the role of foreign exchange risk. An early paper by Jorion (1991)

showed that a trade-weighted exchange rate risk measure is priced in the 1980s for test assets

comprised of portfolios of about 900 U.S. multinational firms constructed by the proportion of

overseas sales. Later, Dumas and Solnik (1995) and DeSantis and Gerard (1998) find empirical

support for conditional versions of multi-factor asset pricing models that include a world market

portfolio and a series of foreign exchange return factors. Dumas and Solnik combine a “pricing

kernel” formulation with a generalized instrumental variables approach for four developed

markets and find that exchange rate risk is priced and cannot reject the international asset pricing

                                                  30
model.   De Santis and Gerard (1998) conduct similar tests using the multivariate GARCH

representation of their 1997 paper, but also document that the currency risk premium captures

almost 64 percent of the total premium during the 1980s for each market, except the U.S.

Dahlquist and Sällström (2001) investigate the ability of asset pricing models to price 19 national

portfolios, national industry portfolios sorted into 25 characteristic-sorted portfolios (such as

value, growth, and size), and 39 global industry portfolios. They find that using national

portfolios they cannot reject any of the models. However, when they investigate the

characteristic-sorted portfolios, they find that the CAPM without foreign exchange risk factors

performs poorly. However, even that model faces difficulties because characteristics are priced

when added to the pricing equation and it does poorly when they try to price the global industry

portfolios. Given the considerable success of industrial production as a conditioning variable in

Zhang’s (2001) work, it would be interesting to see how this variable performs in the tests

implemented by Dahlquist and Sällström.

    Though the empirical evidence on the world CAPM suggests that, for the U.S., it may not be

necessary to use the world market portfolio to investigate the cross-section of expected returns,

some of the empirical evidence on the pricing of exchange rate risk indicates that one may have

to take into account the exposure of stocks to foreign exchange risk. Paradoxically, the evidence

on foreign exchange rate exposures of stocks is weak as discussed in Griffin and Stulz (2001),

making it puzzling that exchange rates would matter so much in the cross-section of returns in

some studies.



3. Home Bias

    The models discussed in Sections 2.A. and 2.B. have strong implications for the equity

portfolios of investors. With these models, all investors hold any two stocks in the same

proportion. The generalized model discussed in Section 2.C. predicts that all investors invest in

the portfolio an investor with logarithmic utility would hold plus hedge portfolios. Except for

                                                 31
hedge portfolios, therefore, all investors also hold any two stocks in the same proportion. If hedge

portfolios do not include stocks, then all three models imply that investors hold any two stocks in

the same proportion. Unless hedge portfolios contain stocks, it must therefore be the case that all

investors hold the world market portfolio of stocks. As shown in Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock

(2001), at the end of 1997 U.S. stocks comprised 48.3% of the world market portfolio. At that

time, foreign stocks represented only 10.1% of the stock portfolios of U.S. investors. The

holdings of foreign stocks predicted by the world CAPM and the Solnik/Sercu model were,

therefore, about five times the actual holdings of foreign stocks of U.S. investors. This dramatic

underweighting of foreign stocks in portfolios is called the home bias.9 The home bias is

pervasive across countries. French and Poterba (1991) and Tesar and Werner (1994) show that at

the beginning of the 1990s, the fraction of stock market wealth invested domestically was in

excess of 90% for the U.S. and Japan, and in excess of 80% for the U.K. and Germany.

       Figure 1 uses flow of funds data to show how the home bias has evolved over time for U.S.

investors from 1973 through the first quarter of 2001. This figure shows holdings of foreign

stocks for American investors as a fraction of their stock market wealth and the share of U.S.

stocks in the world market portfolio. Though the home bias has decreased for these investors,

most of the decrease occurred over a few years from 1985 through 1994. Before 1985, holdings

of foreign stocks represented a trivial fraction of the stock market wealth of American investors.

From 1945 to 1973, holdings of foreign stocks as a fraction of stock market wealth never exceed

1%. Though holdings of foreign stocks increased sharply from 1985 through 1994 to roughly

10% of the stock market wealth of American investors, this fraction has stayed remarkably

constant since then. It was 9.91% in 1994 and 10.53% at the end of the first quarter of 2001.

Though the portfolio weight of foreign assets stayed relatively stable since 1994, the dollar value

of foreign holdings more than doubled.



9
    Lewis (1999) provides a recent extensive review of the home bias literature.

                                                        32
    For a number of years after World War II, most countries had strong barriers to foreign

investment. Because most currencies were not convertible, investing abroad required access to

scarce foreign currencies. Many countries also had prohibitions to foreign investment by their

own citizens and often limits or outright prohibition to ownership of domestic stocks by foreign

investors. Even when countries did not have outright restrictions on foreign investment, equity

investment by foreign investors could be disadvantaged because of tax considerations, because of

the necessity to acquire foreign exchange, and because of the costs of hedging exchange rate risk.

In the presence of barriers to international investment, one expects investors to hold more

domestic stocks than predicted by the world CAPM or the Solnik/Sercu model because barriers to

international investment lessen the benefits of international diversification.

    Black (1974) derives a model of international portfolio choice and asset pricing where

barriers to international investment take the form of a proportional tax that is rebated for short

sales. Barriers of this type might correspond to some types of taxes but, generally, obstacles to

investment are such that they reduce the return both for short and long positions. Stulz (1981b)

models such barriers as the equivalent of a tax paid on the absolute value of holdings of foreign

stocks and shows that they imply that some foreign stocks are not held by domestic residents.

This tax can represent explicit direct costs of holding foreign stocks as well as proxy for other

indirect costs, such as information costs. Other barriers to international investment take the form

of outright ownership restrictions. Eun and Janakiramanan (1986) and Errunza and Losq (1985)

provide models that examine the portfolio and asset pricing implications of such barriers.

    A number of papers investigate empirically the implications of partial segmentation, where

partial segmentation is defined to mean that there are some equity flows that take place either in

or out of a country, but these flows are limited because of explicit constraints on or because of

barriers to international investment. Many of the papers discussed in Section 2.D. use the

hypothesis of segmented markets as their alternative hypothesis. In particular, it is common in the

literature to contrast global pricing of assets to local pricing of country portfolios. When using

                                                  33
developed markets for the 1980s and 1990s, authors generally find that they can reject local

pricing of country portfolios. However, for a number of countries, some of the barriers to

international investment are known explicitly, so that a model that reflects these barriers can be

tested. Errunza and Losq (1985) derive explicit predictions for the expected returns of securities

that cannot be held freely by foreign investors and test these predictions on a short sample period,

obtaining results that are consistent with their predictions. Hietala (1989) tests a model where he

incorporates the ownership restrictions that applied to Finnish companies over his sample period

and finds supportive evidence that the magnitude of the premium of unrestricted shares relative to

restricted shares can be explained by his model. Bailey and Jagtiani (1994) investigate the

determinants of the premium of shares available to foreign investors in Thailand and show how

that premium varies over time.

    With explicit or implicit barriers to international investment, securities available to foreign

investors may not be equally attractive to all foreign investors since the barriers may differ across

investors depending, for instance, on their tax status. In this case, the demand curves for domestic

securities from foreign investors may be downward-sloping, creating incentives for firms to

restrict their supply of shares available to foreign investors to increase the price of these shares.

Stulz and Wasserfallen (1995) expand models with barriers to international investment to take

into account the downward-sloping demand curves for domestic securities from foreign investors.

They find supportive evidence for Switzerland. Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (1997)

investigate the pricing of restricted and unrestricted shares in Mexico and find support for the

hypothesis that the demand curve for Mexican shares from foreign investors is downward

sloping.

    Over the last thirty years, however, barriers to international investment have fallen

dramatically. Emerging markets took longer to remove explicit barriers to international

investment. However, even for emerging markets that have few such explicit barriers, sovereign

risk remains often as a significant barrier to international investment. Further, in these markets,

                                                  34
there have been instances where barriers have been restored – the most visible case being

Malaysia in 1998. Bekaert and Harvey (1995) estimate a multivariate GARCH model where the

degree of integration of an emerging market changes over time and then extract the extent to

which the market is segmented from the data. With their approach, the risk premium on a market

depends on its volatility if the market is completely segmented and depends on its world market

beta if it is completely integrated. They allow a market’s expected return to depend both on its

volatility and on its world beta. The degree of segmentation of a market decreases when the

market’s world beta becomes a more important determinant of the market’s expected return. They

find that the degree of segmentation varies over time – sometimes decreasing and sometimes

increasing.

     Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000) provide evidence on the impact of removing

barriers to international investment for emerging markets.10 When a country’s risk premium is

determined locally, the mean-variance model implies that the risk premium increases with the

volatility of that country’s market. In contrast, when a country’s risk premium is determined

globally, the risk premium depends on the covariance of the return of that country’s market

portfolio with the return of the world market portfolio. Because emerging markets typically have

high volatility but low betas, one would expect their equity to appreciate substantially when they

move from local to global pricing. Henry (2000) shows that it is so. Investigating a number of

countries, he finds that on average the equity of these countries appreciates by more than 25%

over the eight months that precede the opening of their markets and the month of the opening.

Further, Chari and Henry (2001) provide evidence supportive of the hypothesis that the expected

return of individual stocks is determined by their local beta before their markets open up to

foreign investors and by their global beta afterwards. At the same time, however, it is clear that



10
   Stulz and Wasserfallen (1995) provide an event study of the removal of barriers to international
investment for a Swiss stock. They show that when Nestlé made shares that could be held only by Swiss
residents freely available, the price of these shares increased sharply as predicted.

                                                  35
the impact of opening a country’s markets to foreign investors has a relatively small impact on

the risk premium of that market. While Henry investigates stock index returns around stock

market openings, Bekaert and Harvey (2000) investigate changes in dividend yields. They

provide a battery of econometric tests showing that, even though the risk premium falls, a

reasonable estimate of this decrease in the risk premium is only at most between 100 basis points

and 200 basis points.

    The small decrease in the risk premium following the opening of a market to foreign

investors is puzzling. Since the beta of emerging markets is so low and their volatility is so high,

one would expect a much more dramatic impact. The home bias may help explain this low impact

of stock market liberalization on the risk premium of emerging markets. The dramatic change

from local to global pricing takes place only if, after liberalization, foreign investors begin to hold

stocks of the liberalizing country in proportion to their weight in the world market portfolio. We

know that they do not. If they did, the holdings of domestic stocks by domestic investors in

emerging markets would be trivial since the share of an emerging market in the world market

portfolio is typically less than 1%. Obviously, foreign holdings of emerging market stocks are not

as extensive.

    There are at least four reasons why one has to be skeptical about explanations of the home

bias that rely on explicit direct barriers to international investment. First, these barriers have

fallen over time. In fact, Errunza, Hogan, and Hung (1999) show that investors can obtain most of

the benefits from international diversification by investing in securities traded in the U.S. such as

American Depository Receipts (ADRs) and country funds. Despite the growth in these securities,

as shown in Figure 1, the home bias for U.S. investors is unchanged over the last seven years.

Second, the gross equity flows are very large compared to the net equity flows.11 For instance, in

1999, equity transactions between U.S. investors and foreign investors totaled $4.6 trillion.




                                                   36
Further, during the first three quarters of 2000, U.S. investors bought foreign shares for $1.376

trillion and sold foreign shares for $1.364 trillion, buying a net amount of foreign shares of

slightly more than $12 billion. Such dramatic gross purchases and gross sales seem hard to

reconcile with the existence of important differential transaction costs for the purchase and sale of

foreign shares compared to domestic shares. Third, Glassman and Riddick (2001) calibrate a

mean-variance model of portfolio choice with transaction costs in order to explain the deviations

from the world market portfolio for U.S. investors when considering foreign holdings in Canada,

France, Germany, Japan, and the U.K. They show that explicit direct barriers to international

investment would have to be of an extraordinary magnitude -- more than 1% per month for an

investor with a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3 -- for a reasonable explanation of home

bias. Fourth, Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2001) show ownership restrictions and transaction

costs are second-order effects in explaining the cross-country holdings of foreign stocks for U.S.

investors. Liberalization does not mean that foreign investors will immediately acquire a large

stake in the liberalizing country. Absent foreign equity investment, the risk-sharing benefits of

liberalization will not be obtained (see Stulz (1999)).

     If explicit direct barriers to international investment and ownership restrictions fail to explain

the home bias for U.S. investors, what can? The models discussed in Section 2.C. predict that

investors will hold portfolios to hedge against unanticipated changes in state variables on which

their expected lifetime utility depend. As long as the impact of some state variables depends on

the country of residence of the investor and on the fact that to hedge these state variables requires

common stocks, one would expect investors to hold stock portfolios that depend on their country

of residence. The literature has focused on consumption good prices and human capital as the




11
  Tesar and Werner (1995) were first to notice that non-resident investors trade very actively compared to
resident investors.

                                                    37
main state variable that could lead to differences in portfolios across countries. In Krugman

(1981) and Stulz (1983), investors hold bonds rather than stocks to hedge against relative goods

prices because the price of foreign bonds in domestic currency is correlated with the relative price

of foreign goods so that their models cannot explain the home bias. Uppal (1993) provides a

general equilibrium model that builds on Dumas (1992). The Dumas model is a two-country

model where there is only one consumption good, but the location of the inventory of that good

matters because changes in the stock of the good in one country can only take place as a flow and

it is costly to move goods from one country to the other. In the Dumas model, the exchange rate

is interpreted as the price of the good in the foreign country in terms of the price of the good in

the domestic country. The setup of the model makes it possible to generate interesting dynamics

for the real exchange rate. In particular, it is possible for the real exchange rate to differ from one

and no trade in the good to take place. However, there are upper and lower limits to the extent to

which the real exchange rate can depart from one because trade takes place when the real

exchange rate deviates too much from one. Uppal’s model investigates portfolio choice in such a

setting. He finds that investors with a coefficient of relative risk aversion that exceeds unity end

up overweighting foreign stocks.

    Cooper and Kaplanis (1994) examine whether hedging against inflation risk can explain the

home bias and conclude that it cannot. In a simple mean-variance model where human capital is a

non-traded asset, Mayers (1973) shows that investors hold stocks to hedge that non-traded asset.

If the return to human capital of an investor is negatively correlated with the return of the stocks

from that investor’s country, then that investor would increase her position in domestic stocks

relative to what would be predicted in a model without non-traded assets. Fama and Schwert

(1977) were first to examine this issue for the U.S. and found little correlation. However, Baxter

and Jermann (1997) argue that the correlation between human capital and the stock market of the

country of an investor is positive, so that their analysis leads them to conclude that domestic

investors should hold fewer domestic stocks than predicted by the mean-variance model. In

                                                   38
contrast, Bottazzi, Pesenti, and Van Wincoop (1996) present estimates showing a negative

correlation, so that they can conclude that hedging of human capital can explain up to 40% of the

home bias. However, Glassman and Riddick (2001) show that for human capital to explain the

home bias, the return to human capital has to have positive correlation with stock market returns,

this positive correlation has to be larger with most foreign markets than it is with the U.S., and the

volatility of the return to human capital has to be large compared to the volatility of the U.S. stock

market.

    Though explicit direct barriers to international investment and ownership restrictions cannot

explain the home bias, there are also indirect barriers to international investment. It has been

often argued that investors know less about foreign stocks than they know about domestic stocks.

The hypothesis that foreign investors are less well informed about domestic stocks forms the

starting point for several theoretical models. In particular, Gehrig (1993) derives the optimal

portfolio when foreign investors know less and shows that this assumption leads to an

overweighting of domestic assets. Kang and Stulz (1997) provide some evidence about holdings

of foreign assets that is consistent with an information advantage for domestic investors. They

show that foreign investors in Japan hold more stocks of large companies than they do of small

companies. In other words, the home bias is stronger for small stocks than for large stocks. One

would expect that the information disadvantage of foreign investors would be smaller for large

stocks. Dahlquist and Robertson (2001) investigate the holdings of Swedish stocks by non-

resident investors. Their results are consistent with Kang and Stulz (1997). They point out that

non-resident investors are mostly institutional investors and that the holdings of stocks by non-

resident investors exhibit biases that are also typical of resident institutional investors.

    Foreign investors could be disadvantaged because of distance, because of differences in

language and culture, and because of time zone differences. There is evidence that distance

matters. In two papers, Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001) show that the weight of a U.S. stock

in U.S. mutual funds is negatively related to the distance between the location of the fund and the

                                                   39
location of the headquarters of the firm and that mutual fund managers do better with their

holdings of stocks of firms located more closely to where the mutual fund is located. Grinblatt

and Keloharju (2001) show that, in Finland, language matters in an investor’s portfolio allocation.

Finnish investors whose native language is Swedish are more likely to own stocks of companies

in Finland that have annual reports in Swedish and whose CEOs speak Swedish than those

investors whose native language is Finnish. Choe, Kho, and Stulz (2001) find evidence that

foreign investors buy at higher prices than resident investors in Korea and sell at lower prices.

Shukla and van Inwegen (1995) show that U.K. money managers underperform American money

managers when picking U.S. stocks. Hau (2001) finds that proprietary trades on the German stock

market do better when they are geographically closer to Frankfurt. There is however some

evidence that conflicts with the view that foreign investors are less well informed about domestic

stocks. Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), Seasholes (2000), and Karolyi (2002) provide evidence

that foreign institutional investors outperform residents. Grinblatt and Keloharju use Finnish data

to show that over their sample period foreign investors are better at picking Finnish stocks than

domestic investors. Seasholes shows that in Taiwan foreign institutional investors buy stocks

before positive earnings announcements and sell stocks before negative earnings announcements.

Both papers argue that foreign institutional investors do better because they are more skilled at

acquiring and interpreting information. Karolyi (2002) shows that foreign investors in Japanese

equities outperformed Japanese individuals and institutions, including banks, trust and life

insurance companies, and corporations themselves during the Asian financial crisis period.

    In a mean-variance model where investors choose among all stocks, the information

disadvantage of foreign investors matters in their portfolio allocation if they perceive that foreign

stocks are riskier. Glassman and Riddick (2001) show that investors would have to scale up

perceived market portfolio standard deviations typically by a factor from 2 to 5 depending on risk

aversion to produce a home bias similar to the one observed for U.S. investors. Such scaling

makes little sense. Yet, the confidence intervals around portfolio weights obtained from mean-

                                                  40
variance optimization are large enough that they include the case of zero weight on foreign assets

(Britten-Jones (1999)), so that investors with different priors might reach dramatically different

conclusions about the benefits of international diversification. However, Pastor (2000) and Li

(2001) provide evidence that Bayesian investors would have to have rather extreme beliefs in

favor of domestic asset pricing to stay away from foreign stocks. It may well be, though, that

investors overestimate the risk of foreign stocks and underestimate their expected returns because

of behavioral factors. Shiller, Kon-ya, and Tsutsui (1996) provide survey evidence that domestic

investors typically expect domestic stocks to earn more than foreign investors do.

    Merton (1987) develops a model where investors hold stocks that they know. Such a model

would be equivalent to one where investors think that the risk of stocks they do not know is

extremely high. With that model, one would also see investors overweight domestic stocks.

Strikingly, Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2001) find that the most important variable in

explaining the underweighting of stocks of various countries by American investors is the

fraction of a country’s market capitalization that corresponds to firms with ADR programs: The

greater this fraction for a country, the greater the weight of that country in the portfolio of U.S.

investors. The impact of ADR programs might be due to the fact that having a foreign stock

traded in the U.S. represents a certification effect and reduces information asymmetries because

of the adoption of U.S. GAAP. Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock find that the impact of ADRs

comes from listings that require firms to use U.S. GAAP and to provide SEC disclosures as

opposed to OTC listings. At the same time, however, an ADR program makes firms known,

especially when it involves listing on an exchange, which would be supportive of Merton’s

model. The empirical evidence on ADR programs (surveyed by Karolyi, 1998) shows that there is

a positive abnormal return when a firm announces or lists an ADR program (Foerster and

Karolyi, 1999, and Miller, 1999), that ADR programs experience a pre-listing stock price run-up

and post-listing stock price decline (Foerster and Karolyi 1999, 2000), and that global factors

affect the pricing of ADR firms more than firms from the countries of ADR firms that do not list

                                                 41
in the U.S. (Mittoo, 1992, and Karolyi, 1998). This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that

a U.S. listing reduces some barriers to international investment.

    The home bias has generated a great deal of research. However, most explanations for the

home bias have trouble explaining the fact that the allocation to foreign stocks of U.S. investors

remained stable from 1994 through 2000. During that period of time, the size of ADR programs

increased dramatically and it became dramatically easier for U.S. investors to get exposure to

foreign stocks with little impact on portfolio allocations. It is plausible that the success of the U.S.

stock market led U.S. investors to keep their allocation to that market high, so that momentum

trading explains why the home bias has not decreased. However, this explanation for why the

home bias of U.S. investors has not decreased makes it even more puzzling why the home bias of

foreign investors is so large. Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2001) explain this home bias by

the fact that, in most countries, firms have controlling investors who do not trade their shares.

Perfect financial markets models with investors who are mean-variance optimizers cannot explain

any of this.



4. Flows, Spillovers, and Contagion

    Cross-border capital flows have grown dramatically in the past three decades, especially to

developing economies. For example, in 1975, gross cross-border transactions in bonds and

equities for the U.S. were equivalent to 4% of GDP. As shown in Figure 2, these transactions

exceeded GDP for the first time in 1991 and by 2000 they had grown to 245% of GDP.

Moreover, net portfolio flows have become an economically significant component of total

capital flows. Figure 3 shows that total net capital flows to emerging markets were positive each

year but were accelerating to a high of $180 billion in 1996 and subsequently declining to a low

of $45 billion in 2000. Flows are also remarkably volatile: the East Asian crisis countries went

from net private capital flows of $62.4 billion in 1996 to net private capital flows of -$46.2 billion

in 1998.

                                                   42
    The dramatic change in net private capital flows that takes place in crisis periods, as

evidenced by the statistics for East Asia as well as the other statistics given in the introduction,

have led many policymakers to question whether the financial liberalization process has gone too

far and whether controls on capital flows should be reintroduced. The recent upheavals in Asia

and Russia have led to the reimposition of some barriers to international investment in some

countries. Prominent economists have argued that, while trade liberalization should be

encouraged, this is not true of financial liberalization. For instance, Stiglitz (1998) called for

greater regulation of capital flows, arguing that “…developing countries are more vulnerable to

vacillations in international flows than ever before.” Krugman (1998) argued as follows: “What

turned a bad financial situation into a catastrophe was the way a loss of confidence turned into

self-reinforcing panic. In 1996 capital was flowing into emerging Asia at the rate of about $100

billion a year; by the second half of 1997 it was flowing out at about the same rate. Inevitably,

with that kind of reversal Asia's asset markets plunged, its economies went into recession, and it

only got worse from there.” Bhagwati (1998) states that: “This is a seductive idea: freeing up

trade is good, why not also let capital move freely across borders? But the claims of enormous

benefits from free capital mobility are not persuasive. (...) It is time to shift the burden of proof

from those who oppose to those who favor liberated capital.”

    Policymakers, economists, and other observers have been concerned that countries are

adversely affected by volatile flows and by contagion. These channels through which global

forces affect countries cannot be understood with the perfect financial markets model discussed in

Section 2. There is little role for equity flows in models where all investors hold stocks in the

same proportions. In this section, we review two growing branches of the international finance

literature that examine the channels through which global forces affect asset prices and that the

economists quoted in the previous paragraph are concerned about. The first set of studies

examines the joint dynamics of capital flows and asset returns. This research investigates whether

flows reflect changes in expected returns as globalization and liberalization forces would predict

                                                  43
or whether they may just as likely impact returns themselves. The second set of studies examines

an important by-product of free capital flow: how global stock market returns move together.

With free flows, markets are more closely connected. Investors who think that one market will

have higher expected returns can move their investments to that market and this connection

implies that markets move together more than they would if they were segmented. With growing

liberalization and integration of markets, one would expect that international co-movements of

stock returns have also grown, but a number of studies have rejected this notion. Moreover, while

international stock returns comovements fluctuate over time, these fluctuations seem difficult to

explain with economic fundamentals in those markets, leading some to suggest that they reflect

irrational market contagion, especially around crisis periods (Mussa and Richards, 1999).

Evidence that is supportive of this view is provided by Kaminsky and Schmukler (1999) who

show that it is often impossible to find public information justifying large stock-price movements

and that large negative (but not positive) stock-price movements are followed by reversals.

    One important caveat has to be noted here that applies to our discussion in this section. There

is a critical difference between equity flows and debt flows. Equity outflows can only take place

if foreign investors sell stocks. Selling stocks in a hurry is expensive because of the price impact

effect. Hence, the volatility of equity flows is naturally reduced by the price impact expense

incurred by investors when they try to make rapid large changes in their stock holdings. In

contrast, the properties of short-term debt make short-term debt flows more volatile. Consider a

firm that has short-term creditors. If a short-term creditor can call his loan at par or can choose

not to renew his loan, he gets the par amount of his loan and makes no loss – he suffers no price

impact. However, when the firm has limited liquidity, not all short-term creditors can get their

money back – the first ones to ask for it will get it, but not the last ones. Consequently, short-term

creditors have an incentive to ask for their money back and not renew loans at the first sign of

risk of default. The literature we review here is focused on equity flows than on short-term debt

flows. It does not therefore study the causes and consequences of non-renewal of short-term debt.

                                                  44
To the extent that short-term funding is used to invest in illiquid projects, non-renewal of short-

term debt can lead to a classic liquidity crisis. Radelet and Sachs (1998) emphasize this

mechanism in the context of the East Asian crisis. They state that “international loan markets are

prone to self-fulfilling crises in which individual creditors may act rationally and yet market

outcomes produce sharp, costly, and fundamentally panicked reversals in capital flows” (Radelet

and Sachs (1998), p. 5). King (1999) points out that “Virtually the whole of the $125 billion

reversal of flows to the five Asian countries was accounted for by swings in short-term debt

finance.(…) Liquidity runs, although not the sole cause of problems, did play a major part in

recent financial crises.” The literature we review is focused on equity flows rather than debt flows

and therefore pays little attention to the issue of a liquidity crisis.



4. A. Flows and Returns

    Can changes in equity valuations be traced directly to capital flows? If so, does the impact of

capital inflows and outflows on valuations reflect information that foreign investors have that is

not yet incorporated into prices, or are changes in valuations just the destabilizing by-product of

excessively volatile flows as foreign investors come and go on a whim? That foreign investors are

systematically better informed than domestic investors about events that affect the country as a

whole is unlikely and, in fact, the asymmetry of information in favor of domestic investors is one

of the leading explanations of the home bias phenomenon in Section 3. Studies by Tesar and

Werner (1994, 1995) were the first to uncover positive, contemporaneous correlations between

U.S. portfolio flows in developed and emerging foreign markets and market index returns. They

employed quarterly data from the U.S. Treasury Bulletin between 1982 and 1994. Brennan and

Cao (1997) develop and test a theoretical model that relates international investment flows to

differences in information endowments between foreign and domestic investors. In their model,

foreign investors are less well informed than domestic investors. As a result, public information is

more valuable to foreign investors and has a greater impact on their forecasts of asset payoffs

                                                     45
than on the forecasts of local investors. Foreign purchases of equity are volatile because foreign

investors have more diffuse priors, so that news affects expected payoffs more for them than it

does for local investors. They corroborate the Tesar and Werner findings of contemporaneous

correlations in returns and flows using the same U.S. Treasury Bulletin data, but broaden the

sample from Canada, Japan, U.S., and U.K to sixteen emerging markets.

    The coarseness of low-frequency, quarterly data can mask the true dynamics of the relation

between flows and returns. Indeed, Bohn and Tesar (1996) extend the analysis to monthly data

for a large number of countries and, with the higher frequency data, were the first to uncover

evidence of a delayed response of U.S. net portfolio flows to returns. That is, they found that

foreign investors are positive feedback traders, buying following positive returns and selling

following negative returns. Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001) corroborate this positive

feedback trading using proprietary data from State Street Bank and Trust as custodian for

institutional investors in 44 countries. Their advantage is the availability of daily reporting of

these trades which allows them to delineate clearly components of the total quarterly covariance

relationship into those due to flows leading returns, flows lagging returns, and flows

contemporaneously correlated with returns. The results of this decomposition using their

covariance ratio statistic (CVR) clearly shows that flows lagging returns account for 80% of the

total, while contemporaneous and flows leading returns capture 4% and 16%, respectively.

    Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes also estimate a bivariate VAR and impulse responses that

allows them to take into account the dynamics of flows to show that flows are highly persistent,

especially for emerging markets. They then show that a one basis point increase in flows leads to

a 40 basis point increase in equity prices over the first 30 days or so, but after controlling for the

persistence of flows, they find a 100 basis point shock to returns leads to only a 0.05 basis point

additional inflow over the next two or three months. Though significant, this effect is small.

Using an extended structural VAR model, Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes find that a one basis

point shock to flows has a contemporaneous effect of increasing prices by 0.6 basis points. Most

                                                  46
of the price impact of a shock to flows seems to come subsequently to the increase in flows. This

could be evidence that flows contain information about future returns. This result is quite

different from the literature on mutual fund flows and returns in the U.S. (Warther (1995) who

uses monthly data and Edelen and Warner (2001) who use daily data) both find a permanent

increase in prices following net inflows, but this increase is the result of the contemporaneous

effect rather than of a lag effect. Clark and Berko (1996) document permanent price changes

associated with foreign flows using Mexican data for the period from 1989 to 1993 when there

was a significant acceleration in foreign ownership of Mexican equities. Froot and Ramdorai

(2001) offer some new evidence indicating that the relation between flows and returns may be

due to flows forecasting returns rather than the price pressure effect of flows. They examine the

impact of cross-border portfolio flows using the prices of closed-end country funds to control for

country fundamentals.

    One possibility is that structural breaks, due to shifts in fundamental economic factors or

crisis events, complicate empirical analysis. Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999) examine portfolio

equity flows to Korea during the Asian crisis period of 1997 at the stock level and again confirm

the positive feedback effect among foreign investors. Surprisingly, this positive feedback effect

weakens during the three months of their sample corresponding to the Korean phase of the Asian

crisis.12 If the positive-feedback effect dissipates, they argue that the trading practices of foreign

investors are even less likely to be destabilizing. In fact, since their data was available on an

intraday, transaction-by-transaction basis for individual stocks, they test whether large block

purchases and sales by foreign investors have a permanent impact on prices like those of

institutional investors on the NYSE (Chan and Lakonishok, 1993, 1995, 1997; Keim and




                                                  47
Madhavan, 1997). They find that these trades are incorporated into prices within 10 minutes with

no subsequent lasting impact on prices, which is not consistent with the lag effect documented by

Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes. Unlike Choe et al. for Korea, Karolyi (2001) documents a

significant structural break in flows and returns in Japan during the Asian crisis, but, surprisingly,

he finds that positive feedback trading intensifies. Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2000)

investigate the trading of U.S. emerging markets mutual funds and, at a lower frequency, find that

there is strong momentum trading on the part of these funds. Distinguishing between

contemporaneous and lagged momentum trading, they find that contemporaneous momentum

trading increases during crises, more so because of the investors in these funds than because of

the managers, but that lagged momentum trading weakens during crisis periods. They also

demonstrate that funds engage in what they call “contagion trading,” namely that they sell in one

country when returns in another country are poor. Such a trading practice might reflect the need

to rebalance portfolios during crises, might be due to the fact that it is harder to sell in crises

countries because of lower liquidity, or might simply reflect an element of panic. Bekaert,

Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002a, 2002b) explicitly model the importance of liberalization events

and crises on the joint dynamics of flows and returns for a number of emerging markets using an

econometric technique devised by Bai, Lumsdaine, and Stock (1998), though with monthly data.

They find sharply different results if their VAR model is estimated over the entire 20-year sample

and if the nonstationarity in the flows and returns relationship is ignored. Edison and Warnock




12
   Kim and Wei (2002) also investigate positive feedback trading of investors. They use monthly data and
find strong positive feedback trading behavior during the crisis months. They attribute the differences
between their results and those of Choe, Kho, and Stulz to the fact that their dataset has holdings of
investors and to the fact that their sample period is longer. They extend the crisis period to June 1998.
Because their crisis period is so long, they cannot say anything about the importance of feedback trading in
the unfolding of the crisis. It is perfectly possible that all their feedback trading is in 1998.

                                                     48
(2001), using a somewhat different approach, find that flows to emerging markets depend little on

the fundamentals of these markets but are related to U.S. interest rates. Their result contradicts the

result in Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine. A possible explanation for the difference in results is

that, whereas Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine normalize flows by the market capitalization,

Edison and Warnock do not.



4.B. Correlations, Spillovers, and Contagion

    There is growing evidence that risk premia are determined globally, as we showed in Section

2.D. This effect naturally induces comovements in stock prices around the world. In a conditional

setting, time-variation in those comovements reflects economic fundamentals that would not

naturally occur if markets were segmented. There are a number of studies that have documented

patterns in comovements of global asset returns. Their findings are difficult to rationalize with

models of international asset pricing that assume perfect financial markets.

    Much of the analysis of stock price comovements focuses on one measure: correlations.

Typically, studies have shown that correlations with foreign indexes, particularly for emerging

markets, are low. At the same time, these correlations change over time, which makes it difficult

to determine if correlations are greater now than they used to be when capital flows were more

restricted. Institutional factors have always clouded the picture further; for example, how national

indexes are constructed in terms of scope, coverage, and industrial composition of the companies

they include has always plagued studies of cross-country correlations (Roll, 1992; Heston and

Rouwenhorst, 1994; Griffin and Karolyi; 1998). Longin and Solnik (1995) tested the equality of

covariance and correlation matrices of returns for seven developed markets across different 5-

year periods between 1960 and 1990. They rejected the hypothesis of equality in 10 of 16

comparisons and find that correlations increase over time. To do this, they estimated a

multivariate GARCH model, similar in structure to that in Chan, Karolyi, and Stulz (1992) and

De Santis and Gerard (1997), to evaluate and confirm the significance of a trend factor in

                                                  49
conditional correlations across these markets. There are other studies that challenge the trend

toward higher correlations. De Santis (1993) focused on emerging markets and found that the

correlation structure is essentially the same for the 1976-84 and 1984-1992 subperiods, which is

surprising given the rapid pace of liberalizations in those markets. Bekaert and Harvey (1995)

employ a multivariate GARCH model with a Hamilton (1989) regime-switching feature to test

for time-variation in market integration. They develop an integration index that is a conditional

regime probability statistic that captures the same conditional correlations as Longin and Solnik,

but nested within an asset pricing structure. Their model is applied to 21 developed and 12

emerging markets and they examine on a country-by-country basis the time series of conditional

regime probabilities. Overall, they find that there is little trend in these conditional probabilities.

Finally, Bekaert and Harvey (2000) estimate a model that allows correlations between emerging

markets and the world market to change over time. They then estimate these correlations before

and after liberalizations. Out of seventeen emerging markets, they found the correlation to be

higher for only nine markets, hardly overwhelming evidence in favor of higher correlations over

time. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002a) suggest that results on the impact of liberalization

are often hampered by an incorrect identification of the actual liberalization event, which they

estimate endogenously.

    While there is no clear evidence that correlations are increasing with greater liberalization,

there is evidence that correlations are changing over time. Unfortunately, it is difficult to

associate changes in correlations with economic fundamentals. Ilmanen (1995) shows that there

is a strong common factor in interest rate movements across developed countries. He suggests

that this increase in correlations with this common factor reflects the weakening of national

monetary authorities to pursue different inflation or interest rate policies. But, it is not clear why

this would be revealed in nominal bond yields rather than expected real yields. For equities,

Longin and Solnik (1995) estimate their multivariate GARCH model allowing not only a trend

factor in conditional correlations but also market returns, dividend yields, and interest rates.

                                                   50
Overall, these market and economic factors were not reliably significant. King, Sentana, and

Wadhwani (1994) find only weak evidence of association between correlations in monthly

national index returns and economic factors. These weak results with monthly returns motivate

Karolyi and Stulz (1997) to examine higher frequency, intraday returns across the U.S. and Japan

for indexes, portfolios of individual stocks and ADRs, and even Nikkei index futures contracts.

They find that correlations are time-varying, but again are not significantly related to

macroeconomic news, interest rate and exchange rate shocks, dividend yields, and even trading

volume. The only instrument with reliable predictive power for conditional correlations is the

magnitude and direction of market movements themselves, especially for negative returns. De

Santis and Gerard (1997) find a similar volatility and asymmetry effect in conditional correlations

for bear markets across ten developed markets for monthly returns. Longin and Solnik (2001)

employ extreme value statistics to model this same pattern of “threshhold” or “extreme”

correlations more formally.

    A possible explanation for the weak evidence of association between correlations and

fundamentals is that the correlations are inadequately measured. For example, there have been a

number of studies of statistically significant leading and lagging relationships among national

index returns and the volatility of their returns. Eun and Shim (1989) is one of the early studies to

examine the joint dynamics of returns across national markets. They employ a VAR model with

variance decomposition and impulse response analysis to show that the U.S. market often led

other market returns by one or two days and that the variation in U.S. market returns could

capture a significant fraction of the total variation in other developed market returns. The

aftermath of the international October 1987 market crisis prompted studies by King and

Wadhwani (1990), Hamao, Masulis, and Ng (1990) and Lin, Engle, and Ito (1994) to model the

joint dynamics of high-frequency, intraday return volatilities using multivariate GARCH models.

They find that unexpectedly high volatility in the U.S., when the U.S. market is open, leads to

high volatility in Japan. The “volatility spillover” results provide similar inferences to Eun and

                                                  51
Shim, but they indicate that the structure of conditional correlations is more complex than

observed with daily, weekly, or monthly returns and when ignoring the volatility process. For

example, for the U.S., U.K. and Japan, Hamao et al. show that relationship is more symmetric:

unexpected volatility shocks in the U.S. lead to higher volatility in Japan the next day and

unexpected shocks to volatility in Japan leads to higher volatility in the U.K. but not in the U.S.

There have been dozens of studies that seek to relate economic fundamentals to volatility

spillovers, but, like with returns themselves, with limited success (asymmetry of positive and

negative returns, Bae and Karolyi, 1994; regional versus international factors, Ng, 2000;

macroeconomic news announcements, Connolly and Wang, 2001).

    The problem with the evidence on comovements in returns and volatility spillovers is that it is

consistent with two hypotheses that are difficult to separate empirically, but yet have very

different implications for the efficiency of financial markets. One hypothesis is that the markets

have common, unobservable global components and the changes in correlations and spillovers

reflect innovations in these common components. Under this view, spillovers show that markets

incorporate information efficiently. The second hypothesis is that correlations and spillovers are

the work of uninformed investors who systematically overreact to news in one market,

corresponding to shifts in sentiments. That is, they become more risk averse following bad news

and less risk averse following good news irrespective of fundamentals in their own markets. The

weak results with regard to fundamentals and the finding that comovements increase

systematically during bear markets, and especially during the 1994 Mexican and 1997 Asian

crises, prompted a number of researchers to focus on the latter hypothesis, commonly referred to

as “contagion.” The traditional view of contagion has to do with banking panics. The idea is that

a bank fails and depositors start withdrawing funds from other banks that are healthy, thereby

weakening these banks (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). King and Wadhwani (1990) is among the

first studies to apply the same concept to international stock returns: a shock in one market leads

investors to withdraw funds from other markets because of irrational fears and thus leads to

                                                 52
unusually high comovements of asset prices, particularly on the downside.13 The concept, its

definition and measurement issues have been addressed in a number of important recent papers, a

subset of which are surveyed by Claessens, Dornbusch, and Park (2002) and featured in the book

by Claessens and Forbes (2002).

     The literature often defines contagion to be an increase in correlations among asset returns in

different markets in periods of crisis. Calvo and Reinhart (1996), Frankel and Schmukler (1998),

and Bailey, Chan, and Chung (2000) have suggested that the aftermath of the peso crisis in

Mexico in 1994 was evidence of contagion, especially to other Latin American markets, often

referred to as a “tequila effect.” Calvo and Reinhart find evidence that correlations of weekly

returns on equities and Brady bonds for Asian and Latin American emerging markets was higher

after the Mexican crisis than before. Frankel and Schmukler (1998) provide evidence that

emerging market disturbances spread via the international investor community in New York.

Bailey, Chan, and Chung offer more powerful tests with transaction data at 30-minute intervals

between December 1994 and April 1995 on Asian and Latin American ADRs on the NYSE and

country funds. They show that on the critical days of the depreciation of the peso, exchange rate

shocks had a significant and rapid (within 60 minutes) adverse effect on non-Mexican Latin

American ADRs and country funds, but no measurable impact on Asian ADRs or country funds.

A marked increase in correlations among different markets may, however, not be sufficient proof

of contagion. Forbes and Rigobon (1998, 2002) show that in the presence of heteroscedasticity

(increases in volatility around crises), an increase in correlation could simply be a continuation of

strong transmission mechanisms that exist in more stable periods. They also show that increases

in correlations of asset prices may result when changes in fundamentals, risk perceptions, or

preferences (endogenous or omitted variables) are correlated without any additional contagion



13
  Claessens, Dornbusch, and Park (2002) define contagion as “the spread of market disturbances – mostly
on the downside – from one (emerging market) country to the other, a process observed through co-
movements in exchange rates, stock prices, sovereign spreads and capital flows.” (p. 4)

                                                   53
being present. In fact, they show less than 10 percent of the pairwise correlations among 28

developed and emerging markets during the 1987 October crash, the 1994 Mexican peso crisis,

and 1997 Asian crisis increased after accounting for problems of heteroscedasticity, endogenous

and omitted variables.

    Another way to control for the fundamentals is to study conditional probabilities rather than

raw correlations. Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996), Sachs, Tornell, and Velasco (1996)

and Bae, Karolyi, and Stulz (2002) examine whether the likelihood of an extreme outcome (in

terms of exchange rates, interest rates, or stock returns) in one country increases when there are

extreme outcomes in another or several countries. These authors employ limited dependent

variable models (multinomial probit and logit) to control for economic and financial channels

through which linkages would occur in stable periods. These models do not rely on correlations

as linear measures of association, but there is much discretion in defining an extreme outcome

and what constitutes contagion.



5. Conclusion

    In this paper, we have attempted to assess what we learn from the literature on the influence

of global factors on portfolio choices and asset pricing. Intentionally, we have mostly focused on

equities. The literature has provided clear evidence that national market risk premiums are

determined internationally, but less clear evidence that international factors affect the cross-

section of expected returns. Among international factors that affect asset returns, it may well be

that omitting exchanges rates is more of a problem than omitting the return of foreign assets

uncorrelated with the domestic market portfolio for the U.S. Models that rely on perfect financial

markets do not explain important stylized facts in international finance, such as the home bias and

the volatility of capital flows. Though introducing barriers to international investment, especially

differences in information between local and foreign investors, helps in understanding these facts

better, our understanding of these facts is quite incomplete. Yet, existing explanations for the

                                                 54
home bias cannot explain why this bias has not decreased in the U.S. since 1995. It may well be

that investors buy foreign stocks when domestic stocks have done poorly or domestic interest

rates are low, so that they did not increase their share of foreign stocks during the U.S. bull

market, but such behavior seems a long way from what one would expect in a world of perfect

financial markets populated with mean-variance optimizers. Perhaps a good indication of how

much we still have to learn is that, while the policymakers and the press have taken it as a fact

that there is contagion and that it is a first-order phenomenon, existing research raises more

questions about contagion than it resolves and some authors fail to find it altogether.




                                                  55
References



Adler, M., and B. Dumas, 1983, International portfolio choice and corporation finance: A

    synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925-984.

Ahearne, A. G., W. L. Griever, and F. E. Warnock, 2001, Information costs and home bias: An

    analysis of U.S. holdings of foreign equities, Federal Reserve Board, International Finance

    Division, Working Paper 691 (Updated), Washington, D.C.

Bae, K., and G. A. Karolyi, 1994, Good news, bad news and international spillovers of stock

    return volatility between Japan and the U.S., Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 2, 405-438.

Bae, K., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz, 2002, A new approach to measuring financial contagion,

    Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bai, J., R. Lumsdaine, and J. H. Stock, 1998, Testing for and dating common breaks in

    multivariate time series, Review of Economic Studies 65, 395-432.

Bailey, W., and J. Jagtiani, 1994, Foreign ownership restrictions and stock prices in the Thai

    capital market, Journal of Financial Economics 36, 57-87.

Bailey, W., K. Chan, and Y. P. Chung, 2000, Depositary receipts, country funds, and the peso

    crash: The intraday evidence, Journal of Finance 55, 2693-2717.

Barro, R. J, 1974, Are government bonds net wealth?, Journal of Political Economy 82, 1095-

    1118.

Baxter, M., and U. J. Jermann, 1997, The international diversification puzzle is worse than you

    think, American Economic Review 87, 170-180.

Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying world market integration, Journal of Finance 50,

    403-444.

Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey, 2000, Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets, Journal of

    Finance 55, 565-613.

Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and R. Lumsdaine, 2002a, Dating the integration of world capital

                                                 56
    markets, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and R. Lumsdaine, 2002b, The dynamics of emerging market equity

    flows, Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming.

Bekaert, G., and R. J. Hodrick, 1992, Characterizing predictable components in excess returns on

    equity and foreign exchange markets, Journal of Finance 47, 467-510.

Bhagwati, J., 1998, The capital myth, Foreign Affairs 77 (3), 7-12.

Black, F., 1974, International capital market equilibrium with investment barriers, Journal of

    Financial Economics 1, 337-352.

Black, F., 1990, Equilibrium exchange rate hedging, Journal of Finance 45, 899- 908.

Bohn, H., and L. Tesar, 1996, U.S. equity investment in foreign markets: Portfolio rebalancing or

    return chasing?, American Economic Review 86, 77-81.

Bottazzi, L., P. Pesenti, and E. Van Wincoop, 1996, Wages, profits and the international portfolio

    puzzle, European Economic Review 40, 219-254.

Breeden, D., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and

    investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.

Brennan, M. J., and H. Cao, 1997, International portfolio flows, Journal of Finance 52, 1851-

    1880.

Britten-Jones, M., 1999, The sampling error in estimates of mean-variance efficient portfolio

    weights, Journal of Finance 54, 655-671.

Calvo, G., and C. M. Reinhart, 1996, Capital flows to Latin America: Is there evidence of a

    contagion effect?, in Private capital flows to emerging markets after the Mexican crisis, eds.,

    G. A. Calvo, M. Golstein and E. Hochreiter, Institute for International Economics,

    Washington, D.C.

Campbell, J. Y., and Y. Hamao, 1992, Predictable stock returns in the United States and Japan: A

    study of long-term capital market integration, Journal of Finance 47, 43-70.



                                                57
Chan, K.C., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz, 1992, Global financial markets and the risk premium

    on U.S. equity, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 137-168.

Chan, L., and J. Lakonishok, 1993, Institutional trades and intraday stock prices behavior, Journal

    of Financial Economics 33, 173-200.

Chan, L., and J. Lakonishok, 1995, The behavior of stock prices around institutional trades,

    Journal of Finance 50, 1174-1174.

Chan, L., and J. Lakonishok, 1997, Institutional equity trading costs: NYSE versus nasdaq,

    Journal of Finance 52, 713-735.

Chari, A., and P. Henry, 2001, Stock market liberalization and the repricing of systematic risk,

    NBER Working Paper #8265, Cambridge, MA.

Cho, D. C., C. S. Eun, and L. W. Senbet, 1986, International arbitrage pricing theory: An

    empirical investigation, Journal of Finance 41, 313-330.

Choe, H., B. Kho, and R. M. Stulz, 1999, Do foreign investors destabilize stock markets? The

    Korean experience in 1997, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 3-46.

Choe, H., B. Kho, and R. M. Stulz, 2001, Do domestic investors have more valuable information

    about individual stocks than foreign investors?, NBER Working Paper No. 8073, Cambridge,

    Ma.

Claessens, S., R. Dornbusch, and Y. C. Park, 2002, Contagion: Why crises spread and how this

    can be stopped, in Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds., International financial contagion,

    Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, NY.

Claessens, S., and K. Forbes, 2002, International financial contagion, Kluwer Academic

    Publishers, New York, NY.

Clark, J., and E. Berko, 1996, Foreign investment fluctuations and emerging market stock returns:

    The case of Mexico, unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New

    York, NY.



                                                 58
Connolly, R., and F. A. Wang, 2001, International equity market co-movement: economic

    fundamentals or contagion?, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, forthcoming.

Cooper, I. A., and E. Kaplanis, 1994, Home bias in equity portfolios, inflation hedging and

    international capital market equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies 7, p. 45-60.

Coval, J. A., and T. J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference in domestic

    portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.

Coval, J. A., and T. J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed trading and

    asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811-841.

Cumby, R. E., 1988, Is it risk? Explaining deviations from uncovered interest parity, Journal of

    Monetary Economics 22, 279-300.

Cumby, R. E., 1990, Consumption risk and international equity returns: Some empirical evidence,

    Journal of International Money and Finance 9, 182-192.

Dahlquist, M., and T. Sällström, 2001, An evaluation of international asset pricing models, Duke

    University working paper.

Dahlquist, M., and G. Robertsson, 2001, Direct foreign ownership, institutional investors, and

    firm characteristics, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 413-440.

De Santis, G., 1993, Asset pricing and portfolio diversification: Evidence from emerging

    financial markets, Portfolio investment in developing countries, ed. S. Claesens and S.

    Gooptu, Washington, D.C.: World Bank 145-168.

De Santis, G., and B. Gerard, 1997, International asset pricing and portfolio diversification with

    time-varying risk, Journal of Finance 52, 1881-1912.

De Santis, G., and B. Gerard, 1998, How big is the premium for currency risk?, Journal of

    Financial Economics 49, 375-412.

Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity, Journal of

    Political Economy 91, 401-419.



                                                59
Domowitz, I., J. Glen, and A. Madhavan, 1997, Market segmentation and stock prices: Evidence

    from an emerging market, Journal of Finance 52, 1059-1085.

Dumas, B., 1992, Dynamic equilibrium and the real exchange rate in a spatially separated world,

    Review of Financial Studies 5, 153-180.

Dumas, B., and B. Solnik, 1995, The world price of foreign exchange risk, Journal of Finance 50,

    445-479.

Edelen, R., and J. Warner, 2001, Aggregate price effects of institutional trading: A study of

    mutual fund flow and market returns, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 195-220.

Edison, H. J., and F. E. Warnock, 2001, Cross-border listings, capital controls, and equity flows

    to emerging markets, Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.

Eichengreen, B., A. Rose, and C. Wyplosz, 1996, Contagious currency crises: First tests,

    Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98, 463-484.

Engel, C., and J. H. Rogers, 1996, How wide is the border?, American Economic Review 86,

    1112-1125.

Errunza, V., K. Hogan, and M. Hung, 1999, Can the gains from international diversification be

    achieved without trading abroad?, Journal of Finance 54, 2075-2107.

Errunza, V., and E. Losq, 1985, International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory and

    test, Journal of Finance 40, 105-124.

Eun, C. S., and S. Janakiramanan, 1986, A model of international asset pricing with a constraint

    on the foreign equity ownership, Journal of Finance 41, 897-914.

Eun, C. S., and S. Shim,1989, International transmission of stock market movements, Journal of

    Financial and Quantitative Analysis 24, 241-256.

Fama, E., 1976, Foundations of finance, Basic Books Inc., New York, NY.

Fama, E., and K. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal

    of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.



                                                60
Fama, E., and K. French, 1998, Value versus growth: The international evidence, Journal of

    Finance 53, 1975-1999.

Fama, E., and G. Schwert, 1977, Human capital and capital market equilibrium, Journal of

    Financial Economics 4, 95-125.

Ferson, W., and C. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international equity returns,

    Review of Financial Studies 6, 527-566.

Ferson, W., and C. Harvey, 1994, Sources of risk and expected returns in global equity markets,

    Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 775-803.

Ferson, W., and C. Harvey, 1995, Predictability and time-varying risk in world equity markets,

    Research in Finance 13, 25-87.

Ferson, W., and C. Harvey, 1997, Fundamental determinants of national equity market returns: A

    perspective on conditional asset pricing, Journal of Banking and Finance 21, 1625-1665.

Forbes, K., and R. Rigobon, 1998, Measuring contagion: Conceptual and empirical issues, MIT

    working paper.

Forbes, K., and R. Rigobon, 2002, No contagion, only interdependence: Measuring stock market

    comovements, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Foerster S., and A. Karolyi, 1999, The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition on

    asset prices: evidence from foreign stocks listing in the U.S., Journal of Finance 54, 981-

    1014.

Foerster, S. R., and G. A. Karolyi, 2000, The long run performance of global equity offerings,

    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 499-528.

Frankel, J., and S. Schmukler, 1998, Crises, contagion, and country funds: Effects on East Asia

    and Latin America, in Management of Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: Lessons from the

    Pacific Rim, R. Glick, ed., Cambridge University Press.

French, K., and J. M. Poterba, 1991, International diversification and international equity

    markets, American Economic Review 81, 222-226.


                                                61
Froot, K., and T. Ramadorai, 2001, The information content of international portfolio flows,

    Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Froot, K., and K. Rogoff, 1995, Perspectives on PPP and long-run real exchange rates, Handbook

    of International Economics, vol. III, edited by G. Grossman and K. Rogoff, North-Holland.

Froot, K., P. O'Connell, and M. Seasholes, 2001, The portfolio flows of international investors,

    Journal of Financial Economics 59, 151-193.

Froot, K., and R. H. Thaler, 1990, Anomalies: Foreign exchange, Journal of Economic

    Perspectives 4, 179-192.

Gehrig, T., 1993, An information based explanation of the domestic bias in international equity

    investment, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95, 97-109.

Giovannini, A., and P. Jorion, 1989, The time variation of risk and return in the foreign exchange

    and stock markets, Journal of Finance 44, 307-326.

Glassman, D. A., and L. A. Riddick, 2001, What causes home asset bias and how should it be

    measured?, Journal of Empirical Finance 8, 35-54.

Grauer, F. L. A., R. H. Litzenberger, and R. E. Stehle, 1976, Sharing rules and equilibrium in an

    international market under uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 233-256.

Griffin, J. M., 2001, Are the Fama and French factors global or country-specific?, The Review of

    Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Griffin, J. M., and G. A. Karolyi, 1998, Another look at the role of the industrial structure   of

    markets for international diversification strategies, Journal of Financial Economics 50, 351-

    373.

Griffin, J. M., and R. M. Stulz, 2001, International competition and exchange rate shocks: A

    cross-country industry analysis of stocks, Review of Financial Studies, 215-241.

Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of various

    investor-types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 43-

    67.

                                                 62
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, How distance, language, and culture influence

    stockholdings and trades, Journal of Finance, 56, 1053-1073.

Gultekin, M. N., N. B. Gultekin, and A. Penati, 1989, Capital controls and international capital

    market segmentation: The evidence from the Japanese and American stock markets, Journal

    of Finance 44, 849-870.

Hamao, Y., R. W. Masulis, and V. Ng, 1990, Correlations in price changes and volatility across

    international stock markets, Review of Financial Studies 3, 281-308.

Hamilton, J. D., 1989, A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and

    the business cycle, Econometrica 57, 357-384.

Hansen, L. P., and K. J. Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption, risk aversion, and the temporal

    behavior of asset returns, Journal of Political Economy 91, 249-265.

Harvey, C., 1991, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Finance 46, 111-158.

Harvey, C., 1995, Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets, Review of Financial Studies

    8, 773-816.

Hau, H., 2001, Location matters, Journal of Finance 56, 1959-1983.

Henry, P., 2000, Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market prices,

    Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.

Heston, S. L., and K. G. Rouwenhorst, 1994, Does industrial structure explain the benefits of

    international diversification?, Journal of Financial Economics 36, 3-27.

Hietala, P., 1989, Asset pricing in partially segmented markets: Evidence from the Finnish

    market, Journal of Finance 44, 697-718.

Ilmanen, A., 1995, Time-varying expected returns in international bond markets, Journal of

    Finance 50, 481-506.

Jorion, P., 1990, The pricing of exchange rate risk in the stock market, Journal of Financial and

    Quantitative Analysis 26, 363-376.



                                                63
Jorion, P., and E. Schwartz, 1986, Integration vs. segmentation in the Canadian stock market,

    Journal of Finance 41, 603-613.

Kaminsky, G., R. Lyons, and S. Schmukler, 2000, Managers, investors, and crises: Mutual fund

    strategies in emerging markets, NBER working paper #7855, Cambridge, MA.

Kaminsky, G., and S. Schmukler, 1999, What triggers market jitters? A chronicle of the East

    Asian crisis, Journal of International Money and Finance 18, 537-560.

Kang, J., and R. M. Stulz, 1997, Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign portfolio

    equity ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.

Karolyi, A., 1998, Why do companies list shares abroad?: A survey of the evidence and its

    managerial implications, Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments 7, Blackwell

    Publishers, Boston.

Karolyi, G. A., 2002, Did the Asian financial crisis scare foreign investors out of Japan?, Pacific

    Basin Finance Journal, forthcoming.

Karolyi, G. A., and R. M. Stulz, 1996, Why do markets move together? An investigation of U.S.-

    Japan stock return comovements, Journal of Finance 51, 951-986.

Keim, D., and A. Madhavan, 1997, Transactions costs and investment style: An interexchange

    analysis of institutional equity trades, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 265-292.

Kim, W., and S.-J. Wei, 2002, Foreign portfolio investors before and during a crisis, Journal of

    International Economics 56, 77-96.

King, M., 1999, Reforming the international monetary system: The middle way, Bank of

    England, London, U.K.

King, M., E. Sentana, and S. Wadhwani, 1994, Volatility and links between national stock

    markets, Econometrica 62, 901-933.

King, M., and S. Wadhwani, 1990, Transmission of volatility between stock markets, Review of

    Financial Studies 3, 5-33.




                                                 64
Korajczyk, R. A., and C. J. Viallet, 1989, An empirical investigation of international asset

    pricing, Review of Financial Studies 2, 553-586.

Krugman, P., 1981, Consumption preferences, asset demands, and distribution effects in

    international financial markets, NBER Working Paper No. 651.

Krugman, P., 1998, Saving Asia: It’s time to get radical, Fortune, September 7.

Lewis, K. K, 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of

    Economic Literature 37, 571-608.

Li, K., 2001, Home bias in equities: An investor perspective, UBC working paper.

Lin W., Engle, R., and T. Ito, 1994, Do bulls and bears move across borders? International

    transmission of stock returns and volatility, Review of Financial Studies 7, 507-538.

Longin, F., and B. Solnik, 1995, Is the correlation in international equity returns constant: 1970-

    1990?, Journal of International Money and Finance 14, 3-26.

Longin, F., and B. Solnik, 2001, Extreme correlation of international equity markets, Journal of

    Finance 56, 649-676.

Lucas, R., Jr., 1982, Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world, Journal of

    Monetary Economics 10, 335-360.

Mark, N., 1988, Time-varying betas and risk premia in the pricing of forward foreign exchange

    contracts, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 335-354.

Mayers, D., 1973, Nonmarketable assets and the determination of capital asset prices in the

    absence of a riskless asset, Journal of Business 46, 258-267.

McCurdy, T., and I. Morgan, 1992, Evidence of risk premiums in foreign currency futures

    markets, Review of Financial Studies 5, 65-84.

Merton, R. C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867-888.

Merton, R. C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory

    investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323-361.



                                                 65
Merton, R. C., 1987, Presidential address: A simple model of capital market equilibrium with

    incomplete information, Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Miller, D., 1999, The market reaction to international cross-listing: evidence from depositary

    receipts, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.

Mittoo, U., 1992, Additional evidence on integration in the Canadian stock market, Journal of

    Finance 47, 2035-2054.

Mussa, M., and A. Richards, 1999, Capital flows in the 1990s before and after the Asian crisis,

    Research Department Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.

Ng, A., 2000, Volatility spillover effects from Japan and the US to the pacific-basin, Journal of

    International Money and Finance 19, 207-233.

O’Connell, P. J., 1998, The overvaluation of purchasing power parity, Journal of International

    Economics 44, 1-19.

Pastor, L., 2000, Portfolio selection and asset pricing models, Journal of Finance 55, 179-223.

Perold, A. F., and E. C. Schulman, 1988, The free lunch in currency hedging: Implications for

    investment policy and performance standards, Financial Analyst Journal 44, 45-52.

Pinkowitz, L., R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2001, Corporate control and the home bias, working

    paper, The Ohio State University.

Radelet, S., and J. Sachs, 1998, The onset of the East Asian financial crisis, working paper,

    Harvard Institute for Economic Development, Cambridge, MA.

Roll, R., 1992, Industrial structure and the comparative behavior of international stock market

    indexes, Journal of Finance 47,3-42.

Rouwenhorst, K. G., 1999, Local return factors and turnover in emerging stock markets, Journal

    of Finance 54, 1439-1464.

Sachs, J. D., A. Tornell, and A. Velasco,1996, Financial crises in emerging markets: The lessons

    from 1995, Brookings Papers 27, 147-199.




                                                 66
Sarno, L., and M. P. Taylor, 2001, Purchasing power parity and the real exchange rate, CEPR

    discussion paper 2913, CEPR, London, England.

Seasholes, 2000, Smart foreign traders in emerging markets, working paper, University of

    California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.

Sercu, P., 1980, A generalization of the international asset pricing model, Revue de l’Association

    Française de Finance 1, 91-135.

Shiller, R. J., F. Kon-Ya, and Y. Tsutsui, 1996, Why did the Nikkei crash? Expanding the scope

    of expectations data collection, Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 156-164.

Shukla, R. K., and G. B. van Inwegen, 1995, Do locals perform better than foreigners? An

    analysis of UK and US mutual fund managers, Journal of Economics and Business 47, 241-

    254.

Siegel, J. J., 1972, Risk, interest, and forward exchange, Quarterly Journal of Economics 86, 303-

    309.

Solnik, B., 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal of Economic

    Theory 8, 500-524.

Solnik, B., 1983, International arbitrage pricing, Journal of Finance 38, 449-457.

Solnik, B., 1993, Currency hedging and Siegel's paradox: On Black's universal hedging rule,

    Review of International Economics 1, 180-187.

Stehle, R., 1977, An empirical test of the alternative hypotheses of national and international

    pricing of risky assets, Journal of Finance 32, 493-502.

Stiglitz, J., 1998, Boats, planes and capital flows, Financial Times, March 25.

Stulz, R. M., 1981a, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,

    383-406.

Stulz, R. M., 1981b, On effects of barriers to international investment, Journal of Finance 36,

    923-934.



                                                 67
Stulz, R. M., 1983, The demand for foreign bonds, Journal of International Economics 26, 271-

    289.

Stulz, R. M., 1987, An equilibrium model of exchange rate determination and asset pricing with

    non-traded goods, Journal of Political Economy 95, 1024-1040.

Stulz, R. M., 1995, The cost of capital in internationally integrated markets: The case of Nestlé,

    European Financial Management 1, 11-22.

Stulz, R. M., 1999, International portfolio flows and security markets, in International Capital

    Flows, M. Feldstein ed., University Chicago Press, 257-293.

Stulz, R. M., and W. Wasserfallen, 1995, Foreign equity investment restrictions, capital flight,

    and shareholder wealth maximization: Theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies 8,

    1019-1057.

Svensson, L. E. O., 1985, Currency prices, terms of trade, and interest rates: A general

    equilibrium asset-pricing cash-in-advance approach, Journal of International Economics 18,

    17-42.

Tesar, L., and I. Werner, 1994, International equity transactions and U.S. portfolio choice, in J.

    Frankel ed, Internationalization of Equity Markets, NBER Project Report, University of

    Chicago Press, 185-216.

Tesar, L., and I. M. Werner, 1995, Home bias and high turnover, Journal of International Money

    and Finance 14, 467-493.

Uppal, R., 1993, A General Equilibrium Model Of International Portfolio Choice, Journal of

    Finance 48, 529-553.

Warther, V. A., 1995, Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows and Security Returns, Journal of Financial

    Economics 39, 209-235.

Wheatley, Simon, 1988, Some Tests Of International Equity Market Integration, Journal

    of Financial Economics 21, 177-212.



                                                  68
Zhang, Xiaoyan, 2001, Specification Tests of Asset Pricing Models in International Markets,

   Columbia University working paper.




                                             69
                                     Figure 1. U.S. Home Bias,1973-2000

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%

 10%

  0%
    73


            75


                    77


                            79


                                    81


                                            83


                                                    85


                                                            87


                                                                    89


                                                                            91


                                                                                    93


                                                                                            95


                                                                                                    97


                                                                                                            99
 19


         19


                 19


                         19


                                 19


                                         19


                                                 19


                                                         19


                                                                 19


                                                                         19


                                                                                 19


                                                                                         19


                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                         19
    Foreign equities share of world market portfolio        Foreign equities share in U.S. stock market wealth



Source: Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Flows and Outstandings, Federal Reserve
Board.




                                                          70
                        Figure 2. Foreign Purchases of Bonds and Stocks from U.S.
                     Residents and Foreign Sales of Bonds and Stocks to Domestic U.S.
                                        Residents versus U.S. GDP

                 25000000

                 20000000
 US$, Millions




                 15000000

                 10000000

                 5000000

                       0
                            1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

                                          Gross Sales to U.S. Residents by Foreigners
                                          Gross Purchases from US Residents by Foreigners
                                          Nominal US GDP (Constant US$))




Source: Treasury International Capital (TIC) Reporting System, U.S. Treasury
(http://www.treas.gov/tic/), International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook: Fiscal
Policy and Macroeconomic Stability, World Economic and Financial Surveys, May 2001.
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2001/01/index.htm)




                                                  71
                                              Figure 3. Net Capital Flows to Developing Countries,
                                                                    1993-2002

                                     200.0


                                     150.0
  Net Capital Flows ($US billions)




                                     100.0
                                                                                                    Total
                                      50.0                                                          Private Flows
                                                                                                    Direct Investment
                                        0.0                                                         Portfolio Investment
                                              1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001* 2002*   Other Private Flows
                                      -50.0


                                     -100.0


                                     -150.0




Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook: Fiscal Policy and
Macroeconomic Stability, World Economic and Financial Surveys, May 2001. Statistical
Appendix (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2001/01/index.htm)




                                                                           72
