NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DAILY CROSS-BORDER EQUITY FLOWS: PUSHED OR PULLED?

John M. Griffin
Federico Nardari
René M. Stulz

Working Paper 9000
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9000

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

Griffin and Nardari are Assistant Professors at the Department of Finance, Arizona State University. Stulz
is the Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University, and a Research
Associate at the NBER. The research assistance of Patrick Kelly is greatly appreciated. We also thank Don
Hartman for his help in obtaining some of the data. We are grateful for comments from Andrew Karolyi,
Anusha Chari, Ajay Khorana, Spencer Martin, Carmen Reinhart, participants at seminars at the IMF, the
Ohio State University, University of Arizona, Vanderbilt University, and at the Georgia Tech International
Finance Conference. Anthony Richards from the IMF and the National Bank of Australia has found some
of the empirical results of this paper in recent work developed independently. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by John M. Griffin, Federico Nardari and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Daily Cross-Border Equity Flows: Pushed or Pulled?
John M. Griffin, Federico Nardari and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 9000
June 2002
JEL No. G11, G15, F21

ABSTRACT
In a model that is consistent with the existence of a home bias and with foreign investors that are
less informed than domestic investors, we show that unexpectedly high worldwide returns lead to net
equity inflows into small countries. In addition, a small country experiences net equity inflows when its
stocks earn unexpectedly high returns. We investigate these predictions using daily data on net equity
flows for nine emerging market countries and find that equity flows are positively related to host country
stock returns as well as market performance abroad. Both our theoretical model and our empirical
analysis show that global stock return performance is an important factor in understanding equity flows.

John M. Griffin
Department of Finance
Arizona State University

Federico Nardari
Department of Finance
Arizona State University

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

Within the neo-classical paradigm, capital flows where its marginal product is higher. As
a result, the allocation of capital is more efficient and welfare is higher if capital can flow freely
across borders. The emerging market crises of the 1990s have led many to challenge that view.
Since 1997, economists, policymakers, and journalists have talked about shocks being
propagated across countries with little regard for fundamentals through the actions of an
“electronic herd” (Friedman (1999), p. 142) of investors. This has led Bhagwati (1998) to state
that “Capital flows are characterized, as the economic historian Charles Kindleberger of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology has famously noted, by panics and manias.” If markets
work this way, it is not surprising that Stiglitz (1998), calling for greater regulation of capital
flows, argues that “…developing countries are more vulnerable to vacillations in international
flows than ever before.”
There are two well-established empirical facts about holdings of foreign equity by
domestic investors.1 First, the home bias evidence shows that domestic investors hold less
foreign equity than if they held the world market portfolio. Second, domestic investors buy
foreign stocks following unexpectedly high returns on these stocks, a behavior often defined as
trend-chasing or momentum investing. In this paper, we build a theoretical and empirical
framework consistent with these empirical facts that enables us to disentangle some of the
determinants of capital flows in the short run and investigate claims observers make about capital
flows. Our main theoretical results are that (1) a model with perfect financial markets and
investors who know the true distribution of returns cannot explain the existing evidence on
flows, (2) extrapolative expectations are required to explain the evidence that unexpectedly high
stock returns in a small country attract equity flows towards that country, and (3) in a model

1

See Karolyi and Stulz (2001) for a review of this literature.
1

where there is a home bias and extrapolative expectations, net equity flows towards small
countries increase with unexpectedly high worldwide stock returns. We show theoretically that it
is possible for capital to flow out of a country for reasons that have nothing to do with the
economic fundamentals of that country even when investors are rational. Consequently,
observing flows to and from a country that cannot be explained by that country’s fundamentals is
consistent with equilibrium behavior in well-functioning markets. We then examine the
empirical implications of our simple model by uncovering the dynamics of equity flows and
regional equity returns using a unique data set of daily aggregate equity flow data in nine
emerging countries.
In our model, domestic investors’ expected return on stocks in a foreign country are
assumed to increase with the past return of these stocks more sharply than for resident investors.
This greater responsiveness of expected returns of non-resident investors to past returns could
arise for one of two reasons. First, if investors do not know the true expected returns but are
trying to estimate them with past data, past returns are useful in forming expectations. As long as
resident investors are better informed than non-resident investors, our assumption could be
derived from the optimizing behavior of investors. Second, in behavioral finance models, it is
often assumed that investors extrapolate from past returns -- leading investors to increase their
estimates of expected returns following positive past returns.2 Our assumption would follow if
non-resident investors extrapolate more than resident investors. With this assumption, net equity
flows are positively correlated with past returns from the host country but only if the barriers to
international investment that lead to the home bias are not too large. If domestic investors are

2

For instance, Hong and Stein (1999) have a group of investors who estimate expected returns by estimating a
univariate regression on a short time-series of returns. These investors have extrapolative expectations.
2

much wealthier than foreign investors and barriers are not too large, the increase in their wealth
following unexpectedly high returns on domestic stocks also leads them to invest more abroad.
In the empirical section of this paper, we use daily equity flows data to investigate
whether equity flows into a country increase in the performance of other markets. The dynamic
relation between flows and the performance of other markets has not been explored with daily
data. We find that lagged returns in other markets are helpful to understand flows into host
countries. Adding lagged returns of other markets in a Vector Autoregression (VAR) of flows
and returns improves the R-square of the flow equation by roughly 25% on average. Generally, a
positive return shock to developed market regional indices or emerging market indices is
associated with an increase, albeit not always significant, in flows to our sample countries. A
shock to U.S. returns is associated with a significant increase in equity flows in five out of nine
countries and this effect cannot be explained by non-synchronous trading across countries.
Some papers have explored the relation between equity flows towards foreign countries
and U.S. returns using monthly or quarterly data. The evidence is mixed. Bohn and Tesar (1996)
investigate the contemporaneous impact of U.S. returns and host country returns on monthly
equity flows from the U.S. They use a portfolio choice model to predict a portfolio rebalancing
effect and a return-chasing effect. With the rebalancing effect, investors sell equities from
countries that are the best performers in their portfolio since they have become overweighted in
these securities. They argue that the portfolio rebalancing effect implies that a high U.S. return is
accompanied by flows toward foreign countries. Most of the correlations between
contemporaneous flows and the U.S. return in excess of the host country return are insignificant
in their dataset and no correlation is significantly positive.

3

Brennan and Cao (1997) present a model in which foreign investors are less informed
than host country investors about host country stocks. Because of their information disadvantage,
foreign investors learn more from public news. Good news announcements lead them to buy
stocks from host country investors. They argue that stock purchases by foreign investors in the
host country could be associated with high returns in the country of origin of the foreign
investors because of wealth effects. Since their investors have exponential utility functions, they
cannot model such wealth effects, but they allow for them in their regressions. Using quarterly
data, they find that equity purchases from U.S. investors of foreign market securities are
contemporaneously related to foreign market performance but not related to U.S. equity returns.
Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (2001) use daily flow data to examine whether foreign
capital precedes, moves with, or follows short-term local market return performance. They find
that flows increase following unexpectedly high returns in the host market, but also that flows
forecast returns. They interpret their evidence to be consistent with the view that foreign
investors are better informed than domestic investors. Seasholes (2000) and Froot and
Ramadorai (2002) provide further evidence supportive of this assessment of the information of
flows. We find a similar forecasting power of foreign flows on returns in our dataset. However,
our model predicts that high flows can be accompanied by high returns when foreign investors
are informationally disadvantaged because high flows can decrease the risk premium on foreign
stocks. This risk premium effect has been emphasized in the recent literature on stock market
liberalizations (see Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002), and
Henry (2000)). In our data, the relation between flows and returns is driven by a strong positive
daily contemporaneous relation between flows and stock prices. Consistent with the risk

4

premium explanation, we find no reliable evidence of flows forecasting returns after controlling
for the contemporaneous flow/return relation.
A related literature has focused on the relation between capital flows and U.S. interest
rates and industrial production. Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993), Chuhan, Classens, and
Mamingi (1998), and Fernandez-Arias (1996) all examine data from 1988 to 1992 and find some
evidence that low interest rates in the U.S. lead to higher outflows from the U.S. As pointed out
by Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002), a liberalization event constitutes a regime change
that makes estimation hazardous when the sample includes both a pre-liberalization and a postliberalization period. In their work that takes into account regime changes, they fail to find a
statistically significant relation between interest rates and flows. Edison and Warnock (2001)
also account for liberalization dates in a sample from 1989 through 1999 and find that an
increase in U.S. interest rates reduces monthly net flows to some emerging countries. However,
this effect does not exist for a majority of the countries in their sample that overlap with our
sample.
This paper proceeds as follows. In Section I, we present our model of how stock returns
affect equity flows and the testable hypotheses we derive from the model. In Section II, we
describe the composition of the foreign flow data and examine their basic features. Section III
examines the extent of foreign investor positive feedback trading within a country and whether
foreign investors’ trading behavior foreshadows future price movements. The impact of regional
returns on flows is examined in Section IV and compared to the impact of local returns. Section
V examines the additional impact of exchanges rates and foreign flows on local flows. Section
VI examines the robustness of our results to the currency of denomination, time periods, and
returns asymmetries. Section VII concludes.
5

I. A Simple Model of Equity Flows
Though there are exceptions, economists have typically thought about equity flows in the
context of a portfolio choice model – at least since Branson (1970), Miller and Whitman (1970)
and Kouri and Porter (1974). We use such a model as a starting point. However, the data on
flows that is used in empirical analysis does not correspond to changes in portfolio allocations.
Generally, equity flows for a country are measured by net purchases of shares by non-resident
investors. A positive net purchase of a country’s shares by non-resident investors is consistent
with an increase or a decrease in these investors’ portfolio allocation to that country. In contrast
to much of the existing literature (but not of Brennan and Cao (1997)), we therefore formulate
our model so that it makes predictions about net share purchases.
For simplicity, we consider a world with two countries, the domestic country D and the
foreign country F. We assume that each country has one stock (the market portfolio of that
country) and that the returns of the two stocks are uncorrelated. The zero correlation assumption
is not unreasonable when considering the U.S. and an emerging market. Let µD and σD be,
respectively, the instantaneous drift minus the risk-free rate and the volatility of the diffusion
process followed by the value of the domestic stock. We assume that trading is continuous, that
all investors in a country are the same and have log utility, and that µD and σD evolve randomly
over time. The log utility assumption implies that the portfolio demands of investors are myopic,
so that they do not depend on the state of the world. We assume that there are ND shares of the
domestic stock and a share has price PD. We use the subscript F to denote foreign values. We
follow Brennan and Cao (1997) in ignoring currencies, so that foreign nominal quantities are in

6

the same currency as domestic nominal quantities. The number of shares of stock in each country
is kept fixed.
A. Perfect Capital Markets
Define N DD to be the number of domestic shares demanded by domestic investors and
N DF the number of foreign shares demanded by the same investors. The aggregate wealth of
domestic investors is WD. With our assumptions, the demand for domestic and foreign shares by
domestic investors is given by:

µD W D
σ D2 PD

(1)

µF W D
N = 2
σ F PF

(2)

N DD =

D
F

Many studies of portfolio flows use equation (2) to model portfolio flows towards the foreign
country. With that equation, domestic investors buy more shares abroad if the expected return of
these shares increases, if their wealth increases, or if the price of these shares falls. Further,
domestic investors sell foreign shares if their volatility increases. If domestic investors buy more
foreign shares, then foreign investors must sell foreign shares to domestic investors. Taking into
account equilibrium conditions can invalidate the conclusions drawn from a comparative static
analysis of equation (2).
We now investigate equilibrium equity flows. In discussing our result, we show how they
differ from results obtained using a comparative static analysis of equation (2). We start from the
case of perfect financial markets. It is well known that, in such markets, investors hold the world
market portfolio. It immediately follows that if w Fw is the share of the foreign stock in the world
market portfolio, then the equilibrium demand for the foreign stock by domestic investors is:
7

 WD 
N DF = w FW 

 PF 

(3)

The same equation applies for the number of shares of country F held by foreign investors. The
number of shares of country F held by domestic investors relative to the outstanding supply of
foreign shares is:
D
W  W 
w

F 
N DF
WD
 PF 
=
=
D
F
NSF
WW
W W 
W W 
wF 
 + wF 

 PF 
 PF 

(4)

where NSF is the number of foreign shares outstanding. Since all investors hold the same
portfolio of stocks, the ratio of domestic wealth to foreign wealth is constant. Therefore, changes
in expected returns do not lead domestic investors to buy or sell foreign shares. The portfolio
flow implications of the asset demand equation (2) do not hold in equilibrium because expected
returns adjust so that neither domestic nor foreign investors buy or sell foreign shares.
Domestic investors put a fraction N DF PF / W D , or w FW , of their wealth in the foreign stock.
An increase in the price of the foreign stock, ceteris paribus, increases w FW . Consequently, even
though an increase in the price of the foreign stock does not lead domestic investors to purchase
foreign shares, it has the effect of increasing the fraction of their wealth invested in the foreign
stock. This is because the value of their foreign stock holdings increases as the price of the
foreign stock increases.
An increase in the price of the foreign stock increases the portfolio weight of the foreign
stock in the world market portfolio. With our assumptions, the capital asset pricing model holds,
so that the expected return on the foreign stock increases with the covariance of its return with
the world market portfolio. Since stock returns are uncorrelated, the covariance of the return of
8

the foreign stock with the return of the world market portfolio is equal to the portfolio weight of
the foreign stock in the world market portfolio times the variance of the return of the foreign
stock. Consequently, a high return on the foreign stock is associated with a higher expected
return for that stock. Since domestic investors increase their allocation to the foreign stock as its
price increases, it follows that an increase in the allocation to the foreign stock of domestic
investors predicts a higher expected return on that stock in our simple perfect financial markets
model.
B. The Effect of Barriers
The simple model with perfect financial markets is inconsistent with the existence of a
home bias and with the result that non-resident investors buy stock in the host country following
higher returns on that stock. We now introduce a market imperfection so that there is a home
bias. We assume, as in Stulz (1981), that the return for domestic investors is lower than the
return of foreign investors by a constant δD on a long position in the foreign stock. To simplify
the analysis, we consider only the case where the equilibrium outcome is such that no investors
hold short positions. With this modification, equation (2) becomes:
N DF =

µF − δ D W D
σ F2
PF

(5)

Now, investors no longer hold the world market portfolio. Domestic investors exhibit a home
bias as they have a lower allocation to foreign shares than foreign investors. The home bias
implies that a positive return on foreign shares enriches foreign investors relatively more than it
enriches domestic investors. Everything else equal, foreign investors would like to take some of
the gain from the increase in the value of the stock of their country and invest it outside their
country. However, if domestic investors earn a dollar on foreign shares, they do not want to keep
all of their gain abroad. Because of the home bias, they want to take some of that dollar and
9

bring it back home. Obviously, it is not possible for domestic and foreign investors to sell foreign
shares at the same time, so that expected returns have to adjust.
To determine the impact of an increase in the price of foreign shares, we therefore have
to turn to an investigation of the equilibrium holdings of foreign shares by domestic investors.
Let Ω = WD/WW. The equilibrium holdings of foreign shares by domestic investors and foreign
investors are respectively:

N DF = NSFΩ +

δD
WW
Ω
−
Ω
1
[
]
σ F2
PF

δD
WW
N = N [1 − Ω] + 2 Ω[1 − Ω]
σF
PF
F
F

S
F

(6)

(7)

Since Ω < 1, domestic investors have a lower equilibrium allocation to foreign stocks in the
presence of barriers to international investment than if δD is equal to zero, and foreign investors
have a higher allocation. The derivative of the holdings of the foreign stock by domestic
investors with respect to the price of the foreign stock (shown in Section A of the Appendix)
cannot be signed unambiguously. However, an increase in the price of the foreign stock
decreases the holdings of that stock by domestic investors for the symmetric case where both
countries have initially the same supplies of shares, share prices, wealth, and barriers to
international investment. To understand why domestic investors may sell the foreign stock when
it has done well, notice that an increase in the price of the foreign stock increases the wealth of
foreign investors proportionately more than it increases the wealth of domestic investors. As the
wealth of domestic investors increases, they re-balance their portfolio by selling the foreign stock
because they overweight the domestic stock. Foreign investors want also to re-balance by selling
the foreign stock and buying the domestic stock, but with less intensity because they earn more

10

on the foreign stock and less on the domestic stock than domestic investors, which explains why,
on net, domestic investors sell the foreign stock.
It is useful to examine the properties of equations (6) and (7) numerically. We explore
extensively a numerical example where the volatility of the return of the foreign stock is 30%.
The base case is PF = PD = 1, WD = WF = 10, NSF = NSD = 10 , δD = 3%. In this base case, domestic
investors hold 3.33 shares of foreign stock and foreign investors hold 6.67 shares. If the price of
the foreign stock doubles, domestic holdings of the foreign stock fall from 3.33 to 3.17. If we
double δD, the holdings of the foreign stock fall by roughly half and the number of foreign shares
held by domestic investors falls from 1.67 to 1.52 if the price of the foreign stock doubles.
Though the domestic holdings of foreign stock generally fall when the price of the foreign stock
increases, this is not the case when the domestic country is small. For instance, when Ω = 0.05,
so that the wealth of domestic investors is 1, they hold 0.18 shares of foreign stock when the
price of that stock is 1. Following a doubling in the price of the foreign stock, their holdings go
to 0.21.
Figure 1A shows the impact of a doubling of the foreign stock price on equilibrium stock
holdings after taking into account its effect on the wealth of investors. It shows that such a
doubling decreases the equilibrium holdings of the foreign stock by domestic investors except
when the domestic country is much smaller than the foreign country.
C. The Effect of Extrapolative Expectations
Suppose now that an unexpectedly high return on foreign stocks leads domestic, but not
foreign, investors to expect a higher return on these stocks. Such an outcome would result from a
world where domestic investors know less about foreign stocks than foreign investors and

11

therefore learn about expected returns of foreign stocks from past returns.3 It would also be the
result of stronger extrapolative expectations for a country’s stock returns from non-resident
investors than from resident investors based on behavioral considerations. With our model, this
assumption can be taken into account by letting δD depend on the past foreign stock return. Since
δD is a barrier to international investment that decreases the return on the foreign stock for
domestic investors, the expected return on foreign stocks earned by foreign residents exceeds the
expected return earned by domestic investors by δD.
C.1. The impact of foreign stock price changes
If δD is negatively related to the past return, foreign stocks become more attractive to
domestic investors if these stocks have performed well. A decrease in δD increases the demand
for foreign stocks by domestic investors and decreases the demand for these stocks by foreign
investors. As shown in Section B of the Appendix, as long as δD falls sharply enough following a
positive return, the equilibrium holdings of the foreign stock by domestic investors increase
following a positive return on the foreign stock.
We can use our numerical example to investigate the impact of an increase in the price of
the foreign stock when domestic investors expect a higher return on the foreign stock following
an unexpectedly high return on that stock. For simplicity, we set δD/ σ F2 = 0.33 – 0.1 x ∆PF/PF so
that δD is equal to 3%. In this case, the equilibrium holdings of the foreign stock by domestic
investors increase from 3.33 shares to 3.55 shares with a doubling of the price of the foreign
stock. Hence, in this case, foreign investors drop their holdings of foreign shares from 6.67 to
6.45 shares. Figure 1B shows that a doubling of the foreign stock price leads to net positive
foreign equity purchases by domestic investors. With weaker extrapolative expectations,

3

Though not formulated in an international context, the model of Williams (1977) leads to such a result directly.
12

however, it becomes possible for the holdings of the foreign stock by domestic investors to fall
when the foreign stock earns an unexpectedly high return. For instance, if we set δD/ σ F2 = 0.33 –
0.01 x ∆PF/PF, equilibrium holdings of the foreign stock by domestic investors fall to 3.22
following a doubling of the foreign stock price.
In the absence of the home bias and extrapolative expectations for non-resident investors,
high past returns in a country predict high expected returns. However, with extrapolative
expectations, a high return on the foreign stock leads domestic investors to expect higher returns
in the future and therefore increases their demand for that stock. This effect, when strong
enough, can lead to a decrease in the expected return on the foreign stock. Hence, an increase in
equity flows can be associated with a decrease in expected returns as perceived by foreign
investors and hence an increase in the foreign stock price because the discount rate on the
expected cash flows for that stock has decreased. In Figure 1C, the expected return on the foreign
stock falls following high returns on the foreign stock as long as the impact of the price increase
of the foreign stock on domestic investors’ expected return for these stocks is large enough.
However, when the expectations are extrapolative to such an extent, they have to be justified
using behavioral considerations since domestic investors would otherwise understand that their
behavior leads to a decrease in the expected return on foreign stocks.
C.2. The impact of domestic stock price changes
Consider now the impact of an unexpectedly high increase in the domestic stock price on
net flows to the foreign country. The foreign residents investing in the domestic country earn δF
less than domestic investors on domestic stocks. In this case, the demand for the domestic asset
by foreign investors is:

13

δF
WW
N = N [1 − Ω] − 2 Ω[1 − Ω]
σD
PD
F
D

S
D

(8)

We set δF/ σ D2 = 0.33 – 0.1 x ∆PD/PD. Starting from the base case, an increase in the domestic
stock price increases the expected return on domestic stocks for foreign investors relative to the
expected return on the same stocks for domestic investors. A doubling of the domestic stock
price reduces the equilibrium holdings of both domestic and foreign stocks for domestic
investors. The reason for this is that the extrapolative expectations of foreign investors make
stocks more attractive for them, so that they borrow from domestic investors to invest in stocks.
However, this result does not hold when the domestic country is sufficiently richer than the
foreign country. Figure 1D shows this. When the wealth of the domestic country is large enough
relative to the foreign country, a doubling of the domestic stock price results in positive net
equity flows toward the foreign country. The intuition for this result can be obtained by looking
at equation (6). When the wealth of the domestic country is large relative to the wealth of the
foreign country, Ω is large. Consequently, the second term in equation (6) is small. As Ω
becomes large enough, we can neglect the second term in equation (6). In this case, an increase
in the price of the domestic stock increases the first term of equation (6) simply because
domestic investors become richer. However, it is still the case that domestic investors sell
domestic shares for proceeds that exceed their purchase of foreign stocks, so that an increase in
the domestic stock prices leads both to foreign stock purchases and to lending to the foreign
country.

14

D. Summary of Model Implications
It follows from this analysis that if non-resident investors have extrapolative expectations
and there are barriers to international investment, equilibrium holdings of foreign stocks by
domestic investors relate as follows to past returns:
Result 1: Unexpectedly high returns on foreign stocks are accompanied by net equity
inflows in the foreign country as long as domestic wealth is not too small compared to foreign
wealth and expectations are sufficiently extrapolative.
Result 2: Unexpectedly high returns on domestic stocks are accompanied by net equity
flows into the foreign country as long as expectations are sufficiently extrapolative and the
wealth of the domestic country is large relative to the wealth of the foreign country.
The first result does not hold without extrapolative expectations. The second result does
not hold without barriers to international investment. As we saw, a simple mean-variance model
produces no flows because of changes in asset prices. In contrast, our model can explain why
flows are volatile and depend on returns.
The model of this section is admittedly very simple. A feature of equity flows that it
cannot reproduce is the persistence that these flows show in the data. Such persistence could be
obtained in a multi-period version of the model that would allow the expected return for the
foreign stock by domestic investors to depend on realized returns not only for the most recent
period, but also for earlier periods. With such a modification, a large return shock could lead
flows to increase over multiple periods. Such a modification could not be motivated using a
Bayesian updating argument, but rather would require a motivation from behavioral finance.

15

II. Data Description
In testing predictions such as result 1 and 2 above, it is particularly useful to use
relatively high frequency data. Daily data allows for a better examination of lead-lag dynamics
between flows and returns which, with lower frequency data (namely, monthly or quarterly),
would likely appear as contemporaneous relationships. The only existing study that uses daily
data on equity flows for multiple countries is the study of Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes
(2001). Their study estimates flows from the sales and purchases of investors who use State
Street Bank as a custodian. These investors represent about 12 percent of the world’s securities
over the period of their study. Because State Street is such a large custodian, the flow data is
fairly representative, but the data is proprietary. To construct a dataset of daily equity flows, we
contacted about 60 stock exchanges and 12 regulatory agencies with websites on the Internet.4
Most stock exchanges or regulatory agencies indicated that they did not keep track of the trading
activity of foreign investors, at least at the daily level. However, we were able to obtain data
from seven countries with this approach. In addition, private data vendors were helpful in
obtaining data from two other countries. In all, we obtained data on foreign flows from nine
markets.5 As a general feature, Asian countries seem to keep much more extensive data records
of foreign investors’ activities and thus our sample contains seven Asian countries. This is
fortunate for our sake since much of the concerns about the potentially destabilizing influence of
foreign investment flows center around the Asian equity markets.
Our final sample consists of data from five countries in East Asia (Indonesia, Korea, the
Philippines, Taiwan, and Thailand), two in South Asia (India and Sri Lanka), one country from

4

Some of the websites we used for finding stock exchanges and regulating agencies are
www.gsionline.com/exchange.htm, www.fibv.com, and www.iosco.org.
5
We were not able to obtain flow data for two countries for which studies using daily data have been published:
Sweden and Finland.
16

East Europe (Slovenia), and one country from Africa (South Africa). Since this data is recorded
by the exchange, it has the advantage of containing all the recorded trades of foreign investors on
the stock exchange. The flows we consider contain trading by both foreign institutions and
foreign individual investors. In Korea and Taiwan, this data is separately classified, but most
equity flows in these two countries are due to institutional investors.6
The capital flow measure we use is the value of all equity purchases by foreigners minus
all equity sales by foreigners scaled by the previous day’s market capitalization [ft = 100*(fbuy, t –
fsell,t) / mktcapt-1]. We use net flows relative to market capitalization because this measure tells us
how important the net demand is relative to the total supply of available shares.7
Data for market indices and exchanges rates are collected from Datastream with the
exceptions of Sri Lanka and Slovenia where market capitalization and return data is supplied by
the exchange (Datastream does not have coverage of these two countries). We primarily focus
on local currency returns so that exchange rate effects will not confound our inferences, but later
we examine separately the role of exchange rates as well as the implications of using dollar
returns. Since flows are scaled by the country’s market capitalization, they are invariant to the
currency of denomination.
Figure 2 shows time-series plots of the market indices as well as the cumulative foreign
flows. The net flows divided by the previous day’s market capitalization are cumulated across
the entire period. We also cumulate flows divided by the beginning of the period market
capitalization and obtain similar figures. Because many countries started keeping track of the
flow data only recently, the starting dates of the countries vary by country. The data begins in
6

Japan has weekly data classified this way. This data is studied in Karolyi (2001) for a sample period that partly
overlaps with ours. Using a VAR framework, he finds strong evidence of positive feedback trading.
7
Without scaling, it is problematic to compare flows across countries or even across time within a country. Though
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) and Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001) scale flows as we do, a number
of papers, including Edison and Warnock (2001) do not scale flows.
17

January 1996 for Korea, Indonesia, and South Africa, 1997 for Taiwan and Thailand, 1998 for
India, Sri Lanka, and Slovenia, and 1999 for the Philippines. The ending date is February 23,
2001 for all countries except Slovenia, which ends on January 31, 2001.
The first interesting feature of the plots is that flows seem to exhibit a weak positive
relationship with the movement in the market indices. There do not appear, though, to be
massive capital flights during large market down moves. For example, for the Russian crisis in
the summer of 1998, there are five countries with available data, but only in Korea does there
appear to be a noticeable sell-off by foreign investors. Second, the sample period is one of
cumulative net foreign inflows. However, for Thailand, Sri Lanka, and the Philippines net
foreign investment over 1999 is negative. A third noticeable feature of the data is that the
volatility of the foreign equity net flows appears to fluctuate widely across countries with Korea
and Indonesia showing substantial movements in net flows, but Slovenia has almost no variation
in foreign flows.
To gain additional insights about the time-series properties of the data, Figure 3 reports
the daily return movements on the right axis and scaled daily net foreign flows on the left axis.
There appears to be a relationship between the volatilities of returns and flows. For instance, this
can be seen clearly in Korea where both returns and flows became more volatile in mid to late
1997. Another evident feature of the data is that for many of the countries there are large positive
spikes in net foreign inflows. For Korea, we are able to obtain liberalization dates and notice that
most of these days of large inflows coincide with market liberalization dates. Another possible
explanation for some of the large inflows is that they coincide with days when a stock from the
country lists in the U.S. Edison and Warnock (2001) find that ADR listings can lead to sharp
spikes in U.S. monthly flows to emerging markets. To control for capital inflows due to
18

abnormal reasons, we set observations above the 99th percentile of the daily net flow distribution
equal to the 99th percentile point.8
We examine the mean, median, and standard deviation of foreign net flows in Table I.
The standard deviation of net flows varies across countries between one one-hundredth of a
percent (0.01) for Slovenia to 5.5 times as much (0.055) for Korea. This means that in all
markets most daily foreign net activity is less than one-tenth of one percent of market
capitalization.
Table I also examines the autocorrelation structure of both flows and returns out to five
lags. Flows generally have much greater autocorrelations than returns, with the autocorrelations
in flows varying widely across countries. The autocorrelation in flows slowly declines and is
generally still significant out to lag five, indicating substantial persistence in the foreign
investment activity.
Table I also documents some substantial contemporaneous correlations between flows
and returns within each country. All of the Asian countries have substantial positive correlations
between flows and returns (ranging between 0.070 and 0.44). Quite different is the case of
Slovenia and South Africa. The negative correlations in these two countries are inconsistent with
what has been observed elsewhere [e.g. Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (2001)] and more
consistent with the contrarian behavior observed by domestic individual investors [Odean (1999)
and Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000)].
This brings up a potential problem that plagues most analysis of capital flows. While the
flow data is marked as trading activity by foreign investors, there are no guarantees that domestic
investors do not disguise themselves as foreigners through offshore accounts. One might expect
8

All tables and the remaining figure consider the characteristics of foreign flows after trimming the top one percent
of foreign flow activity. We also re-examine our main findings by using flows including these tail-end observations
and obtain similar findings.
19

such activity to be particularly prevalent in a situation where there is large political risk. Through
various news sources, we ascertained that capital flight in South Africa has been occurring
rapidly since the removal of Apartheid laws and the relaxation of exchange rate controls in
1997.9 In addition, laws introduced since 1997 allow South Africans to legally invest some
capital in offshore accounts. Given that South African investors hold large amounts of capital in
offshore accounts, it certainly seems possible that one explanation for the negative
contemporaneous relation between flows and returns in South Africa is that the ‘foreign flows’ in
South Africa represent mostly trading by local investors. Thus, we are careful in making
inferences from South African data and given the negative correlation between flows and returns,
potentially from Slovenia as well.

III. Flows and Own Country Returns
This section examines the within country joint dynamics of the local market return and
flow data. As previously illustrated, our model generally predicts that in the presence of
extrapolative expectations, high stock returns in the local market can increase the demand for
local stocks from non-resident investors and hence lead to further increases in local stock prices.
The end result is that foreign trading activity is predictive of future returns even when foreigners
are informationally disadvantaged. To examine these implications, we ask two main questions of
the flow data. Is there any reliable evidence of foreign investors chasing local market returns? Do
foreign investment flows predict future price movements?

9

The following articles contained some information on the presence of offshore activity by South African investors:
www.moneymax.co.za/learning_centre/begin_global.asp,
www.tradeport.org/ts/countries/safrica/mrr/mark0241.html,
www.computingsa.co.za/1999/06/14/Topnews/top03.html.
20

To investigate these issues, within each country, we use a vector autoregression (VAR)
framework. To facilitate comparison between movements in returns and flows we standardize
both net flows (buy-sell imbalances/ total market cap) and returns relative to their respective time
series standard deviation. We estimate the following bivariate VAR:
 r   α i, r
 i, t  = 
 f i, t  α i, f

r
  b ( L) b ( L)   r
i, t − 1   ε i, t 
12
 +  11

+


 b21 ( L) b22 ( L)  f i, t − 1  ε f i, t 

(9)

where ri,t is the time t return on country i’s equity index and fi,t is the standardized net foreign
flow to country i at time t. The alphas are intercept terms, the b(L)s are polynomials in the lag
operator L and contain the autoregressive coefficients, and εri,t and εfi,t are zero mean disturbance
terms that are assumed to be intertemporally uncorrelated.10
Table II displays the VAR regression results with five lags for both flows (f) and returns
(r). The examination of the flow regressions in panel A shows several interesting findings. First,
flows are strongly related to past flows even after controlling for the effect of returns. For
example, a one standard deviation positive movement in yesterday’s foreign flows in Indonesia
leads to a 0.208 standard deviation increase in today’s flows. The impact of past flows decreases
quickly at lag two (coefficients ranging from 0.015 to 0.139) but persists even out to lag five in
most of the countries.
The second interesting finding, which is consistent with our model, is that foreign flows
are highly affected by the previous day’s return. For instance, a one standard deviation increase
in yesterday’s Indonesian market return leads to a 0.16 standard deviation increase in today’s

10

For most countries the Schwartz Information Criterion (SIC) selects the optimal lag length at two lags. However,
for Korea and Thailand the optimal lag length is four and five, respectively. We choose to model the system with
five lags in each variable for all countries as this choice makes the analysis homogeneous across countries. The
fairly large sample sizes at our disposal allow us to be less concerned about the losses of degrees of freedom induced
by more highly parameterized models. We also reexamine all our VAR results with systems only containing two
lags and find that our results are, essentially, unchanged.
21

foreign inflows. Foreign flows in all five East Asian countries are highly responsive to past
returns with coefficients ranging between 0.16 for Indonesia to 0.287 for Thailand. While the
response in flows to a change in yesterday’s return is large for the East Asian countries, these
effects are always smaller than that of past flows. For the two South Asian countries, there is
only a weak and insignificant relationship with past returns and for Slovenia and South Africa
the relationship is negative. Interestingly, while the relationship between flows and previous
day’s returns in East Asian countries is large, this effect dies out quickly with the impact of lag
two returns being small and actually negative in six of the nine countries. To assess the joint
significance of lagged returns on flows, Granger causality tests are reported at the bottom of
Panel A. For Indonesia, Korea, the Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, and Slovenia, we can reject
(at the 1% level) the null that past index returns do not Granger-cause flows, after controlling for
the predictive power of lagged flows. These results suggest that foreigners buy following high
previous-day stock returns but respond little or actually are net sellers following high returns
earlier in the week.
Moving to the return equation of the VAR in equation (9), Panel B of Table II examines
the relationship between current market returns and past foreign trading activity as well as lagged
returns. Foreign flows are significant predictors of returns at lag one for Korea, Taiwan,
Thailand, and India, indicating that foreign investors are buying before market index increases.
We also test the joint significance of flows for predicting future returns and find (as reported at
the bottom of Panel B) that we can reject the null (at the five percent level) that flows do not
Granger-cause returns in Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, India, and Slovenia.
It is important to notice that, relative to the explained variation in flows, the variation in
returns that is explained by past returns and flows is small. The adjusted R2s in the return
22

equations are less than 0.04 in all the East Asian countries. Comparatively, the adjusted R2s in
the flow equations for East Asian countries range up to 0.40.
Nevertheless, we wish to further understand the cause of this relationship between
foreign activity and next-day stock returns. These findings could be due to foreign investors
anticipating future market movements. Froot and Ramadorai (2002) use closed-end country fund
flows to investigate these alternative explanations and conclude that U.S. investors do have
information about future fundamentals of foreign stock funds. Alternatively, we saw that with
the home bias and extrapolative expectations an increase in flows is associated with a decrease in
expected returns and hence an unexpected positive contemporaneous return.
To investigate these explanations for our countries, in Panel C we report estimates from a
structural VAR model identical to the one above except that contemporaneous flows are included
in the return equation. If flows have predictive power for market returns beyond their forecasting
power for future foreign flows, we would expect lagged flows to be significant predictors even
after including the contemporaneous flows. However, if lagged foreign flows merely forecast
future foreign flows which then lead to a contemporaneous price impact, we would expect to see
the contemporaneous flow/return relationship subsuming the lead-lag dynamics.
The tests for this specification reveal that contemporaneous flows are positive and highly
significant in India and all five East Asian countries. However, lagged flows in these countries
are positive and significant in two countries only and negative and significant in two other
countries. Thus, these results seem to suggest that the importance of foreign flows (in the VAR
without contemporaneous flows) is mainly due to past flows signaling future foreign investment
which leads to contemporaneous price movements. Conversely, we find only mixed support for
the hypothesis that foreign investors consistently anticipate local market movements. Although
23

admittedly limited, this evidence does not support the view that foreigners have better
information than locals about future market movements.
For the flow equations, a similar question can be asked -- how do foreign flows respond
to past price changes if one controls for the contemporaneous relationship between flows and
returns? Panel D of Table II reports results for a separate structural VAR model where the
contemporaneous value of market index returns is included in the flow equation (and no
contemporaneous flows are included in the return equation).11 The return equation is not reported
for this specification as the results are the same as those estimated in Panel B.
The regressions reported in Panel D show that the inferences obtained in Panel A still
hold. Namely, foreign flows are strongly related to past flows and the previous day’s return. The
contemporaneous relationship between returns and flows is positive and highly significant in
India and the five East Asian countries. The coefficient on the contemporaneous return for these
markets range between 0.178 to 0.353 indicating that a movement on the local index return is
generally associated with a relatively large net flow of the same sign.
The daily contemporaneous relationship between flows and returns could be due to
foreign investors buying ahead of intraday market moves, price pressure by foreigners, or by
intradaily trend chasing. The previous day’s coefficient on returns could be attributed to trades
executed after price movements or to trend chasing. It is also interesting to note that the
magnitude of these lagged effects is relatively large, although somewhat smaller than the
contemporaneous relationship. We also estimate VARs with two lags and obtain similar findings.
Although the individual VAR coefficients are informative in their own rights, they only
measure the static lead-lag relationships between foreign flows and returns. It is, perhaps, even
11

Allowing returns to contemporaneously impact flows does not assume causality but rather allows for a separate
assessment of the importance of past returns on current flows, after controlling for their contemporaneous
relationship.
24

more important to look at the joint impact of past shocks and at the dynamic behavior of the
system under consideration. While the Granger causality tests reported above are a first step in
this direction, through the use of impulse response functions we can trace out the overall impact
of an innovation in both flows and returns on subsequent flows over time. Using the VAR
regressions in equation (9), in unreported results we examine the cumulative impact (or dynamic
multipliers) of both lagged flows and market returns on flows for up to twenty days. For the five
East Asian markets, the impulse response graphs show that both flows and returns generally have
a significant and lasting impact on flows. However, the cumulative impact of shocks to flows is
generally substantially higher and more persistent than the impact of returns. To summarize, our
primary finding is that foreign investors appear to be short-term daily trend chasers in Asian
countries with their trading activity strongly governed by the previous day’s market return.

IV. Flows and Non-host Country Returns
As discussed in Section I, our model predicts a positive relationship between flows and
non-host country equity returns when non-host countries are substantially richer than the host
country. In this section we investigate the relationship between regional equity returns and
foreign investment flows.
A. Cross-country Correlations between Flows and Returns
We first examine simple correlations between flows and returns across countries. All
returns are denominated in local currency, as are the regional Datastream indices. Table III
presents correlations between flows and returns in the nine markets and with regional indices.
The correlations between foreign flows vary widely across countries. Foreign investment flows
in Thailand and Korea generally exhibit the highest correlation with other countries, particularly
25

within the Asian region. While flows between India and the five East Asian countries are always
positive, the flow correlations with Sri Lanka, Slovenia, and South Africa are close to zero. The
pattern of much higher correlations of flows within regions is also consistent with findings by
Froot, O'Connell, and Seasholes (2001).
Second, and more importantly, we examine the relationship between flows and
contemporaneous and lagged equity returns in Europe, North America, the Pacific region, and
emerging markets. The three regional indices considered here represent coverage from the major
trading regions and the emerging market index is selected to examine the potential presence of a
common impact within developing markets. Flows in Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and
India are for the most part significantly correlated with the regional and emerging market
indices. Interestingly, both flows and returns in the East Asian countries are correlated with the
lagged North American return but not the contemporaneous return. Since the trading day starts in
Asia, this indicates that Asian equity returns are much more highly correlated with the previousdays’ North American returns than with same-day North American returns which follow Asian
equity trading. Perhaps this is due to more information about prices being generated during
North American trading hours.
B. Cross-country VAR Models
To investigate the importance of regional indices in explaining flow dynamics, we
estimate a structural VAR system where net foreign flows and country index returns depend on
their lagged values as well as those of the Pacific, European, North American, and emerging
market indices. If the predictions of our model hold up, we would expect the relationship
between flows and regional returns to be positive and larger for those indices with larger market
cap, especially the North American and, then, the European index. In this structural VAR, the
26

regional index returns are considered as exogenous variables. To make the presentation of our
results more space effective, even though we estimate the system with five lags for each variable
(exogenous and endogenous), only two lags are reported in the tables and the additional lags are
discussed when relevant. Panel A of Table IV displays the results for the flow regressions. The
results for the return equations are not shown here, as they are not central to the focus on the
determinants of foreign investment behavior.
It is first interesting to note that the inclusion of the regional indices does not alter the
main conclusions reached previously with only the own-country indices and the flows--namely,
that net foreign flows are highly persistent and that foreign investment strongly follows owncountry index returns. Secondly, in looking across regional indices, consistent with the
prediction of our model that flows are positively related to home market returns for large
markets, the most noticeable effect is related to the previous-day North American return. North
American returns exhibit a positive and significant relationship with subsequent foreign inflows
in Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and India. The economic magnitude of this effect is not
trivial as a one unit (standard deviation) shock to the North American return index is followed
the next day by between a 0.095 and 0.247 unit (standard deviation) increase in foreign flows in
these five countries. Looking back further in time shows that lagged two-period North American
returns are sometimes negatively related to current foreign flows although only significantly so
in Korea. However, in Korea lagged three-period returns from North America are positive and
significant and lagged four- and five-period coefficients are smaller but positive. The Pacific
market index exhibits a positive although not statistically significant relationship to flows and the
lagged emerging market index is significantly related to foreign flows in Taiwan only. Consistent

27

with the European index being second behind the U.S. in market cap, the previous-day European
index is positively and significantly related to equity flows in two countries, Korea and Thailand.
It is interesting to examine the amount of variation in flows that can be explained by the
different (local vs. regional) equity indices. To address this issue we first estimate the basic
system with flows as a function of past flows only. We add local index returns (as in Table II),
gauge the incremental increases in adjusted R2s, and then add both local and regional index
returns. We find that the average adjusted R2s for East Asian markets with only lagged flows is
0.242, but the explanatory power increases 16.8 percent to 0.285 with the inclusion of lagged
local index returns and increases an additional 12.7 percent to 0.320 with the inclusion of both
local and regional index returns. For the other countries the increases in adjusted R2s are much
smaller. Regional index returns appear, thus, to be economically important in determining the
variation in foreign flows in East Asian countries.
To assess joint economic importance, Figure 4 displays impulse response graphs for
flows from the VAR without contemporaneous effects (shown previously in Panel A of Table
IV). The shocks to North American returns lead to larger increases to capital flows than those
from local returns in seven of the nine countries (exceptions are the Philippines and Sri Lanka).
By lag 20, North American market returns lead to economically and statistically significant
increases in flows of 0.31, 0.51, 0.97, and 0.73 standard deviations in Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan,
and Thailand, respectively.
One potential explanation for the positive relation between North American returns and
foreign flows to Asian countries is that positive returns in North America propagate into higher
Asian equity returns. Since flows and local market returns are contemporaneously correlated, the
positive relationship between flows and lagged North American index returns could simply be an
28

artifact of the correlation between North American returns and the next-day East Asian equity
returns. To examine this possibility, we estimate a structural VAR where contemporaneous
returns are included in the flow equation. Panel B of Table IV demonstrates that while this effect
weakens the significance of the North American return somewhat, North American returns still
significantly impact flows in Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand.
One other question is whether these regional index effects are jointly (across countries,
that is) important. One problem with a joint system is that it is restricted to the time-period of the
country with the shortest coverage. For this reason we first estimate a system for the four East
Asian countries with the longest coverage, Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand, with the
sample beginning in December of 1997. In unreported results, with a specification similar to the
one estimated in Panel B of Table IV, a joint test across markets finds that both lagged North
American and European returns are statistically significant determinants of flows.12
The findings are consistent with the predictions of our model. Our model predicts that
when the foreign market is sufficiently large relative to the domestic market, equity flows are
positively related to foreign returns and an increasing function of the size of the foreign market.
Empirically we find that equity flows into Asian countries are positive and significantly related
to North American market returns and, to a lesser extent, to European returns.

12

In addition we estimate a seven-country system (Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, India, Slovenia, and Sri
Lanka) with coverage beginning in January 1999 and find a jointly significant North American index return but none
of the other regional indices are jointly significant. We also repeat both the four and seven-country tests with nontrimmed data and with several regional emerging market indices and find similar results.
29

V. The Impact of Exchange Rates and Cross-Country Flows
The model of Section I ignores the impact of exchange rate changes on equity flows. In
this section, we examine whether exchange rate changes affect equity flows and whether they
can explain the impact on flows of non-host country returns.
A. Exchange Rates
To the extent that exchange rate changes are contemporaneously correlated with equity
market increases, a positive relationship between non-host country returns and equity flows
could simply be proxying for an exchange rate effect. In Table V, we add foreign exchange rate
changes as exogenous variables in our structural VAR. The exchange rate coefficients are
positive in eight of the nine countries, indicating that a depreciation of the local currency leads to
more foreign equity inflows. However, the relationship is statistically significant only in
Indonesia and the Philippines. As with returns, the two-period lags of the exchange rate generally
have coefficients closer to zero, indicating that investors react quickly to changes in the
exchange rate.

More importantly, coefficient estimates are generally quite close to the

specification excluding exchange rates (as in Panel B of Table IV). As before, lagged one-period
North American returns exhibit a positive relationship to foreign flows in Korea, Taiwan, and
Thailand, and the European equity index is significant in Thailand. In Asian markets, increased
foreign investment follows exchange rate depreciations, positive local market equity returns, and
increases in regional index returns.
B. Foreign Flows
Our previous investigation has largely drawn inferences for each country in isolation.
However, as shown in Table III, flows are correlated across countries, particularly within East
Asia. One would expect that cross-country flow correlations are due to common information
30

shocks across countries as well as the influence of the North American equity movements on
small market flows. However, one could also argue that these cross-country flow relations are
primarily driven by non-fundamental contagion. In a world where non-fundamental contagion is
important, one might expect flow herding behavior to be the only major determinant of flow
activity and this would drive out the other inferences observed in our model.
To assess the impact of foreign herding behavior across markets, we estimate structural
VARs similar to those previously examined in Table V with the addition of cross-country flows
as an additional exogenous variable. Because of the strong regional component in flows, we
examine East Asian flows for the four countries with the longest coverage: Indonesia, Korea,
Taiwan, and Thailand. We construct a foreign flow index as a simple equally-weighted average
of the flows in the three other East Asian countries.
Table VI presents the results from both the flow and return equations. Foreign flows are
an important determinant of Korean flows and the magnitude of this effect is economically
large.13 This result is consistent with the evidence of a regional common factor in flows
presented in Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001). Interestingly, the inclusion of the foreign
flow index does sharpen some of the inferences obtained from other variables in the system.
European equity returns have positive coefficients in Korean and Thailand and the emerging
market index is now significantly positive in both Korea and Thailand but significantly negative
in Taiwan. The coefficients on the North American returns are highly significant in three
countries and have a p-value of 0.07 in Indonesia.
We also examine the return equations in the structural VAR. In particular we examine
whether foreign flows precede local market equity returns. Foreign flows are a significant
13

In unreported results, we decomposed the average flow measure into three separate foreign flows (one for each
other country) and find that it is flows from Thailand that are leading the Korean flows.
31

determinant of equity returns in Korea but in neither of the other markets. Both cross-country
and local flows only explain a small fraction of the variation in returns. The main inference we
obtain here is that exchange rates and foreign flows affect local flows but their roles are
generally not as important, both economically and statistically, as those of regional index returns.

VI. Other Issues
In this section we briefly investigate the role that currency, time periods, and return
asymmetries play in understanding flow dynamics.
A. Currency of Denomination
All of the previously discussed findings are obtained with local currency denominated
returns and, thus, are taken from the perspective of an investor who is completely hedged against
exchange rate movements. An alternative method of conducting (and checking the robustness of
the) inferences is to take the perspective of an investor who is unhedged against foreign currency
movements and uses a common currency such as the U.S. dollar. To this end, we compute dollar
returns on local and regional indices. Net flows are scaled by market cap and hence invariant to
the currency of denomination. In unreported results, we estimate a country-by-country structural
VAR model identical to the ones previously analyzed in Table V.
Past flows, contemporaneous and lagged own-country market returns are again important
determinants of foreign equity flows. The lagged Pacific index is important only in Korea and
the European index is positive and significant in Korea and Thailand. Previous-day North
American returns are highly significant in Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand and have p-values of
0.07 and 0.06 in Indonesia and India. Emerging market indices play a much smaller economic,
but yet statistically significant role in Korea and Thailand. Impulse response functions also
32

reveal an aggregate significant effect of the North American market on subsequent flows in all
five East Asian countries. In summary, the dollar return results confirm that positive equity
returns in other parts of the world, particularly the US, lead to an increase in foreign investments
into Asian markets.
B. The Effects of the Asian Crisis
An important question is whether our inferences change through time. In particular, most
of our strongest inferences come from Asian countries where we have a time-series extending
through the Asian crisis. To investigate the relation between the Asian crisis and our findings, we
estimate VAR regressions similarly to Table V for the three countries with the longest coverage,
Indonesia, Korea, and Taiwan, during the pre-crisis period (prior to July 2, 1997), during the
crisis (July 2, 1997 to December 31, 1997) and post-crisis (January 2, 1998 to February 23
2001).
In unreported results, we find that in the short pre-crisis period, only Korea has a
significant lag one coefficient on the local market return, although the other two local market
return coefficients are both positive. The lack of significance for Taiwan is not surprising as only
about three months of data are available to us prior to the crisis. Pre-crisis, the North American
coefficients at lag one are not significant. During the crisis, the coefficient on local market
returns at lag one is positive and significant in Korea and Taiwan and the North American
market return is significant only in Taiwan. Post-crisis, the local market return at lag one is
positive and significant in all three countries and the North American market return is
economically large and significant in Korea and Taiwan. In addition, we examine the post
Russian crisis period (August 17, 1998 to February 23, 2001) and find similar magnitude of

33

coefficients and significance. Our findings of Asian capital flows following large local and North
American market moves are, thus, not driven by the Asian or Russian crisis periods.
C. Return Asymmetries
Another interesting issue is whether net flows are affected differently by up and down
market movements. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002) find that flows leave faster than
they come using monthly date and a longer but mostly earlier sample period. In particular, if
foreign investors are more sensitive to negative news, local negative returns may be followed by
capital outflows to a greater extent than a positive return of the same absolute value would affect
foreign inflows. Similarly, stock price declines in North American markets may play a stronger
influence than North American stock price increases on capital flows in Asia. Our model gives
no predictions regarding flow asymmetry and it is not clear whether positive or negative returns
should have more impact on flows.
We investigate this issue by estimating VAR regressions of flows on local and U.S.
market returns with dummy variables for flow asymmetries. Unreported results show that net
flows react differently to positive and negative own lagged returns only in Slovenia and South
Africa although the asymmetries are of opposite sign. As for lagged U.S. returns, there is no
evidence that positive shocks affect subsequent flows differently than negative shocks with the
exception of Slovenia. In sum, our analysis of asymmetries like those for dollar returns and
different sub-periods indicates that the findings of a strong positive relation between capital
flows into Asian countries and both local and North American market returns are remarkably
robust.

34

VII. Conclusion
We present a simple model of equilibrium equity flows with barriers to international
investment and foreign investors who find past stock prices more informative about future
domestic returns than domestic investors. The model predicts that equity flows toward a country
increase with the return of that country’s stock market. Further, when a country is small, the
model predicts that equity flows toward the country increase with stock returns in the rest of the
world. Using daily flow data from nine markets, we find strong support for both of these
predictions.
We find that foreign investors invest more following high returns in a market and that
they react quickly, often within one calendar day. Using a bivariate structural VAR where flows
are allowed to depend on returns to regional indices as well as past flows and local returns, we
examine the importance of regional returns. Equity flows increase following strong regional
equity returns. North American returns are particularly important in determining equity flows
toward Asia and have an economically and statistically significant effect on flows toward
Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and India. These findings are robust when taking into
account exchange rate effects, cross-country flow dynamics, the Asian and Russian crisis, and
potential asymmetric effects of positive and negative returns.
Our model and supporting empirical results provide evidence of a world where foreign
investors from large markets buy shares from local investors following positive international
stock market performance and foreign investors move out of smaller markets following negative
stock market performance both locally and globally. A stock market’s past performance is
positively related to foreign investment but inflows also increase more rapidly when the U.S.
market performs well irrespective of the local market’s performance. The result that inflows into
35

small countries are positively related to U.S. stock market returns has important implications for
our understanding of equity flows. Some have argued that capital flows cannot be explained by
innovations about fundamentals and must be due to some contagious activity. However, both our
model and our empirical results indicate that, to understand capital flows into a country over a
sample period that includes the Asian and the Russian crises, it is not enough to focus on
fundamentals of the host country or even markets with similar fundamentals. Flows can be
pushed towards a country as well as pulled towards it.

36

References
Bekaert, G., and C. R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets, Journal
of Finance 55, 565-613.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and R. L. Lumsdaine, 2002, The dynamics of emerging market equity
flows, Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming.
Bhagwati, J., 1998, The capital myth, Foreign Affairs 77 (3), 7-12.
Bohn, H. and L. Tesar, 1996, U.S. equity investment in foreign markets: Portfolio rebalancing or
return chasing?, American Economic Review 86, 77-81.
Branson, W. H., 1970, Monetary policy and the new view of international capital movements,
Brookings Papers 1, 235-262.
Brennan, M. J., and H. Cao, 1997, International portfolio flows, Journal of Finance 52, 18511880.
Calvo, G., L. Leiderman, and C. Reinhart, 1993, Capital inflows and the real exchange rate
appreciation in Latin America: The role of external factors, IMF Staff Papers.
Chuhan, P., S. Claessens, and N. Mamingi, 1998, Equity and bond flows to Latin America and
Asia: the role of global and country factors, Journal of Development Economics 55, 439-463.
Edison, H. J., and F. E. Warnock, 2000, Cross-border listings, capital controls, and equity flows
to emerging markets, Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Fernandez-Arias, E., 1996, The new wave of private capital inflows: Push or pull?, Journal of
Development Economics 48, 389-418.
Friedman, T. L., 1999, The lexus and the olive tree, Farrar Straus Giroux, New York, NY.
Froot, K. and T. Ramadorai, 2002, The information content of international portfolio flows,
Harvard Business School working paper, Boston, MA.
37

Froot, K., P. O'Connell, and M. Seasholes, 2001, The portfolio flows of international investors,
Journal of Financial Economics 59, 151-193.
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of various
investor types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 4367.
Henry, P., 2000, Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market equity
prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.
Hong, H., and J. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Karolyi, G. A., 2001, Did the Asian financial crisis scare foreign investors out of Japan?,
unpublished working paper, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Karolyi, G. A. and R. M. Stulz, 2001, Are financial assets priced locally or globally?, working
paper, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Kouri, P. J. K., and Michael G. Porter, 1974, International capital flows and portfolio
equilibrium, Journal of Political Economy 82, 443-468.
Miller, N. C. and M. V. N. Whitman, 1970, A mean-variance analysis of United States long-term
portfolio foreign investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 175-196.
Odean, T., 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review 89, 1279-1298.
Seasholes, M., 2000, Smart foreign traders in emerging markets, working paper, University of
California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
Stiglitz, J., 1998, Distinguished lecture on economics in government: The private uses of public
interests: Incentives and institutions, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 3-22.

38

Stulz, R. M., 1981, On the effects of barriers to international investment, Journal of Finance 36,
923-934.
Williams, J. T., 1977, Capital asset prices with heterogeneous beliefs, Journal of Financial
Economics 5, 219-239.

39

Appendix
A. Impact of an increase in PF on N DF when there are barriers to international investment.
Take the derivative of N DF with respect to PF in equation (6):
WW

∂
P
∂Ω W W δ D
dN FD
δD
S ∂Ω
= NF
+ 2 [2Ω − 1]
+ 2 [Ω − 1]Ω  F
∂PF σ F
∂PF PF σ F
dPF
∂PF





The first term is always negative. The second term is negative if Ω is greater than 0.5. The third
term is always positive. When the domestic country is small enough and the ratio δ D / σ F2 is
large, the second term is positive and more than offsets the first one, so that the derivative is
positive. In the symmetric case, the derivative is negative provided that δ D / σ F2 is not greater
than one.
B. Proof that N DF increases as PF increases if the expected return for domestic investors
increases sufficiently strongly with PF.
Let δD = δD(PF). Substitute δD(PF) in the equation in Section A of this Appendix and take the
derivative of N DF with respect to PF:
WW 
∂δ D
∂


PF 
dN FD
WW δ D
∂Ω W W δ D
∂PF

S ∂Ω
= NF
+
+
[ Ω − 1] Ω + 2 [ 2Ω − 1]
[Ω − 1] Ω
∂PF σ F2
∂PF PF σ F2
∂PF
dPF
PF σ F
In this expression, the second and fourth terms are positive and the other terms are negative.
Hence, as long as the second and fourth terms are large enough, it is possible for a positive return
on the foreign stock to lead domestic investors to purchase foreign shares. The second term is the
term that differentiates this expression from the expression of Section A of this Appendix. In the
symmetric case, if this second term is large enough it makes the derivative positive.

40

Table I
Summary Statistics of Net Capital Flows and Market Return by Country
This table reports descriptive statistics for daily net capital flows and market return in each country. Net
Flows are defined as (buy value - sell value) by foreign investors scaled by previous day market
capitalization. To control for abnormal capital inflows, observations above the 99th percentile of the daily
net flow distribution are set equal to the 99th percentile point. Returns and scaled net flows are both
expressed in local currency and in percentage terms. Returns are continuously compounded returns on the
country stock market index. For each country the table shows the starting date of the sample, the mean,
median and standard deviation of net flows and returns, the contemporaneous correlation between net
flows and returns and the first five autocorrelation estimates for each series. The end date for all countries
is 2/23/01 except Slovenia, which has an ending date of 1/31/01.
Start Date
Jan. 2, 1996 Flow
Ret.
Jan. 4, 1996 Flow
Korea
Ret.
Philippines Jun. 1, 1999 Flow
Ret.
Apr. 1, 1997 Flow
Taiwan
Ret.
Dec. 1, 1997 Flow
Thailand
Ret.

Indonesia

Mean Median
0.008
-0.021
0.013
0.000
-0.003
-0.081
0.007
-0.006
0.002
-0.007

0.003
-0.051
0.006
-0.068
-0.004
-0.040
0.006
-0.066
-0.004
-0.240

Dec. 31, 1998 Flow 0.007 0.006
Ret.
0.050 0.142
Sri Lanka Aug. 17, 1998 Flow -0.007 -0.003
Ret. -0.013 0.000

India

Mar. 2, 1998 Flow 0.000
Ret.
0.031
Jan. 2, 1996 Flow 0.015
S. Africa
Ret.
0.052
*
significant at the five-percent level
Slovenia

0.000
-0.001
0.012
0.089

Stdev. lag 1
East Asia
0.030
0.33*
2.361
0.13*
0.055
0.49*
2.739
0.08*
0.022 0.42*
1.533
0.11*
0.027 0.47*
2.031
0.01
0.041 0.48*
2.686
0.10*
South Asia
0.024 0.23*
1.886 -0.01
0.024 0.17*
1.107
0.27*
Other
0.010
0.58*
0.825
0.25*
0.024
0.24*
1.394
0.13*

41

lag2

lag3

lag4

lag5

Corr.

0.24*
0.01*
0.32*
-0.03*
0.22*
-0.05*
0.34*
0.05
0.34*
0.05*

0.18*
-0.02*
0.29*
-0.05*
0.15*
-0.07*
0.23*
0.03
0.28*
-0.01*

0.12*
-0.07*
0.24*
-0.04*
0.12*
0.03
0.21*
-0.13*
0.27*
-0.04*

0.13* 0.375*
0.01*
0.25* 0.270*
-0.06*
0.13* 0.325*
-0.01
0.18* 0.282*
0.02*
0.27* 0.441*
-0.01*

0.20*
0.08
0.17*
0.10*

0.18*
0.00
0.16*
0.12*

0.12*
0.02
0.09*
0.02*

0.13* 0.218*
-0.03
0.10* 0.070
0.09*

0.47*
0.14*
0.20*
0.08*

0.46*
-0.04*
0.22*
0.00*

0.38*
-0.04*
0.16*
-0.02*

0.40* -0.096*
-0.05*
0.19* -0.086*
-0.01*

Table II
Vector Autoregression of Returns and Standardized Net Flow by Country
This table presents results from the bivariate vector autoregression (VAR) specified below with
five lags for each endogenous variable. ri,t is the daily percentage continuously compounded returns on
the country stock market index. fi,t is the daily net capital flow (buy value – sell value) originated by
foreign investors scaled by the previous day market capitalization, the α’s are constant intercept terms,
b(L) denotes a polynomial in the lag operator L, εri,t and εfi,t are zero mean disturbance terms that are
assumed to be intertemporally uncorrelated. The scaled net flow is also expressed in percentage terms.
Returns, flows, and market caps are all expressed in local currency. The VAR is estimated separately for
each country. Panel A and B report coefficient estimates, their p-values, and adjusted R-squared for the
flow and return equations, respectively, from a standard VAR with no contemporaneous variables in
either equation. Panel C reports the return equation results for a structural VAR with contemporaneous
flows in the return equation. For a separate VAR with contemporaneous returns in the flow equation, the
flow equation results are reported in Panel D. For each country the p-values of two Granger causality tests
are reported. Granger 1: Returns do not Granger cause flows. Granger 2: Flows do not Granger cause
returns. The VAR equations are as follows:

 r   α i, r
 i, t  = 
 f i, t  α i, f

  b ( L) b ( L )   r
  ε r i, t 
i
t
−
,
1
11
12
+
+


 b21 ( L) b22 ( L)  f i, t − 1  ε f i, t 

Panel A: Flow Equations

East Asia

South Asia

Indonesia

Korea

Phil.

Taiwan

Thailand

India

Others

Sri Lanka Slovenia S. Africa

0.006

0.004

0.008

0.004

-0.004

0.013

-0.001

0.018

0.008

(p-val)

(0.81)

(0.88)

(0.85)

(0.88)

(0.88)

(0.75)

(0.98)

(0.53)

(0.77)

Net Flows Lag 1

0.208

0.391

0.354

0.342

0.307

0.152

0.126

0.370

0.154

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Intercept

Returns

Lag 2

0.115

0.042

0.015

0.117

0.054

0.139

0.114

0.053

0.138

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.18)

(0.79)

(0.00)

(0.18)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.18)

(0.00)

Lag 3

0.049

0.088

0.094

0.027

0.130

0.108

0.118

0.182

0.080

(p-val)

(0.11)

(0.00)

(0.09)

(0.45)

(0.00)

(0.02)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Lag 4

0.047

0.052

-0.005

0.098

0.144

0.079

0.020

-0.028

0.100

(p-val)

(0.13)

(0.09)

(0.93)

(0.01)

(0.00)

(0.08)

(0.62)

(0.48)

(0.00)

Lag 5

0.085

0.102

0.060

0.047

0.100

0.055

0.078

0.149

0.083

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.24)

(0.15)

(0.01)

(0.22)

(0.06)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Lag 1

0.160

0.237

0.178

0.204

0.287

0.059

0.028

-0.108

-0.034

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.18)

(0.51)

(0.00)

(0.21)

Lag 2

0.031

-0.079

-0.002

0.010

-0.038

-0.075

0.019

-0.045

-0.006

(p-val)

(0.28)

(0.00)

(0.97)

(0.75)

(0.26)

(0.09)

(0.66)

(0.14)

(0.84)

Lag 3

-0.002

0.010

0.005

-0.027

-0.063

-0.052

0.040

0.031

0.035

(p-val)

(0.95)

(0.68)

(0.92)

(0.36)

(0.06)

(0.24)

(0.35)

(0.31)

(0.19)

0.051

Lag 4

-0.032

-0.037

-0.004

-0.038

-0.119

-0.060

0.033

-0.060

(p-val)

(0.25)

(0.14)

(0.94)

(0.19)

(0.00)

(0.17)

(0.44)

(0.04)

(0.06)

Lag 5

-0.034

-0.041

-0.014

-0.016

-0.087

-0.013

-0.010

-0.018

-0.009

(p-val)

(0.23)

(0.10)

(0.77)

(0.59)

(0.01)

(0.76)

(0.80)

(0.53)

(0.74)

42

Adj. R2

0.162
0.000

Granger 1

0.346
0.000

0.219
0.011

0.307
0.000

0.391
0.000

0.093
0.147

0.068
0.613

0.399
0.000

0.117
0.198

Panel B: Return Equations

East Asia

South Asia

Indonesia

Korea

Phil.

Taiwan

Thailand

India

Others

Sri Lanka Slovenia

S. Africa

-0.022

-0.001

-0.079

-0.011

-0.009

0.048

-0.001

0.024

0.042

(p-val)

(0.43)

(0.96)

(0.10)

(0.74)

(0.79)

(0.27)

(0.99)

(0.50)

(0.13)

Net Flows Lag 1

0.004

0.107

-0.020

0.196

0.157

0.167

-0.063

-0.132

0.017

(p-val)

(0.91)

(0.00)

(0.73)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.12)

(0.01)

(0.57)

Lag 2

0.054

0.100

-0.096

0.012

0.013

0.018

-0.027

0.080

-0.006

(p-val)

(0.11)

(0.01)

(0.12)

(0.77)

(0.81)

(0.70)

(0.50)

(0.11)

(0.83)

Lag 3

0.006

-0.017

0.034

-0.125

-0.005

0.056

-0.031

0.071

0.007

(p-val)

(0.85)

(0.66)

(0.59)

(0.00)

(0.93)

(0.24)

(0.45)

(0.15)

(0.81)

Lag 4

-0.014

-0.039

0.089

0.058

0.054

0.021

0.082

-0.069

-0.028

Intercept

(p-val)

(0.67)

(0.30)

(0.15)

(0.17)

(0.30)

(0.66)

(0.05)

(0.16)

(0.35)

Lag 5

0.004

0.002

0.086

-0.009

-0.051

-0.037

0.010

-0.048

0.005

(p-val)

(0.90)

(0.96)

(0.13)

(0.82)

(0.26)

(0.42)

(0.81)

(0.29)

(0.86)

Returns Lag 1

0.139

0.069

0.126

-0.031

0.051

-0.020

0.268

0.208

0.136

2

Adj. R

Granger 2

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.36)

(0.20)

(0.66)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Lag 2

-0.022

-0.135

-0.027

0.005

-0.043

0.000

0.019

0.114

0.061

(p-val)

(0.49)

(0.00)

(0.61)

(0.89)

(0.31)

(1.00)

(0.66)

(0.00)

(0.03)

Lag 3

-0.049

-0.076

-0.039

0.007

-0.057

-0.014

0.075

-0.065

-0.012

(p-val)

(0.11)

(0.01)

(0.46)

(0.85)

(0.17)

(0.76)

(0.08)

(0.09)

(0.68)

Lag 4

-0.033

-0.043

0.029

-0.085

-0.043

0.005

-0.035

-0.037

-0.046

(p-val)

(0.28)

(0.16)

(0.58)

(0.01)

(0.30)

(0.90)

(0.41)

(0.33)

(0.10)

Lag 5

-0.016

-0.072

-0.080

-0.001

0.006

-0.016

0.090

-0.038

-0.002

(p-val)

(0.59)

(0.02)

(0.12)

(0.97)

(0.88)

(0.71)

(0.03)

(0.31)

(0.96)

0.018
0.667

0.039
0.000

0.026
0.073

0.036
0.000

0.021
0.012

0.018
0.002

0.085
0.227

0.078
0.007

0.019
0.943

43

Panel C: Return Equations with Contemporaneous Flows included

East Asia

South Asia

Indonesia

Korea

Phil.

Taiwan

Thailand

India

Others

Sri Lanka Slovenia S. Africa

-0.024

-0.002

-0.082

-0.012

-0.007

0.046

0.000

0.024

0.042

(p-val)

(0.35)

(0.93)

(0.07)

(0.70)

(0.83)

(0.29)

(0.99)

(0.50)

(0.13)

Net Flows Lag 0

0.402

0.303

0.389

0.313

0.567

0.192

0.072

-0.006

-0.085

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.07)

(0.90)

(0.00)

Intercept

Lag 1

-0.080

-0.011

-0.158

0.089

-0.018

0.138

-0.072

-0.130

0.030

(p-val)

(0.01)

(0.75)

(0.01)

(0.03)

(0.71)

(0.00)

(0.08)

(0.01)

(0.31)

Lag 2

0.007

0.087

-0.102

-0.024

-0.018

-0.008

-0.036

0.080

0.005

(p-val)

(0.81)

(0.02)

(0.08)

(0.55)

(0.69)

(0.86)

(0.39)

(0.11)

(0.86)

Lag 3

-0.013

-0.043

-0.003

-0.133

-0.078

0.035

-0.040

0.072

0.014

(p-val)

(0.67)

(0.24)

(0.96)

(0.00)

(0.09)

(0.45)

(0.33)

(0.15)

(0.64)

Lag 4

-0.033

-0.055

0.091

0.027

-0.028

0.005

0.081

-0.069

-0.020

(p-val)

(0.29)

(0.13)

(0.12)

(0.50)

(0.55)

(0.91)

(0.05)

(0.16)

(0.51)

Lag 5

-0.030

-0.029

0.063

-0.023

-0.107

-0.048

0.004

-0.048

0.012

(p-val)

(0.31)

(0.37)

(0.24)

(0.53)

(0.01)

(0.30)

(0.92)

(0.31)

(0.68)

Returns Lag 1

0.075

-0.003

0.056

-0.095

-0.111

-0.031

0.266

0.208

0.133

(p-val)

(0.01)

(0.93)

(0.25)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.48)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

2

Adj. R

Granger 2

Lag 2

-0.034

-0.111

-0.026

0.002

-0.021

0.014

0.017

0.114

0.061

(p-val)

(0.24)

(0.00)

(0.59)

(0.96)

(0.58)

(0.75)

(0.68)

(0.00)

(0.03)

Lag 3

-0.048

-0.079

-0.041

0.015

-0.022

-0.004

0.072

-0.065

-0.009

(p-val)

(0.09)

(0.01)

(0.41)

(0.65)

(0.57)

(0.93)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.76)

Lag 4

-0.020

-0.032

0.030

-0.073

0.024

0.017

-0.037

-0.037

-0.042

(p-val)

(0.49)

(0.28)

(0.54)

(0.03)

(0.52)

(0.70)

(0.38)

(0.33)

(0.14)

Lag 5

-0.003

-0.059

-0.074

0.004

0.056

-0.014

0.091

-0.038

-0.002

(p-val)

(0.92)

(0.04)

(0.12)

(0.91)

(0.14)

(0.75)

(0.03)

(0.31)

(0.93)

0.153
0.032

0.098
0.044

0.143
0.001

0.102
0.005

0.216
0.002

0.050
0.054

0.089
0.148

0.077
0.015

0.024
0.837

44

Panel D: Flow Equations with Contemporaneous Returns included

East Asia

South Asia

Indonesia

Korea

Phil.

Taiwan

Thailand

India

Others

Sri Lanka Slovenia S. Africa

0.014

0.004

0.033

0.006

-0.001

0.005

-0.001

0.018

0.011

(p-val)

(0.57)

(0.86)

(0.42)

(0.81)

(0.97)

(0.91)

(0.98)

(0.53)

(0.68)

Net Flows Lag 1

0.207

0.369

0.360

0.298

0.252

0.123

0.130

0.370

0.156

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Intercept

Lag 2

0.097

0.022

0.045

0.114

0.050

0.135

0.116

0.053

0.137

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.47)

(0.39)

(0.00)

(0.17)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.18)

(0.00)

Lag 3

0.047

0.092

0.084

0.055

0.132

0.098

0.120

0.183

0.081

(p-val)

(0.10)

(0.00)

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.00)

(0.03)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.098

Lag 4

0.052

0.060

-0.033

0.085

0.125

0.075

0.014

-0.028

(p-val)

(0.07)

(0.04)

(0.53)

(0.01)

(0.00)

(0.09)

(0.73)

(0.47)

(0.00)

Lag 5

0.084

0.102

0.033

0.049

0.118

0.062

0.078

0.148

0.083

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.49)

(0.12)

(0.00)

(0.16)

(0.06)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Returns Lag 0

0.343

0.206

0.313

0.225

0.353

0.178

0.075

-0.004

-0.076

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.07)

(0.90)

(0.00)

Lag 1

0.112

0.223

0.139

0.212

0.268

0.062

0.008

-0.108

-0.023

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.14)

(0.86)

(0.00)

(0.39)

Lag 2

0.038

-0.051

0.007

0.008

-0.023

-0.075

0.018

-0.045

-0.001

2

Adj. R

Granger 1

(p-val)

(0.15)

(0.03)

(0.88)

(0.77)

(0.44)

(0.08)

(0.68)

(0.14)

(0.97)

Lag 3

0.015

0.026

0.017

-0.028

-0.043

-0.049

0.034

0.030

0.034

(p-val)

(0.57)

(0.29)

(0.70)

(0.32)

(0.15)

(0.25)

(0.42)

(0.32)

(0.20)

Lag 4

-0.021

-0.028

-0.012

-0.019

-0.103

-0.061

0.035

-0.061

0.047

(p-val)

(0.42)

(0.25)

(0.78)

(0.50)

(0.00)

(0.16)

(0.41)

(0.04)

(0.08)

Lag 5

-0.028

-0.027

0.011

-0.015

-0.089

-0.010

-0.017

-0.018

-0.009

(p-val)

(0.28)

(0.27)

(0.79)

(0.59)

(0.00)

(0.81)

(0.68)

(0.53)

(0.73)

0.277
0.000

0.386
0.000

0.313
0.062

0.355
0.000

0.512
0.000

0.122
0.126

0.072
0.783

0.398
0.000

0.122
0.311

45

Table III: Correlation Matrix of Flows and Returns
This table reports correlations between net flows and returns from nine capital markets along with correlations with four regional indices. Net
Flows are defined as (buy value - sell value) by foreign investors scaled by the previous day market capitalization. Flows above the 99th percentile
of the daily net flow distribution are set equal to the 99th percentile point. Returns and scaled net flows are all expressed in local currency and in
percentage terms. A ‘*’ indicates a correlation that is significant at the five percent level.
Indonesia
Korea
flow ret flow ret

Philippines Taiwan
flow ret flow ret

Thailand
India
flow ret flow ret

Sri Lanka Slovenia
S. Africa
flow ret flow ret flow ret

Pac. Eur. N.Am.
ret
ret
ret

Indonesia Ret 0.39 *
Korea
Flow 0.19 * 0.13 *
Ret

0.06 * 0.16 * 0.20 *

Philippines Flow 0.16 * 0.12 * 0.07
Ret

Taiwan

Flow 0.19 * 0.14 * 0.19 * 0.23 * 0.17 * 0.19 *
Ret

Thailand

0.12 * 0.14 * 0.10 * 0.20 * -0.01 0.13 * 0.28 *

Flow 0.21 * 0.31 * 0.52 * 0.25 * 0.30 * 0.31 * 0.21 * 0.20 *
Ret

India

0.04

0.12 * 0.17 * 0.17 * 0.21 * 0.34 *

0.18 * 0.37 * 0.20 * 0.35 * 0.13 * 0.26 * 0.26 * 0.21 * 0.44 *

Flow 0.18 * 0.04
Ret

0.08

0.19 * 0.05

0.08

0.15

*

Sri Lanka Flow 0.03 -0.05 -0.01
Ret

Slovenia
S. Africa

0.06

0.05

0.02 -0.01
*

Flow -0.11 -0.07

*

Ret

*

0.07

0.10

Flow 0.03

0.03

0.01
0.11

0.17

0.04 0.15 * 0.25 * 0.14 * 0.16 * 0.11 *
*

0.08 0.11 * 0.17 * 0.13 * 0.16 * 0.14 * 0.23 *
0.05

0.02

0.06

0.02 -0.01 0.05

0.02

0.04

0.10 * 0.11 * 0.06 -0.02

0.04 -0.02 0.02
*

0.10 * -0.03

0.08 0.02

0.07

0.02 0.10

*

0.05

0.01

0.00

0.07

0.09

0.04

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.02 -0.02 -0.05 0.02 -0.04 -0.01

0.03

*

0.00

0.05

0.03

0.04

0.01

0.05 -0.09

0.07 *

*

0.03

0.04

0.02

0.01 -0.10 *

0.05

0.05 -0.09 * -0.01

Ret

0.11 * 0.23 * 0.09 * 0.25 * 0.07 0.17 * 0.20 * 0.20 * 0.23 * 0.34 * 0.11 * 0.23 * -0.05

0.04 -0.06

0.11 * -0.08 *

Pacific
Ret
lag 1
Europe
Ret
lag 1
N. America Ret
lag 1
Emerging Ret
lag 1

0.13 * 0.28 * 0.12 * 0.32 * 0.05 0.25 * 0.24 * 0.25 * 0.24 * 0.38 * 0.11 * 0.17 * 0.04

0.06

0.02

0.07 -0.04

0.05

0.01

0.07 -0.01 -0.05

0.09

*

0.06

*

0.07

*

0.17

*

0.13

*

0.08

*

0.08

*

0.03 0.06

*

0.23
0.10

*

0.14

*

0.12

*

0.20

*

0.13

*

0.09

*

0.25

*

0.13

*

*

*

0.38 *

0.10 * 0.18 * 0.15 * 0.22 * 0.07 0.23 * 0.25 * 0.19 * 0.24 * 0.20 * 0.09 * 0.17 * 0.02

0.04 -0.05

0.13 * -0.05

0.15 * 0.29 * 0.07 *

0.02 -0.05 -0.05 -0.02

0.20 * 0.10 * 0.43 *

0.04

0.09 -0.05 0.04 -0.02

0.03

0.04

0.06

0.03

0.00 -0.07

0.11 * 0.22 * 0.13 * 0.28 * 0.01 0.23 * 0.27 * 0.23 * 0.19 * 0.22 * 0.12 * 0.17 * 0.03

0.07

0.23 * 0.46 * 0.19 * 0.33 * 0.07 0.27 * 0.31 * 0.26 * 0.33 * 0.54 * 0.19 * 0.34 * 0.03

0.08 * 0.00

0.22 * -0.03

*

*

0.16

*

0.13

*

0.22

*

0.07

*

*

0.15 0.14

*

0.31

46

*

0.14

*

0.27

*

0.13

*

0.12

*

0.04

0.07

0.11

0.00
0.01

0.58

0.04
*

0.10 -0.06

0.00

0.11

*

0.00 -0.05

*

0.06

0.03 -0.02

0.44 *

0.01

0.00

0.23 -0.02 0.12

*

*

0.18 * -0.06 * 0.43 * 0.43 * 0.40 * 0.01
0.08

0.00

0.50 * 0.49 * 0.41 * 0.08 *
0.04

0.07 * -0.06 * 0.03

Table IV
VAR: Flows with Regional Index Returns
This table presents estimation results from the structural bivariate VAR below. ri,t denotes the daily
percentage continuously compounded market return for country i. fi,t denotes the daily net flow (buy
value – sell value) originated by foreign investors scaled by previous day market capitalization for
country i, the α’s are constant intercept terms, b(L) denotes a polynomial in the lag operator L, εri,t and εfi,t
are zero mean disturbance terms that are assumed to be intertemporally uncorrelated. Scaled net flows are
expressed in percentage terms. xt is a vector of daily returns on regional market indices, which are
considered to be exogenously determined. Five lags are used for all endogenous variables as well as
exogenous variables but only the first two are reported. All variables are expressed in local currency and
the system is estimated separately for each country. Panel A presents the flow equation results for the
basic VAR. Panel B displays similar results for a structural VAR with contemporaneous local market
returns included in the flow equation. The equation for the VAR with the contemporaneous local market
return included is as follows:
  0 
 r  αi, r  b (L) b (L)  r
ε ri, t 
12  i, t −1  + 
 +  11
 i, t  = 
A
L
x
(
)
+
+



t −1 ε f i, t 
 fi, t  αi, f  b21(L) b22(L) fi, t −1 bcri, t  i


Panel A: Flow Equations, no contemporaneous local returns
East Asia
Indonesia Korea

Phil.

South Asia

Others

Taiwan Thailand India Sri Lanka Slovenia S. Africa

-0.004

-0.007

0.009

-0.004

-0.015

0.008

-0.004

0.023

0.010

(p-val)

(0.87)

(0.77)

(0.83)

(0.87)

(0.59)

(0.84)

(0.92)

(0.42)

(0.72)

Net Flows Lag 1
(p-val)

0.212

0.384

0.354

0.301

0.318

0.134

0.125

0.370

0.155

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.115

0.028

0.013

0.150

0.057

0.132

0.110

0.057

0.140

(0.00)

(0.36)

(0.81)

(0.00)

(0.17)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.15)

(0.00)

Intercept

Returns

Pacific

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.148

0.206

0.164

0.168

0.270

0.047

0.028

-0.104

-0.047

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.31)

(0.51)

(0.00)

(0.20)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.035

-0.097

-0.006

0.016

-0.036

-0.066

0.019

-0.052

-0.002

(0.27)

(0.00)

(0.90)

(0.57)

(0.33)

(0.16)

(0.67)

(0.10)

(0.96)

0.009

0.039

-0.040

0.009

-0.013

0.079

0.027

-0.009

0.004

(0.78)

(0.15)

(0.47)

(0.79)

(0.70)

(0.12)

(0.60)

(0.81)

(0.92)

0.022

0.048

-0.064

0.005

-0.021

0.024

0.017

0.033

0.044

(0.49)

(0.08)

(0.25)

(0.87)

(0.53)

(0.63)

(0.74)

(0.35)

(0.19)

0.029

0.073

0.067

0.059

0.122

0.005

-0.023

-0.039

0.001

(0.40)

(0.01)

(0.26)

(0.09)

(0.00)

(0.92)

(0.67)

(0.31)

(0.99)

Lag 1
(p-val)
Lag 2
(p-val)

Europe

North
America

Lag 1
(p-val)
Lag 2
(p-val)

0.014

-0.028

0.070

-0.045

-0.011

-0.026

-0.010

-0.053

-0.024

(0.68)

(0.35)

(0.27)

(0.21)

(0.76)

(0.65)

(0.86)

(0.18)

(0.54)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.095

0.148

0.033

0.247

0.123

0.095

0.020

0.031

-0.062

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.51)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.05)

(0.67)

(0.34)

(0.04)

-0.024

-0.076

-0.045

0.034

-0.052

0.028

-0.077

0.009

0.035

(0.48)

(0.01)

(0.46)

(0.33)

(0.14)

(0.62)

(0.16)

(0.82)

(0.32)

Lag 2
(p-val)

47

All
Emerging

Lag 1
(p-val)
Lag 2
(p-val)

Adj. R2

0.014

0.045

0.061

0.092

-0.013

-0.020

0.071

0.038

0.029

(0.69)

(0.12)

(0.26)

(0.01)

(0.73)

(0.71)

(0.17)

(0.31)

(0.41)

-0.022

0.013

0.048

0.027

0.005

-0.021

-0.017

0.027

-0.016

(0.54)

(0.66)

(0.38)

(0.42)

(0.90)

(0.70)

(0.75)

(0.48)

(0.66)

0.170

0.391

0.216

0.394

0.427

0.100

0.050

0.399

0.119

Panel B: Flow Equations with contemporaneous local returns
East Asia

South Asia

Others

Indonesia Korea Philippines Taiwan Thailand India Sri Lanka Slovenia S. Africa
(p-val)

0.010
(0.67)

-0.004
(0.87)

0.038
(0.36)

-0.002
(0.94)

-0.007
(0.77)

0.002
(0.97)

-0.003
(0.94)

0.023
(0.42)

0.011
(0.69)

Net Flows Lag 1
(p-val)

0.207
(0.00)

0.368
(0.00)

0.345
(0.00)

0.274
(0.00)

0.263
(0.00)

0.107
(0.02)

0.130
(0.00)

0.369
(0.00)

0.155
(0.00)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.100
(0.00)

0.011
(0.71)

0.038
(0.48)

0.149
(0.00)

0.053
(0.15)

0.131
(0.00)

0.112
(0.01)

0.058
(0.15)

0.140
(0.00)

Lag 0
(p-val)

0.339
(0.00)

0.158
(0.00)

0.331
(0.00)

0.151
(0.00)

0.330
(0.00)

0.164
(0.00)

0.085
(0.05)

-0.007
(0.82)

-0.052
(0.08)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.112
(0.00)

0.200
(0.00)

0.148
(0.00)

0.175
(0.00)

0.269
(0.00)

0.046
(0.31)

0.007
(0.88)

-0.103
(0.00)

-0.038
(0.30)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.043
(0.15)

-0.079
(0.00)

0.019
(0.69)

0.017
(0.55)

-0.012
(0.73)

-0.060
(0.19)

0.016
(0.71)

-0.051
(0.11)

0.001
(0.97)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.014
(0.63)

0.037
(0.17)

-0.030
(0.56)

-0.002
(0.96)

0.006
(0.84)

0.077
(0.13)

0.029
(0.56)

-0.008
(0.81)

-0.004
(0.91)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.019
(0.53)

0.047
(0.08)

-0.089
(0.09)

0.004
(0.90)

-0.015
(0.64)

0.027
(0.59)

0.018
(0.73)

0.033
(0.35)

0.043
(0.20)

Lag 1
(p-val)

-0.009
(0.78)

0.054
(0.07)

0.023
(0.69)

0.050
(0.15)

0.097
(0.00)

-0.003
(0.95)

-0.020
(0.71)

-0.039
(0.31)

-0.006
(0.88)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.007
(0.83)

-0.033
(0.27)

0.089
(0.13)

-0.028
(0.43)

-0.028
(0.40)

-0.028
(0.61)

-0.016
(0.78)

-0.052
(0.19)

-0.024
(0.53)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.035
(0.21)

0.115
(0.00)

-0.038
(0.44)

0.217
(0.00)

0.057
(0.05)

0.073
(0.12)

0.013
(0.79)

0.032
(0.33)

-0.039
(0.24)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.010
(0.76)

-0.061
(0.04)

-0.077
(0.18)

0.038
(0.27)

-0.059
(0.07)

0.027
(0.62)

-0.082
(0.13)

0.008
(0.83)

0.035
(0.32)

All
Lag 1
Emerging (p-val)

-0.003
(0.92)

0.045
(0.12)

0.063
(0.21)

0.081
(0.01)

-0.021
(0.55)

-0.012
(0.82)

0.063
(0.23)

0.038
(0.31)

0.030
(0.39)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.003
(0.93)

0.021
(0.46)

0.059
(0.25)

0.024
(0.47)

0.004
(0.91)

-0.031
(0.56)

-0.018
(0.73)

0.027
(0.47)

-0.015
(0.67)

0.275

0.413

0.311

0.414

0.524

0.124

0.055

0.398

0.120

Intercept

Returns

Pacific

Europe

North
America

Adj. R2

48

Table V
VAR: Flows with Regional Index Returns and FX Rates
This table presents estimation results from the structural bivariate VAR below. ri,t denotes the daily
percentage continuously compounded market return for country i. fi,t denotes the daily net flow (buy value
– sell value) originated by foreign investors scaled by previous day market capitalization for country i, the
α’s are constant intercept terms, b(L) denotes a polynomial in the lag operator L, εri,t and εfi,t are zero mean
disturbance terms that are assumed to be intertemporally uncorrelated Scaled net flows are expressed in
percentage terms. xt is a vector of daily returns on regional market indices, which are considered to be
exogenously determined. FXt is the percentage change in the local currency exchange rate with the US
dollar. Contemporaneous local market returns are included in the flow equation. All variables are
expressed in local currency and the system is estimated separately for each country. Five lags are used for
all endogenous variables as well as exogenous variables but only the first two are reported. The table
presents results for the flow equations only. The structural VAR equation is as follows:
r
 ri, t  αi, r  b (L) b (L)  ri, t −1   0 
c1(L)FXt −1  ε i, t 
11
12
+
 =
+
+
+
 + A (L)x


t −1 c2 (L)FXt −1 ε f i, t 
 fi, t  αi, f  b21(L) b22(L) fi, t −1 bcri, t  i



East Asia
Indonesia Korea

Phil.

Taiwan Thailand

South Asia
Sri
Lanka
India

Others
Slovenia S. Africa

(p-val)

-0.006
(0.82)

-0.009
(0.67)

0.035
(0.40)

-0.001
(0.98)

-0.008
(0.75)

0.001
(0.99)

-0.008
(0.84)

0.027
(0.34)

0.012
(0.65)

Net Flows Lag 1
(p-val)

0.220
(0.00)

0.361
(0.00)

0.345
(0.00)

0.266
(0.00)

0.261
(0.00)

0.117
(0.01)

0.127
(0.00)

0.401
(0.00)

0.156
(0.00)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.089
(0.00)

0.007
(0.82)

0.049
(0.36)

0.150
(0.00)

0.054
(0.14)

0.124
(0.01)

0.125
(0.00)

0.072
(0.09)

0.140
(0.00)

Lag 0
(p-val)

0.338
(0.00)

0.151
(0.00)

0.390
(0.00)

0.146
(0.00)

0.328
(0.00)

0.159
(0.00)

0.087
(0.05)

0.002
(0.94)

-0.051
(0.09)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.109
(0.00)

0.197
(0.00)

0.186
(0.00)

0.168
(0.00)

0.269
(0.00)

0.058
(0.21)

0.005
(0.90)

-0.084
(0.01)

-0.032
(0.40)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.044
(0.14)

-0.074
(0.00)

-0.008
(0.88)

0.018
(0.52)

-0.013
(0.71)

-0.067
(0.15)

0.018
(0.69)

-0.084
(0.01)

0.001
(0.98)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.015
(0.62)

0.039
(0.15)

-0.040
(0.44)

-0.007
(0.83)

0.008
(0.81)

0.073
(0.15)

0.031
(0.54)

-0.017
(0.63)

-0.005
(0.88)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.020
(0.50)

0.052
(0.06)

-0.079
(0.13)

0.005
(0.87)

-0.014
(0.65)

0.029
(0.56)

0.020
(0.69)

0.027
(0.43)

0.043
(0.19)

Lag 1
(p-val)

-0.015
(0.65)

0.053
(0.07)

0.004
(0.94)

0.054
(0.12)

0.100
(0.00)

-0.002
(0.97)

-0.020
(0.72)

-0.012
(0.75)

-0.003
(0.93)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.009
(0.78)

-0.036
(0.23)

0.087
(0.14)

-0.025
(0.48)

-0.030
(0.38)

-0.029
(0.61)

-0.017
(0.76)

-0.051
(0.20)

-0.027
(0.50)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.038
(0.18)

0.120
(0.00)

-0.051
(0.29)

0.220
(0.00)

0.058
(0.04)

0.078
(0.10)

0.014
(0.77)

0.018
(0.58)

-0.038
(0.25)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.006
(0.85)

-0.059
(0.04)

-0.060
(0.29)

0.035
(0.31)

-0.058
(0.07)

0.026
(0.64)

-0.085
(0.12)

0.021
(0.58)

0.034
(0.33)

Intercept

Returns

Pacific

Europe

North
America

49

All
Lag 1
Emerging (p-val)

0.014
(0.67)

0.052
(0.07)

0.072
(0.15)

0.077
(0.02)

-0.011
(0.76)

-0.012
(0.82)

0.060
(0.25)

-0.003
(0.94)

0.030
(0.40)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.001
(0.98)

0.029
(0.31)

0.058
(0.26)

0.033
(0.32)

0.014
(0.71)

-0.031
(0.56)

-0.019
(0.71)

0.022
(0.55)

-0.016
(0.66)

FX (US$) Lag 1
(p-val)

0.084
(0.00)

0.026
(0.27)

0.153
(0.00)

-0.052
(0.06)

0.011
(0.69)

0.070
(0.11)

0.055
(0.19)

0.018
(0.55)

0.030
(0.27)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.023
(0.37)

0.054
(0.02)

0.027
(0.58)

0.020
(0.48)

0.019
(0.48)

-0.048
(0.27)

0.021
(0.62)

0.006
(0.85)

-0.013
(0.65)

0.282

0.415

0.323

0.414

0.525

0.124

0.051

0.467

0.119

Adj. R2

50

Table VI
VAR: Flows with Regional Index Returns, FX Rates and Foreign Flows
This table presents parameter estimates, standard errors and adjusted R2s from the structural VAR below.
ri,t denotes the daily percentage continuously compounded market return for country i. fi,t denotes the
daily net flow (buy value – sell value) originated by foreign investors scaled by previous day market
capitalization for country i. The α’s are constant intercept terms, b(L) denotes a polynomial in the lag
operator L, and εri,t and εfi,t are zero mean disturbance terms that are assumed to be intertemporally
uncorrelated. Scaled net flows are expressed in percentage terms. xt is a vector of daily returns on regional
market indices, which are considered to be exogenously determined. Contemporaneous market returns are
included. FXt is the percentage change in the local currency exchange rate with the US dollar. FFt is the
aggregate net flow to all countries other than country i: this aggregate is computed as sum of standardized
net flows in other countries. All variables are expressed in local currency and the system is estimated
separately for each country. Five lags are used for all endogenous variables as well as exogenous
variables but only two are reported. The table presents results for the East Asian countries only. The
equation for the structural VAR is as follows:
r
 r  αi, r  b (L) b (L)  r
  0 
ci,1(L)FXt −1   di,1(L)FFt −1  ε i, t 
i
,
t
i
,
t
1
−
11
12
+
 =
+
+
+
+
 + A (L) x


t −1 ci,2 (L)FXt −1  di,2 (L)FFt −1 ε f i, t 
 fi, t  αi, f  b21(L) b22(L) fi, t −1 bcri, t  i



Flow Equations
Indonesia

Returns

Pacific

Europe

North
America

All

Taiwan Thailand

Indonesia Korea

Taiwan Thailand

(p-val)

0.007
(0.81)

-0.015
(0.55)

0.016
(0.60)

-0.032
(0.32)

-0.160
(0.00)

-0.053
(0.07)

0.054
(0.15)

-0.078
(0.08)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.234
(0.00)

0.358
(0.00)

0.322
(0.00)

0.263
(0.00)

0.076
(0.02)

0.074
(0.03)

0.006
(0.88)

0.123
(0.02)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.081
(0.01)

0.004
(0.91)

0.165
(0.00)

0.034
(0.37)

0.019
(0.55)

0.108
(0.00)

-0.045
(0.32)

0.005
(0.92)

Lag 0
(p-val)

0.284
(0.00)

0.109
(0.00)

-0.012
(0.66)

0.307
(0.00)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.084
(0.03)

0.179
(0.00)

0.005
(0.84)

0.293
(0.00)

-0.018
(0.67)

0.062
(0.04)

0.050
(0.13)

0.009
(0.86)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.088
(0.02)

-0.065
(0.02)

-0.016
(0.55)

-0.035
(0.36)

-0.039
(0.36)

-0.127
(0.00)

0.051
(0.13)

-0.068
(0.20)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.019
(0.50)

0.048
(0.06)

0.014
(0.66)

-0.008
(0.80)

0.041
(0.20)

0.090
(0.00)

0.003
(0.94)

0.026
(0.54)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.029
(0.32)

0.031
(0.24)

-0.031
(0.33)

0.011
(0.71)

-0.011
(0.74)

0.009
(0.78)

-0.001
(0.98)

-0.041
(0.33)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.007
(0.83)

0.065
(0.02)

0.052
(0.12)

0.085
(0.01)

0.070
(0.04)

0.147
(0.00)

0.050
(0.24)

0.105
(0.01)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.028
(0.37)

-0.031
(0.26)

-0.033
(0.32)

-0.025
(0.44)

0.060
(0.08)

0.045
(0.17)

0.007
(0.88)

0.025
(0.57)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.050
(0.07)

0.137
(0.00)

0.263
(0.00)

0.082
(0.00)

0.138
(0.00)

0.172
(0.00)

-0.046
(0.21)

0.168
(0.00)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.013
(0.67)

-0.056
(0.04)

0.053
(0.12)

-0.041
(0.18)

-0.083
(0.01)

-0.116
(0.00)

-0.022
(0.61)

-0.004
(0.93)

Lag 1

0.174

0.040

-0.075

0.094

-0.064

0.040

-0.026

-0.047

Intercept
Net
Flows

Korea

Return Equations

51

Emerging

FX (US$)

Foreign
Flows

Adj. R2

(p-val)

(0.00)

(0.11)

(0.01)

(0.00)

(0.08)

(0.18)

(0.48)

(0.25)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.031
(0.35)

0.050
(0.05)

0.023
(0.43)

0.038
(0.20)

-0.091
(0.01)

0.022
(0.47)

0.023
(0.55)

-0.030
(0.47)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.030
(0.40)

0.047
(0.11)

0.114
(0.00)

-0.022
(0.56)

0.099
(0.01)

-0.009
(0.80)

-0.003
(0.94)

0.011
(0.84)

Lag 2
(p-val)

-0.027
(0.46)

0.039
(0.19)

0.080
(0.02)

0.020
(0.60)

-0.014
(0.71)

-0.055
(0.11)

0.063
(0.15)

0.006
(0.91)

Lag 1
(p-val)

0.138
(0.67)

0.799
(0.02)

-0.235
(0.40)

0.415
(0.18)

-0.585
(0.10)

0.775
(0.06)

0.086
(0.81)

0.141
(0.74)

Lag 2
(p-val)

0.220
(0.51)

-0.300
(0.39)

-0.514
(0.08)

0.738
(0.02)

-0.061
(0.87)

-0.045
(0.91)

0.281
(0.44)

-0.162
(0.71)

0.249

0.405

0.377

0.523

0.103

0.183

-0.004

0.091

52

Figure 1
Model Comparative Statics
The base case is the symmetric case where the return volatility of each stock is 30%, wealth is 10 in each
country, the price of each stock is 1, each stock has 10 shares, and δD and δF are equal to 3%.
Figure 1A
This Figure shows the net equity flow corresponding to a doubling of the foreign stock price without
extrapolative expectations.

Net equity flow

0
-0.2

15

0

WD

10
0.1
0.2

5

0.3
0.4
0.5

δ
Figure 1B
This Figure differs from Figure 1A in that it takes into account extrapolative expectations.

Net equity flow
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

15

0

10
0.1
0.2

5

0.3
0.4
0.5

δ

53

WD

Figure 1C
This Figure shows the change in the equilibrium expected return of the foreign stock when domestic
investors have extrapolative expectations and the price of the stock doubles.

Change in expected return

0.05
0
15

-0.05
0

10
0.1
0.2

5

0.3
0.4

WD

0.5

δ

Figure 1D
This Figure shows the net equity flow corresponding to a doubling of the domestic stock price with
extrapolative expectations.

Net equity flow
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5

15
10

0
0.1
0.2

5

0.3
0.4
0.5

δ

54

WD

Figure 2
Market Index and Cumulative Standardized Net Flows by country
The plots show accumulated daily net foreign capital flows on right axis, darker line and stock market index levels on the left axis, lighter or
dotted line for nine countries. Net capital flows are computed as aggregate (buy value – sell value) expressed in percentage of the previous day
market cap. Flows and market indices are denominated in local currency.
In d o n e s i a
Indonesia

K o rea
Korea

2.5

25
20

2.0

P h il i p p in e s
Philippines

2.5

25
20

2.0

15
1.5

1.5

0.0

-5

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

0.5

0

0.0

-5

1/96

10/96

8/97

T a iw a n
Taiwan

6/98

4/99

2/00

20

2.0

25
20

2.0

0

0.0

-5

4/99

2/00

6/98

2.5

25
20

2.0

15
10
5

0

0.0

-5

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

0.5

0

0.0

-5

1/96

1/01

10/96

8/97

2.5

25
20

2.0

15
1.5

-5

4/99

2/00

1/01

2.5

25
20

2.0

15
10
1.0

5

0.0

1/01

10
1.0

0

2/00

1.5

10

0.5

4/99

15
1.5

1.0

6/98

S
o u t h Africa
A f r ic a
South

S l o v e n ia
Slovenia

20

1/01

5
0.5

S r i Lanka
Lan ka
Sri

2.0

2/00

1.0

1/96

25

4/99

10

1/01

2.5

6/98

8/97

1.5

5
0.5

8/97

-5

10/96

15

1.0

10/96

0.0

In d i a
India

2.5

10
1.0

1/96

0

1/96

1.5

6/98

0.5

1/01

15
1.5

8/97

5

T h a il a n d
Thailand
25

10/96

10
1.0

5

1/01

2.5

1/96

15
1.5

1.0

0

20

2.0

10

5
0.5

25

15

10
1.0

2.5

5

5
0.5

0

0.0

-5

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

55

4/99

2/00

1/01

0.5

0

0.0

-5

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/01

Figure 3
Standardized Net Flows and Market Returns by country
The plots show daily net foreign capital flows on the left axis, lower series and stock market returns on the right axis, upper series for nine
countries. Net capital flows are computed as aggregate (buy value – sell value) expressed in percentage of the previous day market cap. Market
returns are computed as the continuously compounded change in the Total Market Index. Flows and returns are denominated in local currency.
Indonesia
In d o n e s i a

Korea
K o re a

Philippines
P h il l ip in e s

.2
.1

.1

.0

.0

-.1

-.1

-.2

-.2

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/01

-.2
0.0

0.0

0.0

-.1
0.4

0.4

0.4

.0
0.8

0.8

0.8

.1
1.2

1.2

1.2

.2

.2

1/96

10/96

8/97

T a iw a n
Taiwan

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/96

1/01

10/96

6/98

8/97

T h a il a n d
Thailand

2/00

1/01

In d ia
India

.2

1.2

4/99

.2

.2

1.2

1.2
.1

.1

0.8

0.8
.0

.0

0.4

-.1

.0

0.4

0.4

0.0

.1

0.8

-.1

-.1

0.0

0.0
-.2

-.2

-0.4

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/01

-.2

-0.4

-0.4

1/96

10/96

8/97

S r i Lanka
Lan ka
Sri

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/96

1/01

10/96

8/97

4/99

2/00

1/01

S
o u t h Africa
A f r ic a
South

S lo ve n ia
Slovenia
.2

1.2

6/98

.2

1.2

.2
1.2

.1

0.8

.1

.1

0.8

0.8
.0

0.4

.0

.0

0.4

0.4
-.1

0.0

-.2

-0.4

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/01

-.1

-.1

0.0

0.0
-.2

-0.4

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

56

4/99

2/00

1/01

-.2

-0.4

1/96

10/96

8/97

6/98

4/99

2/00

1/01

Figure 4
Responses of Flows to Local and North American Returns
This table shows Impulse Response functions describing the response of scaled net flows to a one
standard deviation shock in local market returns and in North America index returns. Responses are, also,
expressed in standard deviation units. The time scale on the horizontal axis is expressed in days. Results
are based on the vector auto regression (VAR) specified in Panel A of Table IV. The VAR is estimated
separately for each country with five lags for each endogenous variable and for each exogenous variable.
All returns are expressed in local currency. Shocks are orthogonalized through a Cholesky factorization in
order to account for contemporaneous correlations across equations. For each impulse response functions
we also report the 95% confidence intervals (dotted lines), which are computed by Monte Carlo
simulation.
Local

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5
10

15

20

-1.0

0

5

10

15

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

20

0

5

10

15

20

-1.0

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5
0

5

10

15

20

-1.0

Sri Lanka

1.5

0

5

10

15

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

20

0

5

10

15

20

-1.0

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0

0

5

10

15

20

Slovenia

Korea
Philippines

5

India

1.0

0

0

5

10

15

-1.0

20

0

5

10

15

20

-1.0

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0

0

5

10

15

20

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

0

5

10

15

20

-1.0

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

57

-1.0

0

5

10

North America

1.5

1.0

-1.0

Taiwan

Local

1.5

1.0

-1.0

Thailand

North America

1.5

South Africa

Indonesia

1.5

15

20

-1.0

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

