NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN EQUILIBRIUM

Denis Gromb
David Scharfstein

Working Paper 9001
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9001

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

We would like to thank Matthias Dewatripont, Paul Gompers, Augustin Landier, Josh Lerner, Raghu Rajan,
Per Stromberg as well as participants in seminars at Chicago, Harvard Business School, MIT, NBER, and
Northwestern for valuable comments. This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant
SES 00-79176. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Denis Gromb and David Scharfstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Entrepreneurship in Equilibrium
Denis Gromb and David Scharfstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9001
June 2002
JEL No. G3

ABSTRACT
This paper compares the financing of new ventures in start-ups (entrepreneurship) and in
established firms (intrapreneurship). Intrapreneurship allows established firms to use information on
failed intrapreneurs to redeploy them into other jobs. By contrast, failed entrepreneurs must seek other
jobs in an imperfectly informed external labor market. While this external labor market leads to ex post
inefficient allocations, it provides entrepreneurs with high-powered incentives ex ante. We show that two
types of equilibria can arise (and sometimes coexist). In a low entrepreneurship equilibrium, the market
for failed entrepreneurs is thin, making internal labor markets and intrapreneurship particularly valuable.
In a high entrepreneurship equilibrium, the active labor market reduces the value of internal labor markets
and encourages entrepreneurship. We also show that there can be too little or too much entrepreneurial
activity. There can be too little because entrepreneurs do not take into account their positive effect on the
quality of the labor market. There can be too much because a high quality labor market is bad for
entrepreneurial incentives.

Denis Gromb
London Business School
6 Sussex Place, Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
dgromb@london.edu

David Scharfstein
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dscharf@mit.edu

1

Introduction

IBM spends billions of dollars every year on R&D, much of it aimed at creating new
products and businesses. At the same time, venture capital firms such as Greylock
spend large sums funding R&D at start-up ventures, also with the goal of creating new
products and businesses. Scientists and executives routinely leave large companies
to start their own firms, and sometimes they go back to work for the very firms they
left. What determines whether new ventures are funded by established companies
such as IBM or by venture capitalists such as Greylock? Why do some people choose
to create new products for existing companies while others strike out on their own?
Why are so many new, technology-intensive business ventures undertaken by startups in the U.S., while high-tech entrepreneurship of this sort is much less common in
Europe? Do the diﬀerent rates of entrepreneurship matter?
This paper seeks to address these questions by modeling the choice between entrepreneurship and “intrapreneurship”, i.e., the choice between start-ups and business
venturing by established companies. The key distinction we draw between the two
types of business creation is that internal ventures are funded by firms with related
projects. Thus, failed intrapreneurs can be redeployed by their firms into other jobs.
By contrast, failed entrepreneurs must seek employment at other firms or start other
new ventures.
We argue that the intrapreneurial safety net has both benefits and costs.

The

benefit is that firms learn about the abilities of their managers, thereby enabling them
to keep the good ones for their other projects even if the new venture fails. Thus,
firms can avoid having to hire managers from the general labor market where they
are less well-informed about a job applicant’s abilities. The cost is that the safety net
is bad for incentives; knowing that failure is less costly in an internal venture than in

1

an entrepreneurial venture, intrapreneurs will be less prone to take the necessary (but
personally costly) actions to make the business a success. In deciding whether the
best funding source for a new business is an intrapreneurial firm or an independent
venture capitalist, there is a trade-oﬀ between the informational benefits of an internal
labor market and its adverse incentive eﬀects. The model implies that new ventures
in which incentives are important – those where the payoﬀs from the new business
are potentially quite large – will be undertaken by entrepreneurial firms. And, the
model implies that when the external labor market has many high quality managers
available to replace failed intrapreneurs, the value of the internal labor market is low
and more new ventures will be financed in entrepreneurial firms.
This basic model of the choice of organizational form is combined with a model of
the labor market to generate an equilibrium model of entrepreneurial activity. One
of the key aspects of this labor market model is that no one wants to hire a failed
intrapreneur; the only ones that are on the job market are those that firms have
chosen not to retain, i.e., the ones they learn are bad.1 Failed entrepreneurs, by
contrast, are not stigmatized in this way because venture capitalists have no jobs
to which the entrepreneurs can be redeployed; being on the job market after failing
in a start-up is not as bad a signal as being fired from an established firm. Thus,
if there is a lot of entrepreneurial activity, there will be a large supply of relatively
high quality failed entrepreneurs. This in turn, makes it relatively more attractive
to choose an entrepreneurial form of organization since the informational benefits of
an internal labor market are reduced.
This sort of reasoning suggests that there can be multiple equilibria.

At low

levels of entrepreneurial activity, it pays to set up an intrapreneurial firm – one
1

Literally, we do not need that failed intrapreneurs remain unemployed. All that is needed is

that their prospects be worse than those of failed entrepreneurs.

2

with multiple related projects to which managers can be redeployed if they fail –
because it is hard to find qualified managers in the external labor market.

At high

levels of entrepreneurial activity it pays to be entrepreneurial because it is easy to
find skilled managers; the benefit of internal labor markets is small relative to the
benefit of providing high-powered incentives in entrepreneurial firms.
The model also identifies an externality that may lead to too little entrepreneurial
activity.

As described above, when there are more entrepreneurs, there will be a

greater supply of good managers in the labor market; this increases the payoﬀs to
firms that need new managers.

In deciding on an organizational form, however,

everyone takes as given the choices that others make, and thus take as given the
quality of the labor market for managers.

As a result, would-be entrepreneurs do

not internalize the positive eﬀect they have on the labor market and the payoﬀs to
firms that use it. In equilibrium, there can be too few entrepreneurs.
We also extend the model to show that there can be too much entrepreneurial
activity.

If entrepreneurial activity is high, then it is relatively easy for failed en-

trepreneurs to find jobs in other firms and the penalty for failure is not as high as
it would be were there little entrepreneurial activity. Thus, the decision to become
an entrepreneur reduces the eﬀort of other entrepreneurs, an eﬀect that would-be
entrepreneurs do not take into account when they make their decision of whether to
be entrepreneurial or intrapreneurial.
This paper is related to a number of diﬀerent lines of work. Perhaps the closest
links are to Gertner, Scharfstein and Stein (1994) and Landier (2001a,b). The former paper studies essentially the same question though its emphasis is on the costs
and benefits of internal capital markets. In their model as well as in ours, internal
financing comes with lower-powered incentives: because corporate headquarters controls the firm’s projects, they can extract rents from the manager ex post, thereby
3

reducing his ex ante eﬀort incentives.2 The benefit of internal financing is that if a
project fails assets can be redeployed into other lines of business. Our paper diﬀers
in three ways. First, our model focuses on the redeployability of people, not assets.
Second, the lower incentives in firms stems from the redeployability of people to other
jobs in the firm, not the ability of corporate headquarters to extract rents. Third, in
our model, the choice of organizational form is embedded in a labor market model to
determine the equilibrium level of entrepreneurship.
Landier (2001a) also considers an equilibrium labor-market model of entrepreneurship. Like our model, the capital and labor markets cannot distinguish between
good and bad managers that leave other firms to become entrepreneurs. And, like our
model, there can be multiple equilibria. If the capital market thinks that managers
who leave established firms to start new entrepreneurial ventures do so only because
they have failed at their prior jobs, then no one will want to leave firms to become
entrepreneurs. As a result, there won’t be much entrepreneurial activity. If, instead,
the capital market interprets a departure from an established firm as a sign that the
manager has a great idea – that he would not want to leave a high-paying job to
start a risky, new venture otherwise – then entrepreneurs will get funded and managers will want to start their own firms. In this equilibrium, entrepreneurial activity
will be high. While our model shares with Landier’s the feature that the market’s
perception of firm departures is important in understanding entrepreneurship, our
model diﬀers in our explicit consideration of the costs and benefits of entrepreneurial
and intrapreneurial forms of organization.
Finally, we note that there is a large and growing literature on the financing of
new ventures through venture capital (Berglof,1994, Gompers, 1995, and Hellman
2

This part of the argument is also similar to Anton and Yao (1995) and Wiggins (1995) and is

similar in spirit to Grossman and Hart (1986).

4

1998). These papers, however, focus on understanding the details of these financing
arrangements such as the use of convertible preferred stock, and the allocation of
control rights, and the staging of investments over time. Our model abstracts from
the details of venture capital financing and instead uses a simple contracting model
to capture the incentive issues that arise in the two organizational forms we consider.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes
the basic model of the choice between entrepreneurial and intrapreneurial forms of
organization. Section 3 embeds this model in a labor market model and characterizes
the equilibria that can result. We also analyze the eﬃciency of the equilibria both
from the perspective of industry profit maximization and social welfare maximization.
We conclude the paper in Section 4 with a discussion of the ways in which we plan
to extend the model.

2

The Model

There are three dates – 0, 1, and 2 – and two types of agents, investors and
managers. All are assumed to be risk neutral, and there is no discounting between
periods.
At date 0, investors have access to two projects X and Y . Project X requires
the eﬀort and expertise of a manager at date 0. If the manager is good, then, with
probability θ, everyone learns at date 1 that the project is a success and that it will
pay oﬀ X at date 2 provided the manager stays with the project until then. With
probability 1 − θ it becomes known at date 1 that the project is a failure, the payoﬀ
is zero, and the project is shut down. If the manager is not good, eﬀort has no eﬀect
on the probability of success; the project always pays oﬀ 0. At date 0, no one knows
whether the manager is good or bad, not even the manager himself. Hence, there
5

is no problem of asymmetric information at that stage.

However, at date 1, the

investor and the manager learn whether the latter is good or bad. This information
is not available to anyone outside the firm.

3

The probability that the manager is

good at date 0 is β, and the probability that he is bad is 1 − β.
The manager is able to choose the probability of success, θ, though he incurs a
personal, non-pecuniary cost of 12 cθ2 in doing so, where c > 0.

4

This eﬀort choice

cannot be observed by anyone outside the firm and thus contracts cannot be made
contingent on it. The Y project cannot be undertaken until date 1, after the payoﬀs
from the X project are observed. For simplicity, we assume that it requires no eﬀort,
just the involvement of a good manager. If the manager is good, then the project
pays oﬀ Y at date 2; if he is bad it pays oﬀ nothing.
At date 0, investors choose the organizational form in which to take projects X
and Y . The investor can choose to keep both projects or to sell project Y to someone
who has no other projects. We think of the organization with just one project as an
entrepreneurial firm or start-up. We will call these E-firms and the managers that
run them entrepreneurs.

New venture activity taken under the auspices of a firm

with other business ventures is often called intrapreneurship. Thus, we can think of
firms with both projects, X and Y , as established firms engaged in intrapreneurial
ventures. We will refer to them as I-firms. For simplicity, we assume throughout that
projects are allocated to investors once and for all at date 0.5 The main goals of our
3

In essence, we assume that the investor learns more about the manager he employs than investors

outside the firm do. This type of assumption is relatively standard in the literature on labor markets.
4
We will refer to this choice as eﬀort, though what we really have in mind is that there are
things that managers like to do (e.g., product development) and things he does not like to do (e.g.,
marketing). Choosing a high θ means choosing to do things such as marketing that the manager
does not like to do but that increases the probability of success.
5
In particular, investors cannot trade projects at date 1, and contingent contracts involving
trading projects at date 1 are not possible. Otherwise, the initial financier of a failed entrepreneur

6

analysis are to understand (i) the factors that lead organizations to be entrepreneurial
or intrapreneurial; (ii) the diﬀerences between these organizational forms; (iii) the
equilibrium level of entrepreneurial activity; (iv) the eﬃciency of equilibrium.

2.1

6

Optimal Contracts in Entrepreneurial Firms

We first consider the entrepreneurial firm. In order to motivate the entrepreneur to
undertake eﬀort, the investor must make pay contingent on performance. We assume
that the outcome of the X project is observable and verifiable so that contracts can
be made contingent on the outcome.

Thus, the contract specifies a payment, wx ,

if the outcome of the project is X and w0 , if the outcome of the project is 0.

If

the project succeeds the manager stays on managing the project without exerting
any further eﬀort. However, if the project fails, the manager seeks a job elsewhere
for the second period. His only job alternative is to be hired by a firm with one of
the Y projects; these are the only new projects undertaken at date 1. In general,
the wage he receives from this second job will depend on his bargaining power and
his perceived ability (since the payoﬀ Y is realized only if the project is overseen
by a good manager).

For the moment, we simplify matters by assuming that the

manager of a failed entrepreneurial firm has no bargaining power and that he is paid
his opportunity wage, zero, by a firm with a Y project.

7

The optimal contract is one that maximizes investor profits subject to the concould acquire a project at date 1 let the failed entrepreneur run it. Therefore, our assumption ensures
that failed entrapreneurs have to return to the external labor market. This assumption could be
endogenized by assuming that there is much asymmetric information in the market for projects at
date 1.
6
We assume throughout that parameters are such that optimization problems have interior solutions.
7
This assumption is made for simplicity. Relaxing it, which we intend to do in a future version
of the paper, introduces other interesting incentive eﬀects. See our concluding remarks.

7

straint that the entrepreneur receives at least his outside option, zero, and that wages
are never negative given that the entrepreneur has no outside wealth. There is also
an incentive constraint that determines the level of eﬀort as a function of the incentive
contract. The entrepreneur’s expected utility is:
1
βθwx + β(1 − θ)w0 + (1 − β)w0 − cθ2 .
2

(1)

For a given contract, characterized by wx and w0 , the optimal eﬀort level θ chosen
by the entrepreneur is given by:

β(wx − w0 ) − cθ = 0

(2)

The investor’s expected profits from this project are

βθ(X − wx ) + β(1 − θ)(−w0 ) + (1 − β)(−w0 ).

(3)

On the assumption that the individual rationality constraint is never binding –
we will check that this is the case later – the optimal contract maximizes expression
(3) subject to the incentive compatibility constraint (2). It is straightforward to show
that wx > 0 and that w0 = 0. Given the risk neutrality of the entrepreneur, there is
no reason to reward him for a bad outcome. To see this more formally, suppose that
the Lagrange multiplier on the incentive compatibility constraint (2) is given by µ.
The first order condition with respect to wx and w0 of the associated Lagrangian is:

∂L
= −βθ + µβ ≤ 0,
∂wx

(4)

∂L
= −(1 − βθ) − µβ ≤ 0.
∂w0

(5)

8

Since wx > w0 ≥ 0 to induce positive eﬀort it follows that condition (4) is met
with equality and that µ = θ. This, in turn, implies that condition (5) is satisfied
with a strict inequality and that w0 = 0. The first order condition for the choice of
θ is
∂L
= β(X − wx ) − µc = 0.
∂θ
Substituting wx =

cθ
β

(6)

from condition (2) and µ = θ from condition (4), condition

(6) implies that the level of eﬀort that is implemented in entrepreneurial firms, θE ,
can be written as:

θE =

β
X
2c

(7)

Not surprisingly eﬀort is increasing in X and β and declining in the cost of eﬀort,
c. Note that the optimal level of eﬀort is less than the first best level of eﬀort which
is

βX
.
c

This is the case because the marginal benefit of increasing eﬀort is reduced

by the wage that needs to be paid in order to induce eﬀort. Given these values of
the optimal contract, the entrepreneur’s expected utility is
1
1 2
cθE = β 2 X 2 > 0.
2
8c
Therefore the entrepreneur’s individual rationality constraint is satisfied.

(8)
The

investor’s expected profits from the X project are:
¶
µ
cθE
1
= cθ2E = β 2 X 2 .
βθE X −
β
4c

(9)

The above discussion outlines the payoﬀs from the X project. We also need to
take the value of the Y project into account. Investors in entrepreneurial firms sell
the Y project to other firms. The price they will be paid depends on the expected
9

quality of the managers the acquiring firms can get to run the project.

For now,

suppose that they can find a manager with probability p, and that this manager has
a probability λ of being good, and that with probability 1 − p they can find no one to
run the project. Thus, the expected profit from owning project Y is pλY . Assume
that the entrepreneurial investor can sell this project for its full expected value. The
parameters, p and λ, for the moment exogenous, will later be endogenized. Overall,
the expected profits of the entrepreneurial investor, ΠE , can be written as:

ΠE

2.2

µ
¶
cθE
+ pλY,
= βθE X −
β

(10)

= cθ2E + pλY.

(11)

Optimal Contracts in Intrapreneurial Firms

The key distinction between entrepreneurial (E) firms and intrapreneurial (I) firms is
that I-firms have two projects, X and Y . Thus, if the X project fails, the investor
has the option of redeploying the manager onto the Y project. If he observes that
the manager is good despite failing, he will redeploy the manager onto the Y project.
By doing so, he knows that he will get output of Y , though he may have to share
some of it with the manager.

He could also try to hire a new manager from the

outside labor market just as E-firms do. However, the managers on the outside labor
market will be hired only with probability p and generate Y with probability λ. It
is thus more eﬃcient to retain a manager identified as good rather than replace him
with a new one. In the event that the X project fails because the manager is bad,
the investor will choose to try and hire someone from the outside labor market, and
will get Y with probability pλ. The same will happen if the project succeeds and
10

the good manager is needed to run the X project until date 2. Bargaining between
the investor and the manager retained or hired at date 1 will result in the eﬃcient
outcome. The investor looks for an outside manager only if the incumbent manager
is successful in the X project, or if he turns out to be of the bad type.
We also need to describe how surplus is shared between the investor and the
manager hired (or retained) at date 1. We assume that if a manager is hired from
the outside labor market, he is paid zero and the investor receives the entire expected
payoﬀ pλY . (We relax this assumption later in the paper.) If the good manager is
retained, he receives a share 1 − γ of the surplus he generates, Y − pλY . His payoﬀ
is thus

(1 − γ) (1 − pλ) Y,

(12)

and the investor receives the rest of the payoﬀ from the Y project,

pλY + γ(Y − pλY ).
The analysis of the optimal contract proceeds along familiar lines.

(13)
The one

diﬀerence is that in the event the X project fails and the manager is good, he gets
a payoﬀ in excess of zero because he is redeployed to another project on which he is
able to earn rents. Also, in this case, the investor is able to get more that pλY . The
optimal contract, therefore, maximizes:

βθ(X − wx ) + β(1 − θ) [γ (1 − pλ) Y − w0 ] + (1 − β)(−w0 ) + pλY.

(14)

The manager’s expected utility is
1
βθwx + β(1 − θ)[(1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y + w0 ] + (1 − β)w0 − cθ2 .
2
11

(15)

As before, it is straightforward to show that w0 = 0; we do not repeat the arguments here. The manager’s first order condition for the selection of θ is as follows:

β[wx − (1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y ] − cθ = 0.

(16)

By comparing conditions (2) and (16) it is clear that in order to motivate the
same level of eﬀort in E and I-firms, one has to pay a higher wage, wx in I-firms;
given that good managers get a higher payoﬀ when they fail in I-firms they have to
be paid more for success. As before, if µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the incentive
constraint (16), the first order condition for wx , implies that µ = θ. The first order
condition with respect to θ is:

β[X − wx − γ(1 − pλ)Y ] − cθ = 0.

(17)

From condition (16) it follows that

wx =

cθ
+ (1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y.
β

(18)

Substituting this expression for wx into (17) generates the following expression for
θ in intrapreneurial firms, θI :

θI =

β
[X − (1 − pλ)Y ].
2c

(19)

Notice that eﬀort in I-firms is always lower than that in E-firms; θI < θE . Notice
also that θI does not depend on the bargaining power of investors in intrapreneurial
firm. This is because an increase in γ has two eﬀects. On the one hand, inducing a
higher level of eﬀort by the manager is less costly for the investor because the manager
receives less rent when he is reallocated to the Y project following failure of the X
project. On the other hand, the investor is less keen to induce high eﬀort because
12

he receives a higher expected payoﬀ following failure of the X project. In our set-up
both eﬀects cancel out and the optimal eﬀort level implemented is independent of γ.
Substituting wx into the expression for the investor’s profits reveals the trade-oﬀs
that he faces. Expected profits can be written as:

ΠI = βθI [X −

cθI
− (1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y ] + β(1 − θI )γ(1 − pλ)Y + pλY.
β

(20)

On the one hand, having the Y project increases expected profits relative to an
entrepreneurial firm because it enables the investor to redeploy a good manager onto
the Y project with probability β(1−θ) and to earn rents of γ(1−pλ)Y . On the other
hand, being able to redeploy the manager in this way creates incentive problems in
the X project. The intrapreneurial manager knows that with probability β (1 − θ)
he will be redeployed and earn rents of (1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y . Thus, to motivate his eﬀort
he will have to be paid more for a successful outcome of the X project.
Finally, we note that ΠI can be written as:

ΠI = cθ2I + βγ(1 − pλ)Y + pλY.

2.3

(21)

Entrepreneurship vs. Intrapreneurship

We now examine the factors that lead the investor to choose an entrepreneurial or
intrapreneurial form of organization. Analytically, this just amounts to comparing
ΠE and ΠI . Using the expressions (11) and (21) for ΠE and ΠI , we see that

ΠE − ΠI = c[θ2E − θ2I ] − βγ(1 − pλ)Y
This expression is the diﬀerence between two positive terms.

(22)
The first term

reflects the advantage of E-firms over I-firms in terms of incentives (recall that θE >
13

θI ).

The second term captures the advantage of I-firms over E-firms in terms of

identifying and allocating good managers to projects.
At this point it worth emphasizing why I-firms cannot always do as least as well as
E-firms. The problem of I-firms is one of time inconsistency. Ex-ante, I-firms might
find it optimal to threaten their manager to fire them in case of failure. However,
ex-post, if the failed intrapreneur has been identified as a high ability manager, the
investor will find it optimal to retain him nevertheless. This commitment problem
is absent for E-firms because they have no project to which the failed entrepreneurs
can be reallocated.

8

Substituting θE and θI in the above expression and rearranging terms we see that
ΠE > ΠI provided that the following condition holds
Y
β
[X − (1 − pλ) ] > γ.
2c
2

(23)

This inequality generates predictions about the factors that will lead some projects
to be undertaken in entrepreneurial and others in intrapreneurial settings. They are
summarized in our first proposition below.
Proposition 1 Given p and λ,
(i) Projects with high payoﬀs, X,will be financed in entrepreneurial firms;
(ii) Higher ability managers (i.e., with high β) will become entrepreneurs;
8

A related argument is developed in Crémer (1995). In his model of arm’s length relationships,

a principal can optimally choose to remain uninformed about a agent so as not to have incentive
to renegotiate his incentive contract ex-post. In our model, investors in E-firms are informed but
cannot use this information. Our point is also related to the literature on the soft budget constraint
and information. See Dewatripont and Maskin (1995) and Burkart, Gromb and Panunzi (1995).

14

(iii) Projects with low associated eﬀort costs, c, will be financed in entrepreneurial
firms and managers with low eﬀort costs will become entrepreneurs;
(iv) When the alternative project, Y , has low value the project X will be financed in
entrepreneurial firms;
(v) When there is an active market for high quality managers to run project Y (i.e.,
pλ is high), project X will be financed by entrepreneurial firms;
(vi) When intrapreneurial firms have little bargaining power with respect to their
managers (i.e., γ is small), projects will be financed in entrepreneurial firms.
Proposition 1 summarizes some of the main findings of the paper and is a key
building block for our analysis of the equilibrium level of entrepreneurial activity
developed in the next sections. When there are large diﬀerences in the eﬀort levels
between E-firms and I-firms, it is better to finance the project in entrepreneurial
settings. This occurs when the payoﬀs from inducing the manager to take high eﬀort
are large – i.e.,when project payoﬀs, X, are high, when managers are likely to be
good (high β), and when eﬀort costs are small (c low). This explains parts (i)-(iii)
of the proposition.
The reason to finance the X project within I-firms is to take advantage of the
information that is learned about the ability of the manager. If he turns out to be
a good manager even though the project fails, he can be redeployed to the Y project
and the firm will earn some portion γ of the surplus generated by being able to put
someone of known high ability in the Y project instead of someone of uncertain ability
(1 − pλ)Y . Thus, when Y is small the value of redeployability is low and E-firms are
a more attractive organizational form.
Of particular interest is the influence of characteristics of the outside labor market
on the optimal choice of organizational structure. Recall that the value of both E15

firms and I-firms increases with the depth of the outside labor market for high ability
managers, i.e., with p and λ. Proposition 1(v) states that the diﬀerence in values,
ΠE (α) − ΠI (α), is also increasing in p and λ. When p and λ are high, high ability
managers can be easily found in the labor market and so there is less value to knowing
that the intrapreneurial manager is good.
When the intrapreneurial firm has limited bargaining power, the rents that the
firm receives from redeployability are low (even though (1 − pλ)Y may be relatively
high), so that an entrepreneurial organizational structure is more appealing.
The model also allows us to compare incentives and compensation in E-firms and
I-firms.

E-firms have more high-powered incentives as measured by the diﬀerence

in the compensation between good and bad outcomes.

For E-firms this diﬀerence

is X/2, whereas for Y firms the diﬀerence is only [X − (1 − pλ)Y ]/2. However, it
is not necessarily the case that compensation for success, wx , is higher in E-firms.
Indeed, because the payoﬀ when performance is poor is higher in I-firms – it’s
(1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y compared to zero in E-firms – wx has to be higher to induce
the same eﬀort in an I- firm as in an E-firm. Comparing conditions (2) and (18),
the expressions for wx in E-firms and I-firms, and substituting the optimal levels of
eﬀort, we see that wx in I-firms will exceed that in E-firms provided that γ < 1/2.
By contrast, casual empiricism suggests that the upside compensation is much higher
for entrepreneurs than it is for managers of established firms. Indeed, this is one of
the reasons often oﬀered for why managers leave established firms to start their own
companies. How can we square this result with the contradictory casual empiricism?
The answer lies in recognizing that the characteristics of E and I-firms diﬀer along
other dimensions that aﬀect wx . In particular, from equation (23) and Proposition
1, we know that E-firms will tend to be those with high X and β. For example, if

16

X>

2γc
Y
+ (1 − pλ)
β
2

(24)

the firm will be entrepreneurial. Denote the right-hand-side of the inequality X̂ and
suppose that X is distributed uniformly on [Xl , Xh ]. Then, the average compensation
for successful entrepreneurs is (Xh + X̂)/4, whereas the average compensation of
intrapreneurs is (X̂ + Xl )/4 + (1 − γ − 12 )(1 − pλ)Y . Thus, the average compensation
of successful entrepreneurs will exceed that of successful intrapreneurs, provided:
1
Xh − Xl
− (1 − γ − )(1 − pλ)Y > 0.
4
2

(25)

If X is widely distributed, i.e., Xh − Xl is large, as is typically the case in new
ventures, then this inequality will be satisfied. The main point here is that one reason
that entrepreneurs may be rewarded more for successful ventures is simply that –
given the characteristics of the projects that are undertaken in entrepreneurial firms
– their ventures are more successful on average.

3
3.1

An Equilibrium Model of Entrepreneurship
A Simple Model of the Labor Market

In the previous section we took the characteristics of the labor market – the probability of finding a manager on the outside labor market, p, and the average quality
of managers on that market, λ – as exogenous.

We then derived implications

about the types of managers and projects that will be financed by entrepreneurial
firms rather than intrapreneurial firms. However, p and λ themselves depend on the
extent to which projects are financed by entrepreneurial firms; the average quality
of failed managers depends on how many of them choose to be entrepreneurs.
17

In

other words, the choice of organizational form – entrepreneurial or intrapreneurial
– depends on the labor market, and the labor market depends on the choice of
organizational form.
Given the potential complexity of the analysis, we need a simple model of the
labor market at date 1.

First note that in our model the only managers that are

potentially in the labor market to manage project Y are failed managers of E and
I-firms. If the owner of a Y project knows that the manager is from an I-firm, he
will never hire him because the only failed intrapreneurs available in the outside labor
market are bad ones – the good ones are retained by the investors of their I-firms,
who redeploy them onto their own Y projects. However, entrepreneurs of failed X
projects could be good. The probability that they are good given that they failed in
project X, β 0 , is the ratio of failed good entrepreneurs to all failed entrepreneurs, i.e.:

β0 =

β(1 − θE )
< β.
β(1 − θE ) + (1 − β)

(26)

Alternatively, one might assume that the owner of Y projects cannot observe
whether the prior employer was an E-firm or an I-firm. In this case, β 0 , the fraction
of good managers in the outside labor market at date 1 is the ratio of failed good
entrepreneurs to all failed entrepreneurs plus bad managers of I-firms. This ratio can
be written as:

β0 =

αβ(1 − θE )
,
αβ(1 − θE ) + (1 − β)

(27)

where α is the fraction of firms that are entrepreneurial.
In this version of the model, we make the former informational assumption, namely
that investors in Y projects can distinguish between failed entrepreneurs and intrapreneurs. In this case, we set λ = β 0 .

18

Now we need to determine p, the probability that an investor with a Y project
can find an failed entrepreneur on the outside labor market. Intuitively, one would
think that if there are more entrepreneurial firms, there is a greater probability of
being able to find a failed entrepreneur. One simple model of the labor market that
delivers this reasonable characteristic is that failed entrepreneurs can only go to one
firm to search for a job and they cannot identify whether the firm is entrepreneurial
or not, nor whether this firm needs a new manager or not.

If the firm picked by

the job seeking manager is an I-firm with a failed but good manager, this firm does
not need a new manager and the job seeking manager remains unemployed.

His

payoﬀ is zero. In all other cases, the firm is in need of a new manager, and the failed
entrepreneur is hired. In line with the model above, we assume that his wage is zero,
an assumption that we relax later.
Thus, the probability, p, that an investor with a Y project in need of a manager
is matched with a failed entrepreneur is simply the fraction of all managers who fail:

p = α(1 − βθE ),

(28)

where again α is just the fraction of managers that are entrepreneurs.
Importantly, this expression has the feature that the more entrepreneurs there
are, the greater is the probability that Y project owners in need of a manager can
find good managers. We now have all of the elements to study the equilibrium level
of entrepreneurship.
An important implication of this model is that an increase in entrepreneurship
(i.e., a higher α), increases eﬀort in intrapreneurial firms. It does so by decreasing
the rent, (1 − γ)(1 − pλ)Y , that the good intrapreneurial manager gets when the
project fails.
9

9

Indeed, an increase in entrepreneurship increasing the probability

Note that this would also be the case in the alternative labor market model discussed above in

19

p that an I-firm is matched with a failed entrepreneur. (Note that since the eﬀort
in E-firms, θE , is independent of the level of entrepreneurship, α, so is the average
quality of failed entrepreneurs, λ). In other words, more entrepreneurship increases
the competitive pressure from the outside labor market on failed intrapreneurs, and
thus reduces the rent they can extract from I-firms. It is thus less costly to induce the
manager of an I-firm to undertake eﬀort. Indeed, if Y project owners could always
find an entrepreneurial manager (p = 1) and these managers were known to be of
high quality (λ = 1), there would be no diﬀerence between the two types of firms.
An implication of this remark is that the expected profit of an investor in an I-firm
increases with the level of entrepreneurship.
Another important implication of the model is that when there are more entrepreneurial firms (i.e., α and p are larger), the relative value of being an entrepreneurial
firm rather than an intrapreneurial firm is greater. This can be seen by noticing that
the left hand side of condition (23) increases when p increases. Intuitively, the value
to an I-firm of being able to redeploy the good manager is reduced when there are
more entrepreneurial firms and I-firms would be able to find high quality managers.
This attribute of the model will feature prominently in our analysis of equilibrium.

3.2

Equilibria

We now characterize the equilibria in this model. What we will see is that there can
be multiple equilibria. We first determine the situations in which equilibrium will be
unique. This will happen when a particular organizational form is optimal regardless
of what other investors choose. If at α = p = 0 it is still optimal for the investor
which owners of Y projects cannot distinguish between failed entrepreneurs and failed intrapreneurs.
In that model, λ would be increasing in α; the average quality of failed managers is higher when
there are more entrepreneurs in the mix.

20

to establish an entrepreneurial firm, then the only equilibrium is for all firms to be
entrepreneurial. Formally, this happens when condition (23) is satisfied for p = 0,
which can be written as
β
[X − Y /2] > γ.
2c

(29)

By contrast, if it is optimal to be intrapreneurial even if everyone else is entrepreneurial, then the unique equilibrium will be for all firms to be intrapreneurial. This
happens when condition (23) is violated for α = 1 (implying p = 1 − βθE ), which can
be written as
β
[X − (1 − (1 − βθE )λ)Y /2] < γ
2c

(30)

In the event, however, that these inequalities are not satisfied so that
β
β
[X − (1 − (1 − βθE )λ)Y /2] > γ > [X − Y /2],
2c
2c

(31)

then there can be three equilibria.
The first is where all firms are entrepreneurial. In this case, given that all other
firms are entrepreneurial it makes sense to be entrepreneurial as indicated by the first
inequality in condition (31) above. Here, given that the labor market is active, there
is relatively little advantage to being able to redeploy managers in I-firms.
However, there could be another equilibrium in which all firms choose to be intrapreneurial. In this case, given by the second inequality in condition (31) above, if
no other firms are entrepreneurial it is impossible to find replacement managers from
the labor market. This makes redeployment of intrapreneurs very valuable.
Finally, there is a third equilibrium in which a fraction α ∈ (0, 1) of X projects
are undertaken in entrepreneurial firms. The fraction α is set such that investors are
indiﬀerent between the two organizational forms. That is, α solves:
21

β
[X − (1 − α(1 − βθE )λ)Y /2] = γ.
2c

(32)

Note however that the latter equilibrium is highly unstable. For simplicity, we
will not discuss this equilibrium further for now.
Using the notation
·
¸
Y
β
X−
γ ≡
2c
2
∗

(33)

and

γ

∗∗

·
¸
β
Y
X − (1 − (1 − βθE ) λ)
,
≡
2c
2

(34)

these results are summarized in the proposition below.
Proposition 2 There are two thresholds γ ∗ and γ ∗∗ with γ ∗ < γ ∗∗ such that
(i) If γ < γ ∗ , all firms are entrepreneurial, i.e., α = 1;
(ii) If γ > γ ∗∗ , all firms are intrapreneurial, i.e., α = 0;
(iii) If γ ∈ [γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ ], both equilibria coexist (α = 1 and α = 0).
We have established that, in our model, characteristics of the external labor market, i.e., p and λ, have an influence on an investor’s choice between becoming an
E-firm or an I-firm.

However, that choice, in turn, has an impact on the charac-

teristics of the outside labor market which other investors consider in their choice of
organizational form. This feature is what can lead to a multiplicity of equilibria. In
our model, a deeper outside market, i.e., a higher p, makes E-firms more attractive
relative to I-firms. Conversely, if investors anticipate that the outside market will not
be very liquid, they will tend to rely more on an internal labor market and thus set
22

up I-firms. This in turn reduces the liquidity of the outside labor market. If instead,
investors took into account the eﬀect of the liquidity of the outside labor market, they
would be more inclined to set up E-firms, thus contributing to the outside market’s
liquidity.

3.3

Externalities

Having characterized the equilibrium level of entrepreneurial activity, we now study
the properties of equilibrium. A first question that we address is whether the equilibrium always maximizes industry profits as measured by the aggregate expected
profits of all investors. Denote ΠE (α) and ΠI (α) the expected profit of an investor
in an E-firm and an I-firm respectively, when the fraction of entrepreneurial firms is
α.

ΠE (α) = cθ2E + α(1 − βθE )λY.

(35)

ΠI (α) = cθ2I + βγ(1 − α(1 − βθE )λ)Y + α(1 − βθE )λY

(36)

These are obtained by plugging p = α(1 − βθE ) into expressions (11) and (21).
Notice first that the value of an entrepreneurial firm, ΠE (α), is increasing with
the level of entrepreneurship α. This is because as α increases, the increased arrival
rate of managers from the outside labor market, p, means that entrepreneurial firms
are more likely to fill a vacant position for managing project Y . This in turn, means
that entrepreneurial investors can sell project Y for a greater amount.
Furthermore, notice that the value of an intrapreneurial firm, ΠI (α), is also increasing with the level of entrepreneurship α. Three eﬀects lead to this, as can be
seen from expression (36). First, as α increases, the increased arrival rate of managers
23

from the outside labor market means that intrapreneurial firms are more likely to fill
a vacant position for managing project Y if necessary. Second, this increased arrival
rate of outside managers increases potential competition for good intrapreneurs and
thus reduces the level of rent that they can extract following failure. Third, and as
a consequence, this makes it cheaper to provide intrapreneurs with incentives and θI
increases.
Let us now turn to the comparison of the equilibrium level of entrepreneurship to
the level that is optimal from the investors’ point of view. Let α∗ denote the level of
entrepreneurship that maximizes the industry profit
α · ΠE (α) + (1 − α) · ΠI (α).

(37)

We prove the following proposition in the appendix.
Proposition 3
(i) There is never an excess of entrepreneurship in equilibrium. That is, whenever
α = 1 is an equilibrium, then the industry profit maximizing level of entrepreneurship is α∗ = 1.
(ii) There can be too little entrepreneurship in equilibrium. This can hold whether
there are multiple equilibria or whether α = 0 is the unique equilibrium.
The model identifies an externality that may lead to too little entrepreneurial
activity.

As described above, when there are more entrepreneurs, there will be a

greater supply of good managers in the labor market; this increases the payoﬀs to
firms that need new managers.

In deciding on an organizational form, however,

everyone takes as given the choices that others make, and thus take as given the
quality of the labor market for managers. As a result, would-be entrepreneurs don’t
24

internalize the positive eﬀect they have on the labor market and the payoﬀs to firms
that use it. In equilibrium, there can be too few entrepreneurs.
We now turn to a measure of the social optimality of the equilibrium, and show
that it can exhibit too much or too little entrepreneurship. We define total welfare
as the sum of expected utility of all agents in the economy. Total welfare is thus

W (α) = αWE (α) + (1 − α) WI (α)

(38)

where WE (α) is the contribution to total welfare of an E-firm and WI (α) that of an
I-firm when the fraction of E-firms is α. These contributions can be written as
1
WE (α) = βθE X + pλY − cθ2E ,
2

(39)

1
WI (α) = βθI X + β (1 − θI ) (1 − pλ) Y + pλY − cθ2I .
2

(40)

and

Proposition 4 Relative to the social optimal level of entrepreneurship,
(i) there can be too much entrepreneurship in equilibrium,
(ii) or too little entrepreneurship in equilibrium.
The intuition for this result is as follows. The choice between becoming an E-firm
or an I-firm is driven by the investor’s comparison between his payoﬀ from X and Y
projects. The comparison depends on the rent that managers are able to extract in
each type of project. In the X project, managers extract a rent due to the incentive
problem.

In the Y project, they extract a rent that depends on their bargaining

power relative to investors.
When γ is high, the equilibrium tends to be α = 0, i.e., all investors set up I-firms.
This is because they extract a larger payoﬀ in Y projects and are thus less eager to
25

induce high eﬀort and leave managers with the associated rents. However, from a
total welfare perspective, the splitting of the surplus is irrelevant. So investors might
put too much weight on Y projects relative to ensuring that X projects succeed.
Conversely, when γ is small, the equilibrium tends to be α = 1, i.e., all investors
set up E-firms. This is because they extract a smaller payoﬀ in Y projects and are
thus less reluctant to induce high eﬀort and leave managers with the associated rents.
Again, this can lead investors to put too much weight on X projects relative to the
success of Y projects.

4

When Entrepreneurship is Bad for Incentives

In the previous section we assumed that firms have all the bargaining power when
they hire failed entrepreneurs so that they can pay them a wage of zero. This assumption has two undesirable implications. First, it implies that failure in entrepreneurial
firms is always worse than failure in intrapreneurial ventures. Second, it implies that
the level of entrepreneurial activity has no eﬀect on the payoﬀs to entrepreneurs if
they fail. In this section of the paper, we relax the assumption of zero bargaining
power of failed entrepreneurs and instead consider the case in which failed entrepreneurs are able to extract rents from their new firms. We will see that an increase in
entrepreneurial activity increases the entrepreneur’s expected payoﬀs following failure and thereby adversely aﬀects his incentives. Unlike the previous version of the
model, there can be too much entrepreneurial activity in equilibrium relative to the
level that maximizes industry profits.
To extend the model in the way described above, we need to determine both the
probability q that a failed entrepreneur finds a new job managing a Y project, and the
payoﬀ he would get in such a job. We assume that failed entrepreneurs actually hired

26

to manage a Y project do manage to extract a fraction (1 − γ) of the surplus they
create — just as failed intrapreneurs do. Without the entrepreneur, the Y project
does not take oﬀ, i.e., it is worth zero. With the entrepreneur, perceived to be good
with probability λ, the project is worth λY . Therefore, a failed entrepreneur’s wage
when hired to manage a Y project is
(1 − γ) λY.
Now we need to determine q, the probability that a failed entrepreneur can find
a job managing a Y project.10 Recall that in our simple model of the labor market,
failed entrepreneurs can only go to one firm to search for a job. Moreover, they
cannot identify whether the firm is entrepreneurial, nor whether the firm needs a new
manager. All firms except I-firms with a failed good manager need new managers
for the Y project. Therefore,
q = α + (1 − α) (1 − β (1 − θI ))

= 1 − (1 − α) β (1 − θI )
where α is the fraction of managers that are entrepreneurs. Thus, the expected payoﬀ
to a failed entrepreneur is q(1 − γ)λY .
Importantly, this expression has the feature that the more entrepreneurs there are,
the greater is the probability that a failed entrepreneur can find a new job managing
a Y project. Intuitively, if there are more entrepreneurial firms, there is a greater
probability that a failed entrepreneur will be able to find such a job. This is because
all the stand-alone Y projects need a manager while the Y projects in intrapreneurial
10

This variable was not important in the previous analysis because the payoﬀ of redeployed en-

trepreneurs was assumed to be zero.

27

firms only need managers if the X project succeeds or the incumbent manager is
deemed to be bad. The redeployability of managers in I-firms reduces their demand
for managers from the outside labor market.
Note also that the expected payoﬀs to firms from having a Y project are changed
because newly hired entrepreneurs have some bargaining power.

Now instead of

getting λY with probability p, they get γλY with probability p.
Following similar steps as before, we can show that the eﬀort level implemented
in E-firms and I-firms are:

θE =

β
[X − q (1 − γ) λY ] ,
2c

θI =

β
[X − (1 − pγλ) Y ] .
2c

An important implication of this model is that θE , the eﬀort level implemented in
entrepreneurial firms, is decreasing with q, everything else being equal. Thus, unlike
the baseline model above, the external labor market has an eﬀect on eﬀort in E-firms.
Entrepreneurs take into account their expected payoﬀ upon failure which depends on
how likely they will find a new job and how much they will receive in that job.11
Recall that in the previous analysis (Proposition 3) there was never an excessive
amount of entrepreneurial activity in equilibrium. Here, we want to show that this
no longer holds, i.e., the equilibrium can exhibit too much entrepreneurship.
Proposition 5 There can be too much entrepreneurship in equilibrium relative to the
level that maximizes industry profits. A suﬃcient condition for this to be the case is
when γ = 0 and β is near 1.
11

This is in contrast with the previous analysis, where θE was independent of characteristics of

the extrenal labor market. The reason for that was our assumption that failed entrerpeneurs receive
a zero payoﬀ in their new job.

28

We start by showing that when γ = 0, α = 1 in equilibrium. We then show that
the level of entrepreneurial activity, α, that maximizes industry profits is less than 1.

4.1

Equilibrium

The expected profits of investors in E-firms and I-firms as a function of α can be
written as:

ΠE (α) = cθ2E + α(1 − βθE )γλY + pγλY

(41)

ΠI (α) = cθ2I + βγ[1 − α(1 − βθE )γλ]Y + α(1 − βθE )γλY + pγλY

(42)

An investor finds it optimal to set up an E-firm if and only if ΠE (α) − ΠI (α) > 0,
which can be written as
cθ2E − cθ2I − βγ[1 − α(1 − βθE )γλ]Y > 0
When γ = 0, setting up an E-firm is optimal only if θE > θI given that the last
term drops out at γ = 0. The expressions for θE and θI are also simplified:
θE =

β
[X − qλY ] ,
2c

θI =

β
[X − Y ] .
2c

Since q ≤ 1 and λ < 1, we have θE > θI . This implies that the only equilibrium is
such that all firms are entrepreneurial, i.e., α = 1.

29

4.2

Industry Profits

e now show that there exist parameter values such that α = 1 does not maximize
industry profits. For γ = 0, industry profit,

α · ΠE (α) + (1 − α) · ΠI (α),
can be written as

α · cθ2E + (1 − α) · cθ2I .
The derivative of industry profit with respect to α taken at α = 1 is
¡
¢
∂θE
c θ2E − θ2I + 2cθE
.
∂α

Consider the first term.

¡
¢
c θ2E − θ2I = c

µ

β
2c

¶2

¡
¢
[X − qλY ]2 − [X − Y ]2 ,

β2
=
([X − qλY ] + [X − Y ]) ([X − qλY ] − [X − Y ]) ,
4c
β2
=
(X − (1 + qλ) Y /2) (1 − qλ) Y.
2c
Now examine the second term:

∂θE
∂
2cθE
= 2cθE
∂α
∂α

µ

¶
β
[X − qλY ]
2c

µ
¶
∂q
∂λ
= −βθE λ
+q
Y
∂α
∂α
30

(43)

The derivatives in the above equation are:

∂
∂q
=
(1 − (1 − α) β (1 − θI ))
∂α
∂α

= β (1 − θI ) + (1 − α)

∂λ
∂
=
∂α
∂α

µ

∂θI
∂α

β(1 − θE )
β(1 − θE ) + (1 − β)

¶

¶
µ
∂
1−β
=
1−
∂α
1 − βθE
=

−β (1 − β) ∂θE
·
(1 − βθE )2 ∂α

For α = 1, we have q = 1. Therefore the derivative of industry profit with respect
to α taken at α = 1 is
¶
µ
β2
β (1 − β) ∂θE
(X − (1 + λ) Y /2) (1 − λ) Y − βθE λβ (1 − θI ) −
Y
·
2c
(1 − βθE )2 ∂α
Now consider β arbitrarily close to 1. In that case, λ is arbitrarily close to 1 and
the expression above is arbitrarily close to

−θE (1 − θI ) Y.
Since this is strictly negative, we have shown that for β suﬃciently close to 1,
α = 1 does not maximize industry profits.
The reason for this result is as follows. At γ = 0, and β near 1, the diﬀerence in the
eﬀort levels of E-firms and I-firms is very small. Given that there is no redeployability
31

value to the I-firm when γ = 0, this implies that profits of the two types of firms are
very close to each other.

Thus, a change in α has no direct eﬀect on industry

profits. However, a reduction in α increases eﬀort in E-firms because it lowers the
probability that a failed entrepreneur will find a job.

In determining whether to

be entrepreneurial or intrapreneurial, investors do not take into account the eﬀect of
their decision on the incentives of entrepreneurial firms. As a result, there is too little
entrepreneurship.

5

Conclusion

This paper compares the financing of new ventures in start-ups (entrepreneurship)
and in established firms (“intrapreneurship”) and develops an equilibrium model of
entrepreneurial activity. The benefit of financing new ventures in established firms is
that they learn about the quality of their managers over time and can redeploy the
good ones into other jobs when a new venture fails. Failed entrepreneurs, by contrast,
do not have the advantage of an internal labor market and must seek other jobs in
an imperfectly informed external labor market. While this is ex post ineﬃcient, it
provides entrepreneurs with high-powered incentives ex ante. We show that when
entrepreneurship is low, the external labor market is very thin since no one wants to
hire a manager who has been fired by an established firm. This makes internal labor
markets particularly valuable, encourages intrapreneurship, thereby justifying the low
level of entrepreneurship. If, however, entrepreneurial activity is high, the external
labor market will have a large supply of good (but failed) entrepreneurs. This lowers
the value of the internal labor market and encourages entrepreneurship. Thus, there
can be multiple equilibria.
We also show that there can be too little entrepreneurial activity because entrepre-

32

neurs do not take into account the eﬀect of their choice of organizational form on the
functioning of the labor market. When there are more entrepreneurs, there are more
high quality managers in the labor market which makes firms’ other projects more
valuable. Finally, we extend the model to show that, while the high entrepreneurial
activity has a positive eﬀect on intrapreneurial incentives, it can have a negative effect on entrepreneurial incentives. When there is active financing of start-ups failed
entrepreneurs can easily find jobs where they can earn rents. This adversely eﬀects
their incentives, something which investors do not take into account when deciding
whether to be entrepreneurial or not.

Thus, we establish conditions under which

there can actually be too much entrepreneurial activity.
There are two main ways in which we plan to extend the analysis.

First, we

want to endogenize the number of projects that are undertaken. We have assumed
that X and Y projects are in fixed supply.

Thus, we cannot analyze the eﬀect of

entrepreneurial activity on the level of new venture creation. In particular, we would
like to know whether the high rates of high-tech entrepreneurship in the U.S. relative
to Europe are associated with more venture creation or whether it just reflects a
displacement of new ventures from established firms to start-ups? Second, we would
like to explore the dynamics of entrepreneurship. Specifically, what are the critical
factors that move economies from low levels of entrepreneurship to high levels of
entrepreneurship and how is the speed of the transition determined?

33

6

References

Anton, James and Dennis A. Yao (1995), “Start-ups, Spinoﬀs, and Internal Projects,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations, 11:362-378.
Berglof, Erik (1994), “A Control Theory of Venture Finance, ” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization, 10: 247-267.
Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi (1995), “Debt Design, Liquidation
Value, and Monitoring,” mimeo MIT.
Crémer, Jacques (1995), “Arm’s Length Relationships,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110: 275-295.
Dewatripont, Mathias (1988), “Commitment Through Renegotiation-Proof Contracts with Third Parties,” Review of Economic Studies, 55: 377-390.
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Eric Maskin (1995), “Credit and Eﬃciency in Centralized
and Decentralized Economies,” Review of Economic Studies, 62: 541-555.
Gertner, Robert, David S. Scharfstein and Jeremy C. Stein (1994), Internal versus
external capital markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 1211-30.
Gompers, Paul (1995), “Optimal Investment, Monitoring and the Staging of Venture
Capital,” Journal of Finance, 50: 1461-1489.
Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership:
Toward a Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94:691-719.
Hellman, Thomas (1998), “The Allocation of Control Rights in Venture Capital
Contracts,” Rand Journal of Economics, 29: 57-76.
34

Landier, Augustin (2001a), “Endogenous Entrepreneurial Risk: The Stigma of Failure,” mimeo MIT.
Landier, Augustin (2001b), “Exit Options and Lending Institutions: Large Banks
vs. Venture Capital,” mimeo MIT.
Wiggins, Steven (1995), “Entrepreneurial Enterprises, Endogenous Ownership, and
Limits to Firm Size,” Economic Inquiry, 33: 54-69.

35

7

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 3
(i) If α = 1 is an equilibrium, no unilateral deviation is profitable, i.e., ΠE (1) ≥
ΠI (1). This together with the monotonicity of ΠI (α) implies that ΠE (1) ≥ ΠI (α)
for all values of α. Since ΠE (α) is also increasing with α, we have for all values of α,
ΠE (1) ≥ α · ΠE (α) + (1 − α) · ΠI (α).

(44)

(ii) We show that ΠE (1) > ΠI (0) is compatible with α = 0 being an equilibrium.
The diﬀerence ΠE (1) − ΠI (0) can be written as
ΠE (1) − ΠI (0) =

=

£ 2
¤ £
¤
cθE + (1 − βθE )λY − cθ2I + βγY ,

·

(45)

¸ · 2
¸
1 2 2
β
2
β X + (1 − βθE )λY − c 2 (X − Y ) + βγY , (46)
4c
4c

µ
¶¸
·
Y
β
= (1 − βθE )λY − βY γ −
X−
2c
2
Therefore, the condition ΠE (1) > ΠI (0) can be rewritten as
µ
¶
β
Y
(1 − βθE ) λ
γ−
X−
<
.
2c
2
β

(47)

(48)

This condition is compatible with α = 0 being an equilibrium, i.e., with condition
(29)

µ
¶
β
Y
γ−
X−
> 0.
2c
2

(49)

Clearly, one can find values of γ such that the diﬀerence above is strictly positive
but arbitrarily close to zero. Since the right hand side of condition (48) is strictly
positive and independent of γ, both conditions can be satisfied simultaneously. This

36

implies that it is possible that α = 0 be an equilibrium while α∗ > 0 at the same
time.
Showing that this situation can occur when α = 0 is the only equilibrium amounts
to showing that conditions (29) and (48) above are compatible with condition (30)
being violated, i.e., which can be rewritten as
µ
¶
Y
β
β
Y
X−
< (1 − βθE )λ .
γ−
2c
2
2c
2

(50)

Again, the right hand side of this expression is strictly positive and independent
of γ. This implies that all conditions can be satisfied simultaneously.
Finally, we show that this situation can occur when α = 0 is the one of several equilibria, which amounts to showing that conditions (29) and (48) above are
compatible with condition (30) being satisfied, i.e., with
µ
¶
Y
β
Y
β
X−
> (1 − βθE )λ .
γ−
2c
2
2c
2

(51)

One can see that by taking β suﬃciently small, the right hand side of the condition
above can be made arbitrarily small while keeping the other two conditions satisfied.
Indeed, neither the left hand side of the conditions nor the right hand side of condition
(48) goes to zero when β goes to zero.

Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 4
Remark that in our set-up, neither WE (α) nor WI (α) does depend on the bargaining power γ. Hence the socially optimal level of entrepreneurship, α∗∗ , is independent
of γ too. We have established that depending on γ, the equilibrium level of entrepreneurship can be α = 0 or α = 1. It suﬃces to show that α∗∗ is neither always 0
nor always 1.

37

W (1) − W (0) = WE (1) − WI (0)

=

(52)

¢
3 ¡ 2
c θE − θ2I + (1 − βθE ) λY − β (1 − θI ) Y
2

(53)

Noting that as β goes to 1, so does λ, we have

lim (W (1) − W (0)) =

β→1

¢
3 ¡ 2
c θE − θ2I − (θE − θI ) Y
2
·

3
= (θE − θI ) c (θE + θI ) − Y
2
¸
·
3
5Y
=
(θE − θI ) X −
2
6

(54)
¸

(55)

(56)

It is possible to find values of X and Y such that W (1)−W (0) is strictly positive or
strictly negative (without violating the conditions for interior solutions to be obtained
and on which the above expressions are based). Consequently, α∗∗ is neither always
0 nor always 1.

Q.E.D.

38

