                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE PERFORMANCE OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS


                                          James J. Heckman
                                           Carolyn Heinrich
                                            Jeffrey Smith


                                         Working Paper 9002
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9002


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2002

Heckman is Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago and
a Senior Fellow of the American Bar Foundation. Heinrich is Assistant Professor of Public Policy at the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Smith is an Associate Professor of Economics at the University
of Maryland. This research was supported by grants from the American Bar Foundation, the National Science
Foundation (SBR-93-4115), the Russell Sage Foundation, the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. We thank Karen Conneely,
Miana Plesca, Carla VanBeselaere and Alex Whalley for excellent research assistance. We thank Eric
Hanushek for helpful comments. This essay is based in part on research reported in a forthcoming
monograph, Heckman (2003). The data used in this article can be obtained beginning Spring, 2003 through
Spring, 2006 from Jeffrey Smith, Department of Economics, University of Maryland, 3105 Tydings Hall,
College Park, MD 20742. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by James J. Heckman, Carolyn Heinrich and Jeffrey Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Performance of Performance Standards
James J. Heckman, Carolyn Heinrich and Jeffrey Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 9002
June 2002
JEL No. C31



                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the performance of the JTPA performance system, a widely emulated model
for inducing efficiency in government organizations. We present a model of how performance incentives
may distort bureaucratic decisions. We define cream skimming within the model. Two major empirical
findings are (a) that the short run measures used to monitor performance are weakly, and sometimes
perversely, related to long run impacts and (b) that the efficiency gains or losses from cream skimming
are small. We find evidence that centers respond to performance standards.




James Heckman                  Carolyn Heinrich                    Jeffrey Smith
Department of Economics        Department of Public Policy         Department of Economics
University of Chicago          University of North Carolina        University of Maryland
1126 East 59th Street          Abernethy Hall, CB#3435             3105 Tydings Hall
Chicago, IL 60637              Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3435          College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER                       cheinric@email.unc.edu              and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu                                                   smith@econ.umd.edu
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 2


I. Introduction

       Incentives based on performance standards have been advocated to promote productivity

and to direct activity in public organizations. Little is known about how performance standards

systems perform1. This paper presents evidence on this question using data from a social

experiment on a major U.S. government training program with performance standard incentives.

The performance standards system in this program, the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA), is a

prototype for other government programs. The 1993 Performance Standards Act (U.S. Congress,

1993) required the use of performance systems similar to that of JTPA in many other

government programs. In particular, JTPA's successor as the primary federal training program

for the disadvantaged, the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), utilizes an expanded version of the

JTPA performance system. Performance systems like that in JTPA are in use around the world.

       The JTPA incentive system was unique in providing incentives at the local organization

level but not to specific individuals within organizations. Little is known about how

performance standard systems at the level of local organizations work in practice. This paper

presents new evidence on this issue and summarizes related research scattered throughout the

published literature and in government reports. We take it as given that performance standards

affect the behavior of the organization (see, for example, Courty and Marschke, 1996, 1997). In

that light, we address two basic questions. First, do the behavioral responses further the goals of

the program? If not, what do they do instead? Second, how do specific actors within

bureaucracies respond to the incentives presented to them?

       The main focus of this paper is on the first question. We consider whether JTPA

performance incentives promoted “desirable” outcomes. Unlike many government programs, the

JTPA program had tangible outputs: the employment and earnings of its participants. There is
                                                                         Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 3


widespread agreement that maximizing the gain (for example, the increase in the present value of

discounted earnings relative to what participants would have experienced had they not

participated) is a worthy goal. In addition, the JTPA program was created with clearly stated

objectives, so that there is a well-defined set of targets against which to measure performance.

As noted by Wilson (1989), both features of the JTPA program are unusual when compared to

the many other government agencies that lack clearly stated objectives or adequate

measurements of performance.

       Even though the goals of the program are clearly stated, they may be in conflict. The Job

Training Partnership Act (Public Law 97- 300) mandated the provision of employment and

training opportunities to “those who can benefit from, and are most in need of, such

opportunities.” (Section 141 (c)). Since benefit and need are different things, the potential for

conflict between efficiency and equity is written into the law authorizing the program.2 Whether

or not those who benefit most are also the most in need is an empirical question that we

investigate in this paper.

       The JTPA program was designed to improve the human capital of its participants.

Evaluation of human capital projects inherently involves evaluation of earnings and employment

trajectories over time, and comparing them to other human capital investments, including no

investment at all. This involves two distinct problems: (a) construction of counterfactual states

(what participants would have earned in their next best alternative) and (b) measuring outcomes

and creating counterfactuals over the harvest period of the investment, which may be a lifetime.

Both problems are difficult. Constructing counterfactual states is a controversial activity (see, for

example, Heckman, 2001, and Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith, 1999). Tracking persons over

time is a costly activity and does not produce short run feedback on the success of the program.
                                                                          Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 4


The JTPA performance standards system, and most related systems, attempt to circumvent these

fundamental problems by using the outcomes of participants measured at the time they complete

the program, or within a few months thereafter. Such measures are necessarily short run in

nature. In addition, such systems do not attempt to construct even the short run counterfactual.

       Use of these short term outcome measures creates the possibility that the performance

standards misdirect activity by focusing training center attention on criteria that may be

perversely related to long run net benefits, long run equity criteria, or both. This is especially

likely in the context of a human capital program. One benefit of training is that it encourages

further training and schooling. Such additional investment depresses measured employment and

earnings in the short run, but raises it in the long run.3 In this case, the short run measurements

on which performance standards are based will likely be perversely related to long run benefits.

We present evidence on this question and summarize other evidence from the literature. We

establish that fears of misalignment or perverse alignment of the incentives are justified.

       Most discussions of performance standards (see, for example, Anderson et al., 1992, and

Barnow, 1992) focus on “cream skimming”. Sometimes this term is defined as selecting persons

into the program who would have done well without it. In the context of a system of

performance standards, cream skimming is defined as selecting people who help attain short run

goals, rather than selecting persons on the basis of their expected long run benefit from

participation. In the current literature, the definition of cream skimming is vague and the

methods used to measure it are not convincing. Implicit in the current literature is the assumption

that program and no-program outcomes are basically the same, except for a positive treatment

effect common to all persons. One contribution of this paper is to precisely define the concept of

cream skimming in the modern language of counterfactuals and to relate it to an economic model
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 5


of performance standards. Cream skimming may or may not be a serious problem. If persons

who would have done well without the program have the largest gains from it, then cream

skimming may promote efficiency. We present evidence on this question below.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II outlines the basic evaluation problem and how

performance standards attempt to solve it. We present a model of training center performance

under performance standards and define cream skimming in the context of our model. Section

III describes the JTPA program and its performance standards system. We show that features of

the JTPA system are in widespread use, so our analysis of JTPA has some generality. Section IV

describes our data. Section V presents evidence on the efficiency effects of cream skimming.

Section VI presents evidence on the effects of performance standards on the behavior of training

centers and their staff. Section VII presents evidence on how well the short run target outcomes

used in performance standards predict long run impacts. Section VIII concludes.



II. Policy Counterfactuals, Performance Standards, and Cream Skimming

A. A Model of Training Center Choices

       Successful human capital investment programs produce a time series of returns after the

intervention. For simplicity we analyze a program that takes one period to train persons selected

from the eligible population. Training centers face a new cohort of eligible applicants each

period. All persons in each prospective training cohort have one chance to train. They are then

replaced by the next period’s cohort. The environment is assumed to be stationary so that the

same decision rules are followed each period given the same state variables (that is, the

environment facing the center). There is a benchmark outcome that corresponds to no program

or the next best program. Persons participate or not in period “0” of their lifecycle. Thus, we
                                                                            Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 6


normalize lifecycle periods relative to the benchmark period when the training participation

decision is made.4 Participants experience a series of outcomes, Ya1 , a = 0,K , A where A is the

final period of the person's life. In the absence of the program, persons experience outcomes

Ya0 , a = 0,K , A . The per-period treatment effect is Ya1 − Ya0 = ∆ a . The treatment effect can be

negative in the short run if the initial investment leads to additional investment.5 To make our

analysis fit into a standard cost-benefit framework, let Y denote earnings. Given direct cost, c,

and discount rate r, the net present value of the program impacts measured at time zero is

         A
               ∆a
(1)     ∑ (1 + r )
        a =0
                     a
                         − c = PV


for each person. We abstract from general equilibrium effects of the scale of the program.6 We

assume that ( ∆ a , c ) varies among individuals but assume a common r.7

        In our model, we assume that training centers can apply different amounts of “input”, e,

to any individual client. In the JTPA context, the input variable represents staff time and the

direct costs of the services provided. The inputs affect the outcomes experienced by participants.

In particular, input e yields

(2)             (
        Ya1 = f Ya0 , e , )
at cost c(e), where c(0) = 0. Total cost c = c(e) + k , where k is a fixed cost.

        Given these assumptions, training centers have several degrees of freedom. First, for a

fixed set of inputs, a training center can choose to serve applicants with different ( ∆ a , c )

combinations. Second, holding the set of persons served fixed, the training center can vary the

inputs it provides to each participant. This changes the set of potential outcomes for

participants. This framework recognizes that the inputs provided by training centers will
                                                                               Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 7


augment or reduce the potential outcome that participants would have experienced in the absence

of participation. Third, a training center can choose how many participants to serve by trading

off between the fixed per participant costs k and the variable per participant input costs c(e).

       If the goal of the training center is to maximize the ex post present value of the earnings

impacts realized by its trainees, it solves a constrained optimization problem that we now

describe. Notice that if there were no budget constraints, the center would find the e that

maximizes the present value of the earnings impacts for each participant:

                             A
                                     (Ya1 − Ya0 )
(3)     eˆ = arg max ∑                                − c ( e ) − k.
                                      (1 + r )
                                                 a
                        e   a =0



       Training centers operate under a budget constraint B. Thus they face a tradeoff between

serving more clients and increasing inputs per client. Let {1,…,I} be the index set of eligible

applicants. Person i has an associated cost (variable, ci(e), and fixed, ki.). We assume that

technology (2) is common across persons although this assumption can easily be relaxed.

Associated with each potential set of trainees, S ⊂ {1,..., I } is a number of trainees N(S). For each

cohort, the center solves the problem

                                 (
                         A Ya1,i − Ya0,i           )  − c ( e ) − k ,
(4)     Max
        ei ,i∈S
                   ∑    ∑
                   i∈S   a =0 (1 + r )
                                         a
                                                      
                                                            i   i      i
                                                                           
                                                                         

subject to (2) and

(5)     B ≥ ∑ (ci (ei ) + k i ) .
                  i∈S



For LaGrange multiplier λ attached to (5), this produces the first order condition for each

observation i ∈ S ,
                                                                                           Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 8



         A
                  (
             ∂f Yi ,0a , ei   )        1            ∂ci ( ei )
(6)     ∑   
        a=0     ∂ei              (1 + r )   a
                                                  =λ
                                                         ∂ei
                                                                    .
                                

This is the standard efficiency condition for ei (marginal benefit equals marginal cost). In the

absence of a budget constraint, λ = 1 at an interior optimum. In general, λ ≥ 1, reflecting the

scarcity of the resources available to the center, and the center invests less in each person than

would be the case if resources were not constrained.8

        Write the maximized present value that is the solution to this problem as

ψ (S, B ) , which reflects the fact that present value obtained depends on the coalition S of trainees

selected and the available budget. The center’s problem is to pick the optimal S, S*, such that

                                                  ψ ( S * , B ) = arg maxψ ( S , B ) . 9
                                                                            S


Implementing this optimal ex post solution requires substantial amounts of information unlikely

to be available to the center at date “0” when applicants are admitted. Future (Ya1 , Ya0 ) are

unlikely to be available (although past information on Ya0 may be available), and other sources of

information useful for predicting (Ya1 , Ya0 ) , a = 1,..., A may be available. All of the available

studies suggest that forecasting future ∆a is a difficult problem.10

        Let J i be the information set about individual i. Then, ex ante, the criterion for

optimality becomes (for each S),


(7)
                                      (
                  A E Ya1,i − Ya0,i | J i
        Max ∑   ∑
                                                       )  − c ( e ) − k  ,
                          (1 + r )
                                   a                           i        i       i
            i∈S   a = 0                                                         
         ei
                                                                                  

subject to (2), (5) and the individual-specific information sets { J i }i∈S . Then for each S, { J i }i∈S , B
                                                                                   Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 9



and r, we may write the present value solution asψ ( S , B, J ) , where J = {J1 ,..., J I } . The training

center seeks to maximize this criterion with respect to S , so that

                                      ψ ( S * , B, J ) = arg maxψ ( S , B, J ) .
                                                           S


        The center adjusts at three margins: which applicants become trainees, the amount of

inputs devoted to each trainee and the number of trainees. The exact tradeoffs depend on the

specification of the technology for producing skill and the cost. If the marginal cost of

producing skills, c(e), is rapidly increasing, or returns are rapidly decreasing, the center has a

stronger incentive to increase the number of trainees than to increase inputs per trainee. In a

stationary environment, the training center makes the same decision in every period. We expand

on this analysis in Heckman (2003).11



B. Adding Performance Standards to the Model

        If the center seeks to maximize the present value of the earnings gains of its trainees

given the budget B, ex ante optimality is obtainable. In this setting, there is no role for

performance standards even if the training center has imperfect information about potential

outcomes. A role for performance standards emerges if the training center has a criterion

different from ψ ( S , B, J ) , or some monotonic function of it. Suppose that the center has

preferences U (ψ (S ), N (S ), Q(S )) where ψ (S ) is the present value of gains for trainee cohort S,

N(S) is the number of participants served (≤ I) in cohort S (one year's trainees in JTPA, as

performance is evaluated on an annual basis), and Q(S) is the “quality” of the persons served. For

notational simplicity we suppress the B and J arguments in ψ ( S , B, J ) , except where needed.
                                                                         Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 10


         By Q(S) we mean characteristics of the potential trainees other than their impacts. For

example, county and city governments often administer their local training centers, with the

result that staff may face pressure to serve groups targeted by the local politicians (see, for

example, Smith, 1992). At the same time, concerns about the social welfare of the least well off

among the applicant population may lead local bureaucrats to serve persons who would be

excluded by criterion (7). In the presence of these preferences for goals other than impact

maximation (that is, other than allocation based purely on efficiency concerns), or in the

presence of organizational lethargy (the on-the-job leisure enjoyed by the staff may, for example,

decrease in e), performance standards may redirect activity toward choosing the persons and

treatments that satisfyψ ( S ).

         Courty and Marschke (2003) document that a variety of performance systems currently

guide government programs. Most have the following character. The training center receives a

reward R if certain short run criteria are satisfied. An idealized version focuses on the short term

outcomes of trainees, which we operationalize as the average outcome in time period “1” for the

period “0” trainees:

                 1
Y11 ( S0 ) =            ∑    Y1,1i ,
               N ( S0 ) i∈S0

where the subscript on Y11 denotes time period “1”, while the first subscript on Y1,i denotes age

“1”, measured relative to the age of training. The “0” subscript on S indicates the current cohort

of trainees:

(8)      Y 11 ( S0 ) ≥ τ ,

a threshold value, the training center gets R. Otherwise it does not.
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 11


       Several factors motivate the use of short-term outcome measures. First, in order for a

performance standards system to be effective, it must provide quick feedback to program

managers. Feedback that arrives years after the corresponding actions by program staff is of little

use for short-term decisions, but it may have great scientific value for learning about the

parameters of the system and devising an effective performance standards system in the long run.

Second, evaluations (whether experimental or non-experimental) that seek to estimate the

counterfactual outcomes of participants, which are required to produce impact estimates, take a

long time, typically on the order of years. This is true even if the impacts they produce are short-

run impacts because of the time associated with collecting comparison group data, cleaning the

data and performing econometric analyses. Third, performance measures based on impacts are

likely to be controversial, either because of uncertainty about the econometric method utilized, in

the case of non-experimental methods, or politically, in the case of random assignment. Finally,

performance standards measures based on outcome levels generally cost much less to produce

than measures based on impacts, ∆ a . This is important, because an expensive performance

management system, even if it accomplishes something, may not accomplish enough to justify

the expense. Estimating impacts, either experimentally or non-experimentally, is technically

demanding and therefore difficult to automate. As a result, it would likely require the ongoing

intervention of expensive analysts. In contrast, as already noted, an outcome-based system can

typically rely on straightforward calculations based on administrative data. Both start-up and

operating costs are relatively low for outcomes based systems.

       Reward R is used to augment the center budget for the next cohort of trainees but cannot

be used as direct bonuses to center bureaucrats – or their employees. This incentive directs
                                                                          Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 12



attention toward the short run goal of attaining Y 11 ( S0 ) , which may, or may not, serve to

maximize the present value of output ψ ( S , B, J ) for the current batch of JTPA trainees.

        These incentives create a new intertemporal dynamic that is absent without performance

standards. Decisions by the center today affect the quality and quantity of participants today and

the resources available to the center to train tomorrow’s cohort. The center's problem changes in

the presence of the incentive constraint provided by the performance standards system. Y 11 ( S0 )

is a random variable as of date “0”. Thus, the budget for the next cohort, B% , is stochastic, and is

realized only after the decision on the cohort S0 is made. Formally,

   B if Y 11 ( S0 ) < τ ;
%
B=
    B + R if Y 1 ( S0 ) ≥ τ .
                  1




The reward can only be spent on the next cohort of trainees.



C. A Two-Cohort Model with Performance Standards

        The analysis of a model for a training center that serves only two cohorts is particularly

simple, and provides a useful point of departure for the more complicated model we analyze

below. Assume that the budget for the first cohort is fixed at B. The choice of S0, the initial

training group, affects ψ ( S0 , B,J ) as before (as well as N(S0) and Q(S0)). But it also affects the

resources available to train the next cohort in the second period.

        In the second period, the agency has budget B + R if Y11 ( S0 ) ≥ τ , so that it meets its

performance standards. It has budget B otherwise. Thus, in this simplified two-cohort model,

the problem of the center is to pick S0 so as to maximize
                                                                                   Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 13



             U (ψ ( S0 , B, J ) , N ( S0 ) , Q ( S0 ) )

(9)          +
                1
               1+ ρ
                          (
                    Pr Y11 ≥ τ | S0 max
                                     S11
                                             )         ( (      ) ( ) ( ))
                                         U ψ S11 , B + R, J , N S11 , Q S11

             +
                1
               1+ ρ
                          (
                    Pr Y11 < τ | S0 max
                                     S10
                                             )         ( (    ) ( ) ( ))
                                         U ψ S10 , B, J , N S10 , Q S10 ,


          1
where         is a discount rate. S11 is the cohort selected in the second period if Y11 ( S0 ) ≥ τ , so
         1+ ρ

that the budget equals B + R . S10 is the cohort selected in the second period if Y11 ( S0 ) < τ , so

that the budget equals B. Solving the two-cohort problem involves a two-stage maximization.

For the second period cohort, there are two possible states, corresponding to whether the first

cohort succeeds or fails relative to the performance standards. The center picks a group of

trainees for each possible budget. Given these optimal values, it picks S0 to maximize criterion

(9)—given the values of S10 and S11 selected in the first stage maximization.

             Heuristically, if S0 were a continuous variable, and (9) were differentiable in S0 , the first

order condition would be

      ∂U (ψ ( S0 , B, J ) , N ( S0 ) , Q ( S 0 ) )
0=
                              ∂S0
         (                      )
    ∂ Pr Y ( S0 ) ≥ τ | S0
                                    {                                                             ) ( ) ( ) )}
               1

+
              1

                   ∂S0
                                    max
                                     1
                                        S1
                                                 ( (         ) ( ) ( ))
                                        U ψ S11 , B + R, J , N S11 , Q S11 − max
                                                                              0
                                                                              S1
                                                                                      ( (
                                                                                 U ψ S10 , B, I , N S10 , Q S10



             The first term reflects the value of S0 in raising the current utility of the training center.

The second term captures the motivating effect of performance standards, which equals the

marginal effect of S0 on the probability of winning the award times the increase in center utility

from winning the award.12 In the two-cohort model, there is no third cohort whose budget gets
                                                                           Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 14


determined by the second cohort, so this incentive effect disappears when the center makes

decisions regarding the second cohort.

        In this simple model, performance standards may distort performance. Even if the

agency would maximize present value in their absence, the performance incentives create the

possibility of distortion. If R is sufficiently large and c and ρ sufficiently small, and if Y11 ( S0 ) is

weakly or perversely correlated with present value in the absence of the performance standards,

the agency may distort its choices in serving the first cohort in order to get a reward that it can

then use to serve the second cohort. If the reward is sufficiently large, it can raise the

(discounted) present value in the second period enough to more than offset the loss in present

value in the first period. Of course, the actual solution is more complicated because the criterion

is not differentiable in S0. But this heuristic is a useful guide to the more general solution, which

is presented in Heckman (2003).



D. A Model For A Stationary Environment With Performance Standards

        This simple two-cohort model abstracts from an important feature of the JTPA system,

which we now develop. In reality, training centers serve multiple cohorts of trainees over many

time periods. To take an opposite extreme to the one just considered, suppose, for analytical

simplicity, that training centers last forever, and that the environment they face is stationary.

        Training centers at any point of chronological time can be in one of two states: (a) in

receipt of a bonus R, so that they have budget B+R to spend on the current cohort or (b) without

the bonus, so that they have budget B. They influence these budgetary outcomes by their choice

of S in the previous chronological time period. What they choose depends on the resources

available to the center in that period. Since the environment is stationary, and there are only two
                                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 15


states, the model is a Markovian decision problem. This means that the decision variable S does

not have to be time subscripted, just state subscripted, depending on whether or not in any given

period the budget is B or B + R .

         Define V0 as the value function of a center without a reward in the current period and

V1 as the value function for a center with a reward in the current period. Then,

                                                            1                           1
         V0 = max U (ψ ( S , B, J ), N ( S ), Q ( S )) +        Pr(Y11 ( S ) ≥ τ )V1 +      Pr(Y11 ( S ) < τ )V0 ,
                 S                                         1+ ρ                        1+ ρ

where we make the budget in each state explicit by entering it as a conditioning argument in the

utility function. We define V1 in a parallel fashion:

                                                                1                           1
         V1 = max U (ψ ( S , B + R, J ), N ( S ), Q ( S )) +        Pr(Y11 ( S ) ≥ τ )V1 +      Pr(Y11 ( S ) < τ )V0 .
                 S                                             1+ ρ                        1+ ρ

We assume that V1 > V0 , because more resources further center objectives. The optimal choice of

S depends on the rewards, the preferences, and the constraints facing centers. Here we present

an intuitive analysis of the effects of incentives. We develop this model formally in Heckman

(2003), but a number of features of it are intuitively obvious and we record them here without

proof.

         (1) Let P 01 be the transition probability of going from no reward to a reward and let

P11 be the transition probability of having a reward in two consecutive periods. Since having

more resources makes it easier to attain all center objectives, including meeting performance

standards next period, P11 > P 01 . Performance standards impart a value to incumbency.

         (2) The analysis of the two-period model carries over in part in this more general setting.

With sufficiently large R, sufficiently small ρ , and sufficiently misdirected performance

incentives (incentives not aligned with present value maximization), centers that care only about
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 16


maximizing the present value of the earnings gains of participants may choose to divert resources

away from that goal in low budget (non-reward) periods. They will do so in order to get the

budgetary reward in the following period, which can then be spent to generate a larger total

discounted stream of earnings gains than would period-by-period earnings gain maximization.

The same incentives are not operative in high budget periods. Thus, in the case where center

preferences are the same as social preferences, if discount rates are sufficiently low, misaligned

performance standards may distort activity, but only in the low budget state.

       (3) For the conditions on center preferences analyzed in point (2), and the same

misalignment of performance incentives, if the probability of attaining the reward threshold is

sufficiently low, but the reward R is sufficiently high, the introduction of performance standards

can lower the aggregate output of all centers. Unsuccessful centers divert their activities away

from productive uses and toward meeting the targets. Successful centers produce more human

capital because they have more resources. If the gains for the successful centers are sufficiently

small and the successful centers are a small fraction of all centers, aggregate output can decrease.

In general, the question of whether or not incentives distort or enhance aggregate productivity of

training centers is an empirical question on which we provide some information in this paper.



E. Cream Skimming

       The most common criticism of the JTPA performance standards system, and other similar

systems, is that they encourage cream skimming. That is, by rewarding training centers based on

the mean outcomes of their participants, rather than the mean impacts of the services they

provide, the system encourages them to serve persons who will have good labor market

outcomes (as measured by the system) whether or not the program has any benefit for them, or
                                                                                Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 17


for whom there are substantial short run benefits. The performance measures create an incentive

to serve persons with a high value of Y1,i1 , regardless of whether that high value results from a

high value of Y1,i0 or a high value of ∆ 1,i . The existing literature is vague about whether cream

skimming should be defined in terms of Y11,i or Y10,i . The logic of performance standards in terms

of program outcomes suggests a definition in terms of Y11,i .13

        As noted in Heckman (1992), and Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997), conventional

models of program evaluation assume that Ya1,i and Ya0,i differ by a constant:

                                      ∆ a ,i = Ya1,i − Ya0,i = ∆ a for all i,

that is, that everyone has the same impact of treatment.14 This is the so-called “common effect”

model. In this case, a high Y11,i goes hand in glove with a high Y10,i and picking persons with a

high Y10,i helps toward satisfying (8). Assuming equal costs across all trainees, cream skimming

(or “bottom scraping” by focusing on the “hard to serve”) is innocuous, because all participants

have the same impact from the program.

        Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997) show that when the ranks of Y11,i and Y10,i in their

respective distributions are the same, one can relax the assumption that ∆a is the same for

everyone, but preserve many of the features of the common effect model without assuming a

                                                   ( )
common treatment effect. In this case, if Y11,i Y10,i is increasing in Y1,i0 , the center has an incentive

to cream skim on Y10,i . Cream skimming on the untreated outcome furthers the maximization of

                                               ( )
the present values of earnings gains if Y11,i Y10,i - Y10,i is increasing in Y10,i . Cream skimming on
                                                                            Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 18



Y1,i0 has the same effects as cream skimming on Y1,i1 because the two are monotonically related if

the densities of Y1,i0 and Y1,i1 are continuous.

        Finally, many of the analyses in Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997) suggest that most

of the variance in Y1,i1 is actually variance in Y1,i0 or, put differently, the variance of ∆1,i is small

relative to that of Y1,i0 . In this case, cream skimming based on Y1,i0 will again have essentially the

same effects on the efficiency or equity of the program's choices as cream skimming based on

Y1,i1 . In general, however, the two definitions of cream skimming have different theoretical and

operational content.



III. Institutions

A. The JTPA Program

        The Job Training Partnership Act program began in 1982. It envisioned a partnership

between the private, public and non-profit sectors in providing employment and training services

to the disadvantaged. Until recently, when it was replaced by the Workforce Investment Act,

JTPA was the largest federal employment and training program. The program operated through

local training centers, which usually had a local monopoly on providing JTPA services (though

not on government-subsidized employment and training services in general). JTPA was a

voluntary program (for both participants and training centers) that served persons receiving

means tested federal transfers or with a low family income in the six months preceding program

entry. Commonly provided services included classroom training in occupational skills,

subsidized on-the-job training at private firms and job search assistance. Among youth, basic

education (often leading to taking the GED exam) and work experience were also sometimes
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 19


provided.15 Most services were contracted out to private providers, non-profit agencies or other

government agencies (such as community colleges).



B. The JTPA Performance Standards System

       The federal government, the states, and the local JTPA training centers all played distinct

roles in the JTPA system. The federal government defined core performance standard outcome

measures. These measures evolved somewhat over time, but always included employment rates,

either at termination from JTPA or 13 weeks after, and average wage rates among participants

who found employment, computed for both all participants and participants on welfare. The

simple model in Section II, which defines performance in terms of earnings levels, captures only

one of the many measures actually used, but can easily be modified for other measures, or for the

weighted average of measures actually used in the JTPA system (see Heckman, 2003). Each

program year, the federal government defined target levels, or standards, for each core outcome

measure, and provided a regression model that allowed states to adjust the targets for differences

in economic conditions and participant characteristics among centers.

       The individual states could adopt the federally defined standards or modify and augment

them within broad limits. Many states added additional measures that provided incentives to

serve particular groups within the JTPA-eligible population. States also had substantial discretion

over the “award function,” the rule that determined centers' budgetary payoffs as a function of

their performance relative to the standards and, in some cases, relative to each other. As

documented in Courty and Marschke (2003), these functions varied widely among states on

many dimensions. All of the state systems shared the feature that centers were never worse off

for increasing average employment or wages among participants. For this reason, and because
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 20


the employment and wage rate measures typically received the greatest weight in the state award

functions, we concentrate our analysis on these measures.

          The individual centers kept track of the participants' labor market outcomes, subject to

state and federal reporting rules. At the end of each program year, states calculated the

performance measures for each center and determined the reward it would receive. Depending on

the state award function and its performance, a center could receive nothing (or even a sanction

if it was far below the threshold) or, in the event of success, as much as a 20 to 30 percent

increase in its regular budget. Centers valued these award funds because they could be used more

flexibly than regular budget allocations.



C. The WIA Performance Standards System

          The performance standards systems for many other programs, including employment and

training programs in Canada and Germany, resemble those in the JTPA system in their reliance

on short term outcome levels as a proxy for long term impacts. Thus our analysis has generality

well beyond the JTPA program. The performance standards system for the WIA program, the

successor to JTPA, is similar in both its federalism and in the types of performance measures it

employs. The WIA system is described in detail in U.S. Department of Labor (2000a,b) and

criticized in U.S. General Accounting Office (2002). WIA provides essentially the same services

as JTPA to a somewhat broader population. O'Shea and King (2001) describe the program in

detail. Its performance standard measures include close analogs to the JTPA measures we study

here, such as entry into unsubsidized employment and retention in unsubsidized employment six

months after entry into employment (where “retention” need not mean actually keeping the same

job).16
                                                                         Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 21




IV. The National JTPA Study Data

       We use data gathered as part of the National JTPA Study, an experimental evaluation of

the JTPA program.17 The experiment was conducted at 16 of the more than 600 JTPA training

centers. At these centers, persons who applied to and were accepted into the program were

randomly assigned to either a treatment group allowed access to JTPA services or to a control

group denied access to JTPA services for the next 18 months. Background information including

demographic variables, educational attainment, work histories, indicators of previous training

and of participation in government transfer programs, and family income and composition were

collected at the time of random assignment. Survey information on employment and earnings

was collected around 18 months after random assignment and again for a sub-sample of the

experimental group around 30 months after random assignment.



V. The Efficiency Effects of Cream Skimming

       In this section, we present two pieces of evidence on the efficiency effects of cream

skimming in JTPA. We then review the literature on whether or not cream skimming actually

occurs in practice.



A. Efficiency Effects of Cream Skimming on Ya0 and Ya1 .

       As noted in Heckman (1992) and Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997), experimental

data alone do not identify both components of (Ya0 , Ya1 ) or their joint distribution. They only

identify the marginal distributions of Ya0 and Ya1 . We know either Ya0 (for the controls) or Ya1 (for
                                                                              Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 22


the treatments) but not both for either group. Thus, without further assumptions, it is not

possible to form ∆ a = Ya1 − Ya0 for anyone or to relate it to either Ya0 or Ya1 .

           Following Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997), if the ranks of Ya0 and Ya1 for any

person are the same in their respective distributions, it is possible to associate a Ya0 with each Ya1 ,

and the association is unique if both distributions are continuous. We use this assumption to

construct ∆ a as a function of Ya0 . Given continuity of the two marginal distributions and the

perfect ranking assumption, ∆ a (Ya0 ) can be expressed as a function of Ya0 (or its percentile

equivalent Ya1 ). Under this assumption cream skimming on Ya0 is equivalent to cream skimming

on Ya1 .

           The perfect ranking assumption is implied by the common effect assumption ∆ a ,i = ∆ a

for all i but does not imply it. It generalizes the common effect assumption by allowing the

impact ∆ a to vary as a function of Ya0 . We operationalize this idea by taking percentile

differences across the treated and untreated outcome distributions.18 Let Ya0, j denote the jth

percentile of the Ya0 distribution, with Ya1, j the corresponding percentile in the Ya1 distribution.

Thus, we estimate ∆ a (Ya0, j ) = Ya1, j − Ya0, j .

           Figures 1A and 1B present estimates of ∆ a ( Ya0, j ) constructed using this method for adult

females and males, respectively. Earnings in the 18 months after random assignment constitute

the outcome. Consider first the estimates for adult women in Figure 1A, for whom the sample

size is the largest. At the low end, the impact is zero through the 20th percentile. This region

corresponds to persons with zero earnings in the 18 months after random assignment in both the

treated and untreated states. The treatment effect is flat and positive over the interval from the
                                                                         Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 23


20th to the 90th percentile, after which there is a discernible increase in the estimated impact in

the final decile. Figure 1A suggests that with equal costs per participant, the net gains from

participation are modest and roughly constant over a broad range of untreated outcomes, and that

cream skimming past the 20th percentile probably contributes little to efficiency. However, a

policy of targeting services at the bottom two deciles would likely entail considerable efficiency

costs. Figure 1B for adult men tells a similar tale. The curve is flat over the range from the 10th

to the 50th percentile, after which it dips and then begins to rise.



B. Impact Estimates and Participant Characteristics

        Another way to assess the potential for efficiency losses from cream skimming is to

establish whether or not the predictors of Ya1 are correlated with measured impacts. Program

officials are likely to use characteristics ( X ) to forecast the short run target outcome. The

relationship between the predictors and ∆ a is of interest in its own right. We find few precise

relationships between the predictors and the impacts and conclude that there are unlikely to be

sizeable efficiency losses from cream skimming.

        Tables 1A and 1B summarize subgroup estimates of the impact of JTPA on the earnings

and employment of adult females and adult males in the JTPA experiment, respectively.19 The

first column in each table lists the values of each subgroup variable. Columns two through five

present impact estimates on 18- month and 30-month earnings and 18-month and 30-month

employment, respectively. The tables also present p-values from tests of the null of equal

impacts among subgroups for each X.

        We estimated subgroup impacts conditional on labor force status (employed, unemployed

and out of the labor force) and highest grade completed, both measured at random assignment.
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 24


We also estimated impacts conditional on receipt of Aid to Families with Dependent Children

(AFDC)20 and on the month of last employment (if any). All of these variables predict the level

of the 18-month and 30-month outcomes for participants.

       For adult females, we reject the null of equal impacts among subgroups in four of the

sixteen possible cases. The rejections (at the five percent level) occur for employment over 18

months and earnings over 30 months conditional on AFDC receipt, and over 30 months for both

earnings and employment conditional on month of last employment, with larger impacts in each

case for women receiving AFDC. However, even when we do not reject the null of equal

impacts, the point estimates suggest very different impacts, and hence the possibility of

substantial efficiency losses from cream skimming which cannot be detected in our samples. The

point estimates for the other two sets of estimates, for which the null of equality is not rejected,

suggest larger impacts for AFDC recipients. As AFDC receipt is negatively related to Ya1 , this

finding suggests that cream skimming may be (slightly) inefficient for adult women. The

interpretation of the subgroup estimates for adult females conditional on month of last

employment before random assignment is less clear, as the pattern of coefficient estimates is

non-monotonic. This finding, combined with the general lack of statistically significant subgroup

differences in impact estimates and the sometimes substantial changes in the estimated

coefficients from 18 to 30 months, suggest, at most, weak evidence of modest inefficiency

arising from cream skimming for adult females.

       For adult males, statistically significant differences in impacts among subgroups defined

by X emerge only once, for impacts on 18-month earnings conditional on labor force status. In

this case, the largest impacts appear for men employed at the time of random assignment.

Employment at random assignment is positively correlated with Ya1 . As for the adult women, the
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 25


insignificant coefficients vary substantially among subgroups, and reveal patterns that are

difficult to interpret, such as non-monotonicity as a function of months since last employment or

years of schooling, as well as substantial changes from 18 to 30 months. Combined with the

general lack of statistically significant subgroup impacts, the pattern of estimates presents weak

evidence of at most a modest efficiency gain to cream skimming for adult males. For both men

and women, of course, the costs of service provision may vary among subgroups as well, so that

the net impacts may differ in either direction from the gross impacts reported here.

        Other results in the literature that make use of the experimental data from the NJS echo

the findings in Table 1. Bloom et al. (1993, Exhibits 4.15 and 5.14) present subgroup impact

estimates on earnings in the 18 months after random assignment, while Orr et al. (1996, Exhibits

5.8 and 5.9) present similar estimates for 30-month earnings, using a somewhat different

earnings measure than we use here.21 Both consider a different set of subgroups than we do.

Only a couple of significant subgroup impacts appear at 18 months. At 30 months, the only

significant subgroup differences found by Orr et al. (1996) among adults are for adult men,

where men with a spouse present have higher impacts.22 Overall, the absence of many

statistically significant subgroup differences, combined with the pattern of point estimates,

makes the findings in Bloom et al. (1993) and Orr et al. (1996) consistent with our own findings.

There are unlikely to be substantial efficiency gains or losses from picking people on the basis of

X .23



VI. The Effects of Performance Incentives on Behavior

A. Cream-Skimming in JTPA?
                                                                         Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 26


        In this section, we review the evidence on the question of whether or not cream skimming

occurs in response to the incentives presented by the JTPA performance standards system. In

order to do so, we first introduce some additional notation that will allow us to define precisely

how we can go about identifying cream skimming empirically. We define indicators for the

following stages of the JTPA participation process: E for eligibility for JTPA, W for awareness

of the JTPA program, A for application to JTPA, C for acceptance into the JTPA program and T

for formal enrollment in the JTPA program. These stages are largely self-explanatory except for

acceptance, which means that a spot in the program has been offered. Figure 2 summarizes the

stages in the JTPA participation process.

        In Section II we defined cream skimming as selection of persons into the program based

on Y11 , and noted that empirically this is essentially the same as selection on Y10 . In examining

cream skimming empirically, two issues arise. The first is that we do not observe Y11 for non-

participants, and so we cannot directly examine the cream skimming question by comparing

values of Y11 for participants and non-participants or for accepted and rejected applicants. The

literature typically addresses this issue by looking at observable characteristics X that predict Y11 ,

either directly or in the form of a predicted value Yˆ11 ( X ) . Addressing the cream skimming issue

in this way implicitly assumes the validity of matching on X as an estimator. If the assumptions

of matching are satisfied for X , we can use Y11 ( X ) for participants to validly approximate

Y11 ( X ) for nonparticipants.

        The second issue concerns what population of non-participants against which to compare

the participants. The literature adopts two approaches to this issue. The first compares

participants with the eligible population as a whole. This approach implicitly assumes that in the
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 27


absence of cream skimming, eligibles would participate at random, or at least not in a way that

looks like cream skimming. As a result, it potentially conflates self-selection by participants

with the exercise of administrative discretion in choosing among applicants.

       As discussed in Devine and Heckman (1996), the JTPA program casts a fairly wide net in

terms of eligibility. Its eligible population includes persons with stable, low-wage employment.

As shown in Heckman and Smith (1999), such persons have very low participation probabilities.

They also have relatively high earnings within the eligible population. It is unlikely that cream

skimming is the reason why such persons fail to participate in JTPA, especially since this group

shows a low participation rate for other training programs without performance standards

(Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith, 1999). The second approach attempts to avoid this problem by

comparing participants only to applicants, on the argument that program bureaucrats have

substantially more control over who participates among applicants than over who participates

among eligibles. A potential problem with this approach is that even among applicants, there

may be self-selection out of the program into work. Further, any control that staff have over who

applies, through their marketing efforts and choice of contract providers such as non-profit

community agencies, is missed.

       Anderson et al. (1992) use data on adult JTPA enrollees in Tennessee in 1987, combined

with data on persons eligible for JTPA identified in the March 1986-1988 Current Population

Surveys, to compare f(X | E = 0) with f(X | E=0, W = 0, A = 0, C = 0, T=0). Relative to all

eligibles, they find that participants are significantly more likely to be female, high school

dropouts and AFDC recipients. Within the black and AFDC recipient subgroups, JTPA

participants have much lower probabilities of being high school dropouts than eligible non-

participants. Using the same data, Anderson, et al. (1993) estimate a bivariate probit model of
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 28


enrollment and of placement conditional on enrollment. In this multivariate framework, less

educated eligibles (particularly high school dropouts) are under-represented in the program, but

blacks and AFDC participants are not. Their model predicts that if eligible persons participated

at random, the placement rate would fall 9.1 percentage points, from 70.7 percent to 61.6

percent, suggesting modest evidence of cream-skimming when measured relative to all eligibles.

       Heckman and Smith (1995) use data from the four training centers in the JTPA

experimental study at which special data on program eligibles were collected, combined with

data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), to decompose the process of

JTPA participation into four stages: eligibility, awareness, application and acceptance (combined

into a single stage due to data limitations), and participation. Several findings emerge from their

study. First, the differential participation of certain groups among the eligible population has

multiple causes. For example, among the least educated (those with fewer than 10 years of

schooling), lack of awareness of JTPA plays a critical role in deterring participation. Awareness

depends only very indirectly on the efforts of JTPA staff. At the same time, adults with fewer

than 10 years of schooling are also less likely to reach the application and acceptance stage

conditional on awareness and are less likely to enroll conditional on applying and being

accepted. This evidence suggests that cream skimming may play a role in their low participation

rate. Second, Heckman and Smith (1995) provide evidence of cream skimming at the enrollment

stage, where program staff members have the most influence. Blacks, persons with less than a

high school education, persons from poorer families and those without recent employment

experience are less likely to be enrolled than others, conditional on application and acceptance.24

The Heckman and Smith (1995) study demonstrates the importance of considering both self-
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 29


selection and cream skimming at each stage of the participation process. They find substantial

evidence of cream skimming for some subgroups of the overall population.

       In a study of an individual center, Heckman, Smith, and Taber (1996) use the JTPA

experimental data from Corpus Christi, Texas. They examine how predicted short-term earnings

levels and predicted long-term earnings impacts affect the probability that an applicant gets

accepted into the program (where acceptance is defined as reaching the point of random

assignment) by estimating Pr(T=1| E=1, W=1, A=1, E( Y11 | X), E (PV|X)). They estimate both

E( Y11 | X), defined as expected earnings in the 18 months after random assignment for

participants, and E(PV|X), defined as the expected discounted lifetime earnings gain from

participating, either gross or net of costs, using the experimental data. The transition from

application to acceptance should depend in large part on caseworker choices and thus provides

the cleanest measure of cream skimming among the existing studies. They find strong evidence

that caseworkers at Corpus Christi select negatively on E( Y11 | X). That is, they find that

caseworkers indulge their preferences for helping the most disadvantaged applicants rather than

responding to the incentives provided by the performance standards system. At the same time,

they find only weak evidence of positive selection on expected gains, E(PV|X). While the authors

caution against over-generalizing from a study of only one of JTPA's more than 600

heterogeneous training centers, this study demonstrates the empirical importance of negative

cream skimming by caseworkers who indulge their preferences for helping the needy.



B. Other Effects on Bureaucratic Behavior

       Heinrich's (1995, 1999, 2003) analyses of the Cook County JTPA center provide

additional insights into how performance standards affect bureaucratic behavior. At this site,
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 30


which had a strong technocratic focus relative to other JTPA training centers, performance

incentives were passed onto service providers through performance-based contracts. Both

caseworkers and program managers were keenly aware of contractually defined performance

expectations, and placed a strong emphasis on achieving high placement rates at low cost

(Heinrich, 1995, 2003). Heinrich's (1999) analysis of the center's decisions in awarding

contracts to service providers finds that the most important factor is a service provider's past

performance relative to cost-per-placement standards in their earlier contracts. In addition,

training center administrators set much higher performance requirements in the contracts they

concluded with vendors than they themselves faced under the state performance standards

system. In essence, they insured themselves against the possibility that some providers would

fail to meet their contractual standards.



VII. How Well Do the Short Run Performance Measures Predict Long Run Impacts?

       This section presents evidence from our analysis of the JTPA experimental data and from

the literature on the link between short-run outcome measures like those in the JTPA

performance standards system (versions of Y11 ) and the longer-term impact of the program on

participants' earnings and employment. A central question is whether the short run performance

measures based on outcomes predict long run impacts.



A. Methods

       As discussed in Heckman (1992) and Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997), without

additional assumptions, experimental data cannot be used to generate individual-level impact

estimates. Instead, we estimate subgroup mean impacts using covariates measured at the time of
                                                                      Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 31


random assignment. For adult males and females in the NJS data, we form 43 subgroups based

on the following characteristics measured at the time of random assignment: race, age, education,

marital status, employment status, receipt of AFDC, receipt of food stamps, and training center.

Individuals with complete data belong to eight subgroups, while those with incomplete data are

included in as many subgroups as their data allow. Using self-reported earnings data, we

construct total earnings over 18 and over 30 months after random assignment for each sample

member with sufficient data. We also compute the fraction of months employed (where being

employed in a month is defined as having positive earnings in that month) in each period as our

employment outcome. Using a regression framework, we construct mean-difference

experimental impact estimates for each subgroup and adjust these estimates to reflect the fact

that a substantial fraction of persons (41 percent of adult males and 37 percent of adult females)

in the treatment group dropped out and did not participate in JTPA.25,26

       The JTPA performance measures we analyze are hourly wage and employment at

termination from the program and weekly earnings and employment 13 weeks after termination.

In practice, program bureaucrats obtain these outcomes by calling the participants and asking

them. We cannot do this, and instead use program termination dates from JTPA administrative

data combined with survey data on job spells to construct the performance measures. Because

program administrators do not necessarily contact participants on the exact date of termination or

follow-up, and to allow for some measurement error in the timing of the self-reported job spells,

we use a 61-day window around each date in constructing the performance measures. We

measure employment based on the presence or absence of a job spell within this window. We

calculate hourly wages and weekly earnings for employed persons only, since the corresponding

performance standards are defined only over this group. We use the highest hourly wage within
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 32


the window for persons holding more than one job. Earnings are averaged over the window and

are summed over jobs for persons holding multiple concurrent jobs.

       We then average the constructed performance measures over each subgroup, and regress

the estimated subgroup impacts on the subgroup averages of the performance measures, using

the inverse of the Eicker-White standard errors from the impact estimation as weights in the

regression. We estimate separate regressions for each outcome (earnings and employment over

18 and 30 months) and for each performance measure.



B. Evidence from JTPA

       Table 2 presents estimates of the relationship between experimental earnings and

employment impact estimates and various short-term outcomes measured at selected dates after

random assignment. The four columns of estimates in Table 2 correspond to cumulated earnings

and employment gains over the eighteen and thirty month intervals following random

assignment. Each cell in the table presents the regression coefficient associated with the column's

dependent variable and the row's independent variable, the estimated (robust) standard error of

the coefficient, the p-value from a test of the null hypothesis that the population coefficient is

zero and the R2 for the regression. The constant from the regression is omitted to reduce clutter.

For example, the first row of the first column reveals that a regression of earnings over the 18

months after random assignment on the hourly wage at termination from the JTPA program

yields an estimated coefficient of $465.41 on the hourly wage, with a standard error of $394.76,

a p-value of 0.2452 and an overall R2 of 0.0328.

       Four striking findings emerge from Table 2. First, and most important, we find many

negative relationships between short run performance indicators and the experimental impact
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 33


estimates. That is, in many cases, the short-term outcome measures utilized in the JTPA

performance standards system are perversely related to the longer-term participant earnings and

employment gains that constitute the program's goals. The only evidence supporting the efficacy

of short-term outcome measures is the link between employment at follow-up and earnings,

which is positive at 18 months and positive and marginally statistically significant at 30 months

for adult men (but statistically insignificant in both cases for adult women, with a negative

coefficient estimate at 30 months). Second, the R2 values are quite low. The short-term

performance standards measures are only weakly related to the long-term earnings and

employment gains produced by the program. Third, moving from wage measures at termination

to “longer-term” measures constructed from follow-up interviews at three months after

termination usually weakens the relationship between the performance standard measure and the

longer-run earnings or employment impacts. The R2 values nearly always decline and the

estimated coefficients sometimes become less positive or more negative. Fourth, the

performance measures often do worse at predicting earnings impacts estimated over 30 months

than at predicting earnings gains estimated over only the first 18 months after random

assignment. This suggests that our findings are not due to the fact that the in-program period,

when some participants reduce their labor supply to focus on training, may dominate the 18-

month outcomes of some participants.



C. Evidence from the Literature

       The findings presented in the preceding subsection do not represent an anomaly in the

literature, but rather characterize the findings of almost all of the small number of existing papers

that perform similar analyses. Table 3 summarizes five other studies we found in the literature
                                                                      Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 34


that examine the relationship between performance standards measures based on short run

outcome levels and long run program impacts.27 For each study, the first column of the table

gives the citation, while the second indicates the particular employment and training program

considered. The third column indicates the data used. The fourth and fifth columns indicate the

impact measure used (for example, earnings from 18 to 36 months after leaving the program) and

what impact estimator (for example random assignment) was used to generate the impact

estimates, respectively. The sixth column details the particular performance measures

considered (for example, employment at termination from the program). The final column

summarizes the findings.

       The studies range from strongly negative in their findings, as in Gay and Borus (1980),

Cragg (1997), and Burghardt and Schochet (2001), to more mixed findings such as those

reported in Friedlander (1988) and Zornitsky, et al. (1988). The most positive of the studies,

Zornitsky, et al. (1988), examines a single treatment program treating relatively homogeneous

clients, a context very different from, and perhaps not generalizable to, multi-treatment programs

serving heterogeneous populations such as JTPA and WIA. This narrowly focused program

focused on the skills for a particular occupation, and so did not stimulate post-program human

capital investment, which, as we have already noted, would weaken the relationship between the

short run performance measures and long run impacts. Taken together, these studies generally

support our finding from the JTPA data that performance standards based on short-term outcome

levels likely do little to encourage the provision of services to those who benefit most from them

in employment and training programs.



VIII. Conclusions
                                                                           Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 35


       Performance standards systems that attempt to motivate bureaucratic behavior by

rewarding government agencies on the basis of short-run outcome measures are widely perceived

to be a solution to the problem of inefficiency in government, despite the absence of any strong

evidence that such standards lead bureaucrats to increase their attainment of long-run program

goals. We present a model of training center behavior in the presence of performance standards,

and show why these standards focus on short-term outcomes. Within the context of this model,

we precisely define cream skimming and show how such systems provide an incentive for it.

       Our empirical analysis reaches two important conclusions. First, whatever cream

skimming occurs in JTPA produces only modest efficiency gains or losses. Opposition to cream

skimming must come on equity grounds. Put differently, our results show that the efficiency cost

of not cream skimming, and instead focusing on the hard to serve among the eligible population,

is a modest one.

       Our second important conclusion is that the JTPA performance standards do not promote

efficiency because the short-term outcomes they rely on have essentially a zero correlation with

long-term impacts on employment and earnings. This surprising result comports with the

findings in several other studies that have estimated this relationship.

       Nothing in this paper says that a successful performance standards system cannot be

devised. The available evidence suggests that bureaucrats respond to performance standards,

although sometimes perversely so. The available evidence also suggests that the efficiency gains

or losses from cream skimming are likely to be small. However, the performance systems that

have been tried in the past have generally used short run target measures that are only weakly

related to long run efficiency measures. If performance standards are to be put in place that
                                                                    Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 36


motivate efficiency, long term studies should be conducted to determine which short run

measures are strongly related to long term efficiency criteria.
                                                                     Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 37


References



Anderson, Kathryn, Richard Burkhauser, Jennie Raymond, and Clifford Russell. 1992. “Mixed

Signals in the Job Training Partnership Act.” Growth and Change 22(3): 32-48.



Anderson, Kathryn, Richard Burkhauser, and Jennie Raymond. 1993. “The Effect of Creaming on

Placement Rates Under the Job Training Partnership Act.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review

46(4): 613-624.



Barnow, Burt. 1992. “The Effects of Performance Standards on State and Local Programs.” In

Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs, ed. Charles Manski and Irwin Garfinkel, 277-309.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.



Becker, Gary. 1964. Human Capital. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.



Bell, Stephen, and Larry Orr. 2002. “Screening (and Creaming?) Applicants to Job Training

Programs: The AFDC Homemaker-Home Health Aide Demonstration.” Labour Economics

Forthcoming.



Bloom, Howard, Larry Orr, George Cave, Steve Bell, and Fred Doolittle. 1993. The National JTPA

Study: Title IIA Impacts on Earnings and Employment at 18 Months. Bethesda, MD: Abt

Associates.
                                                                     Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 38




Bloom, Howard, Larry Orr, Stephen Bell, George Cave, Fred Doolittle, Winston Lin, and Johannes

Bos. 1997. “The Benefits and Costs of JTPA Title II-A Programs: Key Findings from the National

Job Training Partnership Act Study.” Journal of Human Resources 32(3): 549-576.



Burghardt, John, and Peter Schochet. 2001. National Job Corps Study: Impacts by Center

Characteristics. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.



Carneiro, Pedro, Karsten Hansen, and James Heckman. 2001. “Educational Attainment and Labor

Market Outcomes: Estimating the Distributions of Returns to Interventions.” Unpublished

manuscript, University of Chicago.



Courty, Pascal, and Gerald Marschke. 1996. “Moral Hazard Under Incentive Systems: The Case of

a Federal Bureaucracy.” In Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Economic

Growth, Volume 7, Reinventing Government and the Problem of Bureaucracy, ed. Gary Libecap,

157-190. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.



__________. 1997. “Measuring Government Performance: Lessons from a Federal Job Training

Program.” American Economic Review 87(2): 383-388.



__________. 2003. “The JTPA Incentive System.'' In Performance Standards in a Government

Bureaucracy: Analytic Essays on the JTPA Performance Standards System, ed. James Heckman,

forthcoming. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 39




Cragg, Michael. 1997. “Performance Incentives in the Public Sector: Evidence from the Job

Training Partnership Act.” Journalof Law, Economics and Organization 13(1): 147-168.



Csörgö, Miklós. 1983. Quantile Processes with Statistical Applications. Philadelphia, PA:

Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.



Devine, Theresa, and James Heckman. 1996. “The Structure and Consequences of Eligibility Rules

for a Social Program.” In Research in Labor Economics, Volume 15, ed. Solomon Polachek, 111-

170. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.



Dixit, Avinash. 2002. “Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An Interpretative

Review.” Journal of Human Resources, current issue.



Doolittle, Fred, and Linda Traeger. 1990. Implementing the National JTPA Study. New York, NY:

Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.



Friedlander, Daniel. 1988. Subgroup Impacts and Performance Indicators for Selected Welfare

Employment Programs. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.



Gay, Robert, and Michael Borus. 1980. “Validating Performance Indicators for Employment and

Training Programs.” Journal of Human Resources 15(1): 29-48.
                                                                     Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 40


Hansen, Karsten, James Heckman, and Edward Vytlacil. 2000. “Dynamic Treatment Effects.”

Paper presented at the Midwest Econometrics Group, Chicago.



Hanushek, Eric. 2002. “Publically Provided Education.” In Handbook of Public Finance, ed. Alan

Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, forthcoming. Amsterdam: North-Holland.



Heckman, James. 1992. “Randomization and Social Program Evaluation.” In Evaluating Welfare

and Training Programs, ed. Charles Manski and Irwin Garfinkel, 201-230. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press.



__________. 2001. “Micro Data, Heterogeneity, and the Evaluation of Public Policy: Nobel

Lecture.” Journal of Political Economy 109(4): 673-748.



_________, ed. 2003. Performance Standards in a Government Bureaucracy: Analytic Essays on

the JTPA Performance Standards System, forthcoming. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for

Employment Research.



Heckman, James, Neil Hohmann, Jeffrey Smith, and Michael Khoo. 2000. “Substitution and

Dropout Bias in Social Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Experiment.” Quarterly

Journal of Economics 105(2): 651-694.



Heckman, James, Robert LaLonde, and Jeffrey Smith. 1999. “The Economics and Econometrics of
                                                                    Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 41


Active Labor Market Programs.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, ed. Orley

Ashenfelter and David Card, 1865-2097. Amsterdam: North-Holland.



Heckman, James, Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber. 1998. “Explaining Rising Wage

Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with

Heterogeneous Agents.” Journal of Economic Dynamics 1(1): 1-58.



Heckman, James and Jeffrey Smith. 1995. “The Determinants of Participation in a Social Program:

Evidence from JTPA.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.



__________. 1999. “The Pre-Programme Dip and the Determinants of Participation in a Social

Program: Implications for Simple Programme Evaluation Strategies.” Economic Journal 109(457):

313-348.



Heckman, James, Jeffrey Smith, and Nancy Clements. 1997. “Making The Most Out of Programme

Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Programme Impacts.”

Review of Economic Studies 64(4): 487-535.



Heckman, James, Jeffrey Smith, and Christopher Taber. 1996. “What Do Bureaucrats Do? The

Effects of Performance Standards and Bureaucratic Preferences on Acceptance into the JTPA

Program.” In Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Economic Growth,

Volume 7, Reinventing Government and the Problem of Bureaucracy, ed. Gary Libecap, 191-218.

Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
                                                                      Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 42




__________. 1998. “Accounting for Dropouts in Evaluations of Social Programs.” Review of

Economics and Statistics 80(1): 1-14.



Heinrich, Carolyn. 1995. “Public Policy and Methodological Issues in the Design and Evaluation of

Employment and Training Programs at the Service Delivery Area Level.” Ph.D. dissertation, Harris

School of Public Policy Studies, University of Chicago.



__________. 1999. “Do Bureaucrats Make Effective Use of Performance Management

Information?” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 9(3): 363-393.



__________. 2003. “The Role of Performance Standards in JTPA Program Administration and

Service Delivery at the Local Level.” In Performance Standards in a Government Bureaucracy:

Analytic Essays on the JTPA Performance Standards System, ed. James Heckman, forthcoming.

Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.



Hotz, V. Joseph. 1992. “Designing an Evaluation of the Job Training Partnership Act.” In

Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs, ed. Charles Manski and Irwin Garfinkel, 76-114.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.



Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido Imbens, and Jacob Klerman. 2000. “The Long Term Gains from GAIN: A

Re-Analysis of the Impacts of the California GAIN Program.” NBER Working Paper #2007.
                                                                        Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 43




Kemple, James, Fred Doolittle, and John Wallace. 1993. The National JTPA Study: Site

Characteristics and Participation Patterns. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research

Corporation.



Mincer, Jacob. 1972. Schooling, Experience and Earnings. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago

Press.



National Commission for Employment Policy. 1995. Understanding Federal Training and

Employment Programs. Washington, DC: National Commission for Employment Policy.



Orr, Larry, Howard Bloom, Stephen Bell, Fred Doolittle, Winston Lin, and George Cave. 1996.

Does Training for the Disadvantaged Work? Evidence from the National JTPA Study. Washington,

DC: Urban Institute Press.



O'Shea, Daniel, and Christopher King. 2001. “The Workforce Investment Act of 1998.”

Rockefeller Institute Report No. 12. New York: Rockefeller Institute.



Smith, Jeffrey. 1992. “The JTPA Selection Process: A Descriptive Analysis.” Unpublished

manuscript, University of Chicago.



U.S. Congress. Government Performance and Results Act, 1993. Washington D.C.: U.S. Congress.
                                                                      Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 44




U.S. General Accounting Office. 2002. “Workforce Investment Act: Improvements Needed in

Performance Measures to Provide a More Accurate Picture of WIAs Effectiveness.” GAO-02-275.

Washington D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office.



U.S. Department of Labor. 2000a. “Core and Customer Satisfaction Performance Measures for the

Workforce Investment System.” Training and Employment Guidance Letter No. 7-99. Washington

D.C.: Employment and Training Administration.



__________. 2000b. “Negotiating Performance Goals; and Incentives and Sanctions Process under

Title I of the Workforce Investment Act.” Training and Employment Guidance Letter No. 8-99.

Washington D.C.: Employment and Training Administration.



Wilson, James. 1989. Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do It. New

York, NY: Basic Books.



Zornitsky, Jeffrey, Mary Rubin, Stephen Bell, and William Martin. 1988. “Establishing a

Performance Management System for Targeted Welfare Programs.” National Commission for

Employment Policy Research Report 88-14.
                                                                            Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 45




1 See Hanushek (2002) for a discussion of accountability systems in education based on

performance standards at the teacher and school level. See Barnow (1992) for a discussion of

performance standards in publicly provided training programs

2 Wilson (1989) and Dixit (2002) discuss conflicts in the objectives of programs as outcomes of a

political process.

3 See Becker (1964), Mincer (1972), Heckman, Hohmann, Smith, and Khoo (2000) and Hotz,

Imbens, and Klerman (2000).

4 We abstract from decisions regarding the timing of training. See Hansen, Heckman and Vytlacil

(2000).

5 It can also be negative in the long run, as indeed it was for male youth in JTPA. See, for

example, Bloom et al. (1993).

6 Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998) present evidence on the importance of general equilibrium

effects in evaluating large scale educational programs. Such effects are much less likely to be

important for smaller scale job training programs.

7 Note that r may be a social discount factor.

8 We assume interior solutions. Sufficient conditions for an interior solution are concavity of (2) in

e for all Ya0,i , convexity of ci(ei) for each i, and Inada conditions on both cost and technology. For

some S, the constraint (4) may be slack (that is, λ = 1 can be obtained).

9 There may be more than one S that qualifies. If so, we assume the training center picks the

particular set chosen at random.
                                                                                  Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 46




10 Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2001) demonstrate that most of the variation in future earnings

gains is unforecastable, even for college graduates. Bell and Orr (2002) show that caseworkers do a

poor job of predicting ∆ a in a program that provided job training to welfare recipients.

11 There is an additional stage to the allocation process that we do not consider, namely, the

allocation of the overall budget among centers. The budget should be allocated to equate returns at

the margin for all centers.

12 In this heuristic problem, we assume that the second order conditions are satisfied.

13 In thinking about cream skimming from a policy perspective, two other facts should be kept in

mind. First, even if cream skimming occurs, the cream of the JTPA eligible (or applicant)

population was still disadvantaged. They must have been so in order to satisfy JTPA’s eligibility

rules. Thus, cream skimming did not mean that JTPA resources got spent on, for example, middle

class people. Second, JTPA was far from the only employment and training program available at

the time (just as WIA is far from the only program available now). As documented in National

Commission for Employment Policy (1995), dozens of other programs coexisted with JTPA.

These other programs may well have provided services better suited to the hard to serve among

JTPA’s eligible population than did JTPA. Determining whether cream skimming, should it occur,

is good or bad, requires more thought than the literature typically devotes to it.

14 In models with regressors, this assumption is ∆ a ,i ( X ) = Ya1,i − Ya0,i = ∆ a ( X ) for all i, yielding

equal impacts for all persons with the same X.

15 See Devine and Heckman (1996) for a detailed study of JTPA program eligibility and Orr et al.

(1996) or Kemple, Doolittle, and Wallace (1993) for details on the types of services provided and

their relative frequency.
                                                                          Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 47




16 In addition, it includes measures related to skill or credential attainment (as did JTPA), a

measure of before-after earnings changes, and measures based on “customer” satisfaction surveys.

17 Doolittle and Traeger (1990), Hotz (1992) and Orr et al. (1996) describe the design of the

experiment. Bloom et al. (1997) summarize the experimental impact estimates.

18 See Heckman, Smith, and Clements (1997) for more details on this estimator, including the

construction of the standard errors.

19 We omit analyses for male and female youth throughout the paper due to the small sample sizes

available for these groups.

20 AFDC is now called Temporary Aid to Needy Families or TANF.

21 Their earnings measure combines self-report data with data from UI earnings records. For more

details, see the discussion in Orr et al. (1996).

22 Orr et al. (1996) also present subgroup impact estimates for male and female youth (see Exhibits

5.19 and 5.20). As expected given the small sample sizes, they find no statistically significant

differences in estimated impacts among the subgroups.

23 The analyses in both this section and the preceding section have the potential limitation that they

condition on persons who reach random assignment. In choosing whom to serve, program staff

members care about relationships conditional on application to the program, not on reaching

random assignment.

24 However, even at this stage, self-selection cannot be entirely ruled out.

25 See the discussions in Heckman, Smith, and Taber (1998) and Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith

(1999, Section 5.2) on the origin of this estimator.
                                                                       Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith 48




26 An alternative strategy would generate predicted individual impacts by including interaction

terms between baseline covariates and the treatment group dummy in an impact regression.

27 We thank Tim Bartik of the Upjohn Institute for providing us with copies of two of the

unpublished papers.
                                                         Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 49


TABLE 1A
Experimental Impact Estimates by Subgroup
Adult Females
Subgroup                              Earnings Impacts          Employment Impacts
                                       Measured over              Measured over
                                  18 Months     30 Months     18 Months   30 Months
                                   Labor Force Status
P-value for equal impacts           0.3919         0.5745       0.4715           0.2286
Employed                           1223.78        1487.38       0.0017          -0.0158
                                   (651.64)      (2461.08)     (0.0135)         (0.0168)
Unemployed                          507.42         428.84       0.0112           0.0184
                                   (507.92)      (1715.10)     (0.0112)         (0.0128)
Out of the Labor Force             1543.72        3274.29       0.0274           0.0184
                                   (601.48)      (2089.21)     (0.0160)         (0.0188)
                                       Education
P-value for equal impacts           0.6890         0.4641       0.8149           0.4646
Highest grade completed < 10       1029.22        -2227.56      0.0135           0.0175
                                   (643.40)      (2577.38)     (0.0164)         (0.0182)
Highest grade completed 10-11      1341.37        3088.46       0.0289           0.0246
                                   (592.06)      (2179.51)     (0.0147)         (0.0171)
Highest grade completed 12          460.29        1503.23       0.0129          -0.0053
                                   (469.73)      (1711.16)     (0.0109)         (0.0129)
Highest grade completed > 12        971.20         795.14       0.0115           0.0209
                                   (816.54)      (2997.34)     (0.0172)         (0.0211)
                                     AFDC Receipt
P-value for equal impacts           0.7224         0.0371       0.0277           0.2607
Not Receiving AFDC                  712.26         -947.01      0.0028           0.0026
                                   (392.05)      (1462.17)     (0.0087)         (0.0105)
Receiving AFDC                      924.57        3624.35       0.0343           0.0211
                                   (451.07)      (1631.02)     (0.0113)         (0.0127)
                                  Recent Employment
P-value for equal impacts           0.8614         0.0492       0.5708           0.0139
Currently employed                 1104.08         396.24       0.0138           0.0056
                                   (721.42)      (2851.27)     (0.0151)         (0.0197)
Last employed 0-2 months ago        594.01         979.22       0.0099           0.0060
                                   (713.69)      (2485.38)     (0.0161)         (0.0181)
Last employed 3-5 months ago        171.44        -7677.17      -0.0063         -0.0589
                                   (953.91)      (3485.31)     (0.0199)         (0.0220)
Last employed 6-8 months ago       1874.38         975.22       0.0451           0.0502
                                  (1175.53)      (3721.12)     (0.0263)         (0.0305)
Last employed 9-11 months ago      1679.73        5244.59       0.0310           0.0636
                                  (1311.91)      (4437.63)     (0.0305)         (0.0382)
Last employed ≥ 12 months ago      1304.36        4919.73       0.0341           0.0347
                                   (587.15)      (2020.46)     (0.0155)         (0.0180)
Never employed                      610.59        -2490.44      0.0335          -0.0059
                                   (609.42)      (2736.46)     (0.0168)         (0.0191)
                                                            Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 50




Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.

Notes: Monthly earnings are based on self-reports with top 1% trimming. Estimates are

adjusted for program dropouts in the treatment group. Earnings impacts are calculated

using all sample members with valid observations for self-reported monthly earnings

during each period. The sample includes 4886 valid observations for the 18-month

period after random assignment and 1147 valid observations for the 30-month period

after random assignment. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses.
                                                                           Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 51
TABLE 1B
Experimental Impact Estimates by Subgroup
Adult Males
Subgroup                                    Earnings Impacts         Employment Impacts Measured over
                                             Measured over
                                   18 Months            30 Months    18 Months            30 Months
                                              Labor Force Status
P-value for equal impacts             0.0407               0.3469      0.2679               0.6517
Employed                             2839.24              6328.20      0.0300               0.0005
                                    (1145.51)            (4143.22)    (0.0166)             (0.0194)
Unemployed                            718.84              3021.68      0.0056               0.0180
                                     (710.16)            (2339.51)    (0.0105)             (0.0125)
Out of the Labor Force               -2193.85             -2725.72     -0.0163              0.0289
                                    (1658.81)            (4693.28)    (0.0262)             (0.0281)
                                                   Education
P-value for equal impacts             0.6077               0.7939      0.9587               0.7206
Highest grade completed < 10          680.26              1713.46      0.0114               0.0403
                                    (1193.62)            (3935.62)    (0.0203)             (0.0225)
Highest grade completed 10-11          -64.77              -270.18     0.0120               0.0134
                                    (1020.79)            (3516.67)    (0.0163)             (0.0188)
Highest grade completed 12           1438.13               552.70      0.0030               0.0105
                                     (793.68)            (2729.26)    (0.0119)             (0.0141)
Highest grade completed > 12           -92.00             4886.81      0.0116               0.0201
                                    (1238.21)            (4155.34)    (0.0172)             (0.0221)
                                                AFDC Receipt
P-value for equal impacts             0.5948               0.5794      0.3813               0.6678
Not Receiving AFDC                    722.73              2933.22      0.0122               0.0161
                                     (556.43)            (1810.58)    (0.0085)             (0.0099)
Receiving AFDC                        -232.18              -274.82     -0.0132              0.0306
                                    (1706.56)            (5495.50)    (0.0278)             (0.0322)
                                              Recent Employment
P-value for equal impacts             0.5995               0.6193      0.9112               0.7010
Currently employed                   2668.20              3053.96      0.0176               -0.0134
                                    (1230.61)            (4174.11)    (0.0178)             (0.0212)
Last employed 0-2 months ago          816.36              6126.54      0.0168               0.0205
                                    (1091.14)            (3637.23)    (0.0152)             (0.0180)
Last employed 3-5 months ago          -425.61             1248.64      0.0037               0.0119
                                    (1162.99)            (3794.83)    (0.0176)             (0.0209)
Last employed 6-8 months ago            -5.65              -790.27     -0.0135              0.0312
                                    (1824.51)            (5453.91)    (0.0256)             (0.0296)
Last employed 9-11 months ago        1191.58              -4914.81     0.0163               0.0098
                                    (2328.58)            (7657.02)    (0.0384)             (0.0478)
Last employed ≥ 12 months ago         525.44              3885.63      0.0284               0.0475
                                    (1333.79)            (4722.38)    (0.0224)             (0.0257)
Never employed                        -799.52             -6377.68     0.0017               0.0145
                                    (1606.04)            (6242.27)    (0.0295)             (0.0319)
                                                                                 Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 52

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.

Notes: Monthly earnings are based on self-reports with top 1% trimming. Estimates are adjusted for program

dropouts in the treatment group. Earnings impacts are calculated using all sample members with valid

observations for self-reported monthly earnings during each period. The sample includes 4886 valid

observations for the 18-month period after random assignment and 1147 valid observations for the 30-month

period after random assignment. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses.
                                                                           Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 53
Table 2
Relationship Between ∆ and Y11 in JTPA: Earnings and Employment Impacts

                               Earnings Impact Measured Over:     Employment Impact Measured Over:
                             18 Months After    30 Months After   18 Months After  30 Months After
Performance Standard             Random             Random           Random           Random
Measure                        Assignment         Assignment        Assignment       Assignment
                                             Adult Females
Hourly wage at time of           -577.61            -1729.66           -0.018               -0.010
termination                      (304.00)          (1280.64)          (0.008)              (0.011)
                               p = 0.0645          p = 0.1842       p = 0.0202           p = 0.3559
                               R2 = 0.0809        R2 = 0.0426       R2 = 0.1246          R2 = 0.0208
Weekly earnings at time of         -3.74              -12.05           -0.000               -0.000
follow-up                         (8.78)             (36.54)          (0.000)              (0.000)
                               p = 0.6726          p = 0.7432       p = 0.2728           p = 0.3277
                               R2 = 0.0044        R2 = 0.0026       R2 = 0.0293          R2 = 0.0234
Employment at time of            -117.72            -2065.61           -0.023               -0.029
termination                      (941.92)          (3928.63)          (0.023)              (0.033)
                               p = 0.9012          p = 0.6019       p = 0.3213           p = 0.3767
                               R2 = 0.0004        R2 = 0.0069       R2 = 0.0246          R2 = 0.0196
Employment at time of            1513.28            -1873.03           -0.067               -0.024
follow-up                       (1482.04)          (6236.83)          (0.037)              (0.053)
                               p = 0.3132          p = 0.7655       p = 0.0767           p = 0.6521
                               R2 = 0.0248        R2 = 0.0022       R2 = 0.0745          R2 = 0.0050
                                              Adult Males
Hourly wage at time of            465.41            -1405.68           0.003                -0.005
termination                      (394.76)          (1653.30)          (0.005)              (0.010)
                               p = 0.2452          p = 0.4001       p = 0.4914           p = 0.6230
                               R2 = 0.0328        R2 = 0.0173       R2 = 0.0116          R2 = 0.0059
Weekly earnings at time of          6.74              -20.76           0.000                -0.000
follow-up                         (7.42)             (31.79)          (0.000)              (0.000)
                               p = 0.3690          p = 0.5174       p = 0.9921           p = 0.3274
                               R2 = 0.0197        R2 = 0.0103       R2 = 0.0000          R2 = 0.0234
Employment at time of            2542.99            3673.71            0.005                -0.059
termination                     (1384.72)          (5869.08)          (0.017)              (0.034)
                               p = 0.0737          p = 0.5349       p = 0.7559           p = 0.0850
                               R2 = 0.0778        R2 = 0.0097       R2 = 0.0024          R2 = 0.0723
Employment at time of            2579.24            18716.00           0.050                0.021
follow-up                       (2486.91)          (9842.28)          (0.028)              (0.061)
                               p = 0.3058          p = 0.0643       p = 0.0848           p = 0.7338
                               R2 = 0.0256        R2 = 0.0810       R2 = 0.0707          R2 = 0.0029
                                                                                    Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 54

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.

Notes: The actual JTPA performance measures are defined as follows: “Hourly Wage at Placement” is the

average wage at program termination for employed adults. “Weekly Earnings at Follow-up” are the average

weekly wage of adults employed 13 weeks after program termination. “Employment Rate at Placement” is the

fraction of adults employed at program termination. “Employment Rate at Follow-up” is the fraction of adults

who were employed 13 weeks after program termination. In our analysis, employment rates were calculated

based on the presence or absence of a job spell within 30 days of each reference date (termination or follow-up).

Hourly wages were calculated based on the highest reported hourly wage for all job spells reported within 30

days of each reference date. Weekly earnings were calculated by averaging the product of hourly wages and

hours worked per week across all reported job spells within 30 days of each reference date weighted by the

fraction of the 30-day window spanned by each job spell.
                                                                                                                                 Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 55
Table 3
Evidence on the Correlation Between Y1 and ∆ from Several Studies
Study                    Program                  Data                       Measure of impact      Impact estimator      Performance measures       Findings
Gay and Borus (1980)     Manpower                Randomly selected          Impact on social       Non-experimental       Employment in quarter     No measure has a
                         Development and         program participants       security earnings in   "kitchen sink" Tobit   after program, before-    consistent, positive and
                         Training Act (MDTA), entering programs             1973 (from 18 to 36    model                  after (four quarters      statistically significant
                         Job Opportunities in    from December 1968         months after program                          before to one quarter     relationship to the
                         the Business Sector     to June 1970 and           exit)                                         after) changes in         estimated impacts
                         (JOBS),                 matched (on age, race,                                                   weeks worked, weeks       across subgroups and
                         Neighborhood Youth      city and sometimes                                                       not in the labor force,   programs. The before-
                         Corps Out-of-School     neighborhood)                                                            wage rate, hours          after measures,
                         Program(NYC/OS)         comparison sample of                                                     worked, income,           particularly weeks
                         and the Job Corps.      eligible non-                                                            amount of                 worked and wages, do
                                                 participants.                                                            unemployment              much better than
                                                                                                                          insurance received and    employment in the
                                                                                                                          amount of public          quarter after the
                                                                                                                          assistance received.      program.
Zornitsky, et al. (1988)   AFDC Homemaker-       Volunteers in the          Mean monthly           Experimental impact    Employment and            All measures have the
                           Home Health Aid       seven states in which      earnings in the 32     estimates.             wages at termination.     correct sign on their
                           Demonstration         the demonstration          months after random                           Employment and            correlation with
                                                 projects were              assignment and mean                           welfare receipt three     earnings impacts,
                                                 conducted. To be           monthly combined                              and six months after      whether adjusted or
                                                 eligible, volunteers had   AFDC and food stamp                           termination. Mean         not. The employment
                                                 to have been on AFDC       benefits in the 29                            weekly earnings and       and earnings measures
                                                 continuously for at        months after random                           welfare benefits in the   are all statistically
                                                 least 90 days.             assignment.                                   three and six month       significant (or close to
                                                                                                                          periods after             it). The welfare
                                                                                                                          termination. These        measures are correctly
                                                                                                                          measures are examined     correlated with welfare
                                                                                                                          both adjusted and not     impacts but the
                                                                                                                          adjusted for observable   employment measures
                                                                                                                          factors including         are not unless adjusted.
                                                                                                                          trainee demographics      The measures at three
                                                                                                                          and welfare and           and six months do
                                                                                                                          employment histories      better than those at
                                                                                                                          and local labor           termination, but there
                                                                                                                          markets.                  is little gain from
                                                                                                                                                    going from three to
                                                                                                                                                    six.
                                                                                                                                  Heckman, Heinrich, and Smith, 56

Table 3 (Continued)
Evidence on the Correlation Between Y1 and ∆ from Several Studies
Study                     Program                 Data                   Measure of impact         Impact estimator       Performance measures        Findings
Friedlander (1988)       Mandatory welfare-to- Applicants and           Post random               Experimental impact     Employment (non-zero       Employment measure
                         work programs in San    recipients of AFDC     assignment earnings       estimates.              quarterly earnings) in     is positively correlated
                         Diego, Baltimore,       (varies across         (from UI earnings                                 quarters 2 and 3 (short-   with earnings gains but
                         Virginia, Arkansas,     programs). Data        records) and welfare                              term) or quarters 4 to 6   not welfare savings for
                         and Cook County.        collected as part of   receipt (from                                     (long term) after          most programs.
                                                 MDRC's experimental    administrative data).                             random assignment.         Welfare indicator is
                                                 evaluations of these                                                     Welfare receipt in         always positively
                                                 programs.                                                                quarter 3 (short-term)     correlated with
                                                                                                                          or quarter 6 (long-        earnings impacts, but
                                                                                                                          term) after random         rarely significantly so.
                                                                                                                          assignment.                It is not related to
                                                                                                                                                     welfare savings.
                                                                                                                                                     Long-term
                                                                                                                                                     performance measures
                                                                                                                                                     do little better (and
                                                                                                                                                     sometimes worse) than
                                                                                                                                                     short-term measures.
Cragg (1997)            JTPA (1983-87)          NLSY                    Before-after change in    Generalized bivariate   Fraction of time spent     Negative relationship
                                                                        participant earnings      Tobit model of pre-     working since leaving      between work
                                                                                                  program and post-       school in the pre-         experience and before-
                                                                                                  program annual          program period. This       after earnings changes.
                                                                                                  earnings.               variable is strongly
                                                                                                                          correlated with post-
                                                                                                                          program employment
                                                                                                                          levels.
Burghardt and           Job Corps               Experimental data       The outcome measures      Experimental impact     Job Corps centers          No systematic
Schochet (2001)                                 from the National Job   include receipt of        estimates.              divided into three         relationship between
                                                Corps Study             education or training,                            groups: high-              the performance
                                                                        weeks of education or                             performers, medium-        groups and the
                                                                        training, hours per                               performers and low-        experimental impact
                                                                        week of education or                              performers based on        estimates.
                                                                        training, receipt of a                            their overall
                                                                        high school diploma or                            performance rankings
                                                                        GED, receipt of a                                 in Program Years
                                                                        vocational certificate,                           1994, 1995 and 1996.
                                                                        earnings and being                                High and low centers
                                                                        arrested. All are                                 were in the top and
                                                                        measured over the 48                              bottom third nationally
                                                                        months following                                  in all three years,
                                                                        random assignment.                                respectively.
Difference
    4000

    3000


    2000


    1000


       0


   -1000
               20/20th       40/40th       60/60th      80/80th
                         Percentile (Control/Treatment)
Figure 1A
Treatment - Control Differences at Percentiles of the
18 Month Earnings Distribution: Adult Females.
Source: Authors' calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Earnings variables are those used in Bloom, et al. (1993).
Standard errors are obtained using methods described in CsörgÐ (1983).
Difference
     5000

    4000

    3000

    2000

    1000

       0

   -1000

   -2000
                20/20th       40/40th       60/60th      80/80th
                          Percentile (Control/Treatment)
Figure 1B
T reatment - Control Differences at Perc entiles of the
18 Month Earnings Distribution: Adult Males, Full Sample.
Source: Authors' calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Earnings variables are those used in Bloom, et al. (1993).
Standard errors are obtained using methods described in CsörgÐ (1983).
                               Heckman, Smith, and Heinrich, 56



        Eligibility for JTPA

                

        Awareness of JTPA

                

       Application to JTPA

                

       Acceptance into JTPA

                

       Enrolment into JTPA




FIGURE 2
THE JTPA SELECTION PROCESS
