                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       HEAT OR EAT? COLD WEATHER SHOCKS AND
                        NUTRITION IN POOR AMERICAN FAMILIES


                                         Jayanta Bhattacharya
                                           Thomas DeLeire
                                            Steven Haider
                                             Janet Currie


                                          Working Paper 9004
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9004


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We thank the Joint Center for Poverty Research and the Institute for Research on Poverty for financial
support of this project. Seminar participants at Northwestern University, University of Chicago, University
of Wisconsin, the National Bureau of Economic Research at Stanford University, the Midwestern Economics
Association, and the Western Economics Association provided helpful feedback and suggestions. We thank
Alison Jacknowitz and William Clune for expert research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Jayanta Bhattacharya, Thomas DeLeire, Steven Haider and Janet Currie. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Heat or Eat? Cold Weather Shocks and Nutrition in Poor American Families
Jayanta Bhattacharya, Thomas DeLeire, Steven Haider and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 9004
June 2002
JEL No. I32, I12



                                             ABSTRACT

        We examine the effects of cold weather periods on family budgets and on nutritional outcomes
in poor American families. Expenditures on food and home fuels are tracked by linking the Consumer
Expenditure Survey to temperature data. Using the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, we track calorie consumption, dietary quality, vitamin deficiencies, and anemia in summer and
winter months. We find that both rich and poor families increase fuel expenditures in response to
unusually cold weather (a 10° F drop below normal). At same time, poor families reduce food
expenditures by roughly the same amount as the increase in fuel expenditures, while rich families increase
food expenditures. Poor adults and children reduce caloric intake by roughly 200 calories during winter
months, unlike richer adults and children. In sensitivity analyses, we find that decreases in food
expenditure are most pronounced outside the South. We conclude that poor parents and their children
outside the South spend and eat less food during cold weather temperature shocks. We surmise that
existing social programs fail to buffer against these shocks.


Jayanta Bhattacharya                                 Thomas DeLeire
Stanford University School of Medicine               Harris Graduate School of Public Policy Studies
Center for Primary Care Outcomes Research            University of Chicago
Center for Health Policy                             1155 E. 60th St.
218 Encina Commons                                   Chicago, IL 60637
Stanford, CA 94305-6019                              t-deleire@uchicago.edu
jay@stanford.edu

Steven Haider                                        Janet Currie
RAND                                                 UCLA
1700 Main Street                                     405 Hilgard Avenue
Santa Monica, CA 90401                               Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
sjhaider@rand.org                                    and NBER
                                                     currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu
Introduction
       In many parts of the country, American winters can impose a financial burden on
families. Newspaper reports suggest that poor families with children, who are often least
able to cope with such budgetary pressures, are hit the hardest. These families can face
difficult decisions about where to place their resources, deciding between heating their
homes, feeding themselves, or feeding their children. For example, the New York Times,
26 February 2001, reported that parents reduce their use of utilities to pay for food. One
family member interviewed reported that "[w]e owe $800 on the water bill and $500 for
heat." The outcomes of these tough choices may have a large impact on the nutritional
well being of children. Some of the harm will be tempered if parents can shield their
children from nutritional deprivation. The same newspaper article also reported that
some poor parents "routinely go without dinner to make sure their…children have
enough to eat."
       The purpose of this paper is to investigate whether poor American families have
lower food expenditures and worse nutritional outcomes during cold-weather periods and
to determine the extent to which parents protect their children from these shocks. We use
two large and nationally representative data sets. The first, the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX), collected by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), has extensive
information about food and other expenditures by American families over a long time
period. The second, the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES III), is the gold standard for nationally representative nutritional data.
       We find that both rich and poor families increase fuel expenditures in response to
unusually cold weather. However, poor families respond to these shocks by reducing
food expenditures while rich families increase food expenditures. Poor adults and
children reduce caloric intake by 10% during the winter months, whereas rich families do
not reduce their caloric intake during the winter. These findings suggest that existing
social programs do not buffer against shocks to family budgets caused by unusual
weather.




                                             3
Background
       Frank starvation is rare in the U.S. However, poor nutritional choices
(“misnutrition”) are rampant. American children are at risk of having diets that are high
in fat, high in sweets, and low in fruit and vegetables. (Bhattacharya and Currie, 2001).
There are few studies that find vitamin intake deficiencies in American children (see
Devaney et al. 1995 and Middleman et al. 1996). However, Bhattacharya and Currie find
a high prevalence of anemia, high blood cholesterol, and some evidence of serum vitamin
deficiencies among American adolescents.
       While low serum vitamin levels are clinically difficult to evaluate in the context
of a single patient, they are good measures of dietary inadequacy in broad populations.
The relationship between micronutrient intake and blood levels of these nutrients is
complicated. Because the body can store some vitamins and minerals for a long time, it
is not anomalous to find a respondent who has not recently consumed the recommended
amount of some vitamin and yet does not have a deficiency in that vitamin according to
blood tests. For example, it can take between three to six years for a deficiency in
vitamin B12 to become clinically evident (Middleman et al. 1996). Nevertheless, blood
tests can provide solid objective evidence of micronutrient malnutrition, when properly
interpreted.
       Though poor diets seldom result in classic vitamin deficiency related to diseases like
scurvy or pellagra, low vitamin and mineral levels could have long-term health
consequences. For example, even mild iron deficiency is associated with fatigue,
shortened attention span, decreased work capacity, reduced resistance to infection, and
impaired intellectual performance (U.S. CDC 1996).
       There are recent studies in the public health literature that are concerned with
whether poor children receive inadequate diets during winter. Frank et al. (1996) report
that the fraction of emergency room visits by small-for-age children rises during the
winter months in a Boston hospital. However, relying on British data, Lawlor et al.
(2000) and Shah and Peacock (1999) fail to identify any relation between excess winter
mortality and deprivation.
       American economists have examined nutritional resource sharing in poor
families. Wilde (1997) and Wilde and Ranney (1997) examine whether poor families on



                                             4
food stamps eat less towards the end of a benefit month. Adults frequently eat less
during the fourth week while children have smooth food consumption throughout the
month. These findings suggest that the food consumption of poor families is potentially
vulnerable to financial strains but that parents in poor families are able to protect their
children from the adverse effects of these strains to some extent.


Methods


Sample and Procedures
       In this study, we use two complementary datasets. To measure patterns of
expenditure on food and on home fuel, we use data from the 1980 though 1998 interview
surveys of the CEX. Each household reports up to 12 months of consumption data as
well as demographic, geographic, and income information. The CEX collects
expenditure data at the household level from roughly 5,000 families each month, so our
ultimate sample contains 104,747 households, 35,509 of which have children under the
age of 18 in the household. Survey weights are provided so that the CEX sample is
nationally representative within any given month. From the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, we obtain data on mean ground temperature for each state
in each month between 1980 and 1998. We merge these data with the CEX using
information on each family’s state of residence. With this large sample of households, we
can examine the differential changes in spending patterns at the household level.
However, the CEX cannot be used to infer consumption by individual family members,
just the family as a whole.
       To measure patterns of nutritional well being at the individual level, we use data
from the NHANES III, collected by the Center for Disease Control. The NHANES III
was conducted between October 1988 and October 1994. It surveyed 33,994 people over
89 locations using a roving, mobile exam center. The NHANES is unique in that it
combines demographic information, data from a standard clinical exam conducted by
doctors (including blood tests) and questions about dietary intakes.


Measures



                                               5
       From the CEX, we derive measures for monthly expenditures in four different
categories, food consumed in the home, food consumed outside of the home, clothing,
and home fuel. Food in the home includes expenditures on all meals prepared at home,
including picnics. Food outside the home includes expenditures at restaurants, cafes, fast
food establishments, catered affairs, school and boarding house meals, and meals
received as pay. Subsidized meals (such as free school breakfast) are not captured in the
CEX measure of food expenditure, and we exclude expenditures on alcoholic beverages
or tobacco from both measures of food. Home fuel includes expenditures on six fuels
(heating oil, electricity, natural gas, coal, kerosene, and firewood) at primary residences.
To account for inflation, we applied the Consumer Price Index deflator so that all
expenditures are measured in constant 1982-1984 dollars.
       We use three conceptually different measures of nutrition based on the NHANES
data: calorie intake, dietary quality, and serum measures of vitamin and mineral
deficiency. The first two measures are based on 24-hour dietary recall information in the
NHANES, where individuals are asked to recount everything they ate in the last 24 hours.
For most children under the age of 12 and for all children under age 6, their parents or
guardians supplied dietary information.
       Based on these responses, the NHANES provides an estimate of the total daily
calorie intake and a measure of the dietary quality. The measure of dietary quality is
based on the Health Eating Index (HEI), which was developed by scientists at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) to summarize how closely a diet meets USDA
recommendations (Kennedy et al. 1995). Diets that feature fruits, vegetables, meat, and
dairy in the right proportions receive higher scores in the HEI index, while diets that
feature high levels of saturated and total fat and cholesterol receive lower scores. Intakes
in ten different categories are scored on a scale from 0 to 10 (with 10 representing a good
score), and then summed into a total score from 0 to 100. A two-point change in the HEI
can reflect, for example, an extra daily serving of vegetables or a three-percentage point
increase in the proportion of calories that come from fat.
       Our vitamin deficiency measures are based upon low serum levels of the vitamin
in question. We use age-specific normal values from standard pediatric and internal
medicine textbooks to define inadequate serum levels of vitamins and minerals



                                              6
(DeAngelis et al. 1999 and Wilson et al. 1991). These normal values are shown in
Appendix Table 5. We consider serum levels of vitamin A, C, and E. Because serum
iron correlates poorly with inadequate body stores of iron, we instead use hematocrit and
hemoglobin levels to diagnose anemia.
       Table 1 presents basic descriptive statistics for both samples.


Data Analysis
       Because the two datasets we analyze are structured differently, they require
distinct, though closely related, empirical analysis. For the CEX, the unit of observation
is the family, while for the NHANES, the unit of observation is the individual, though
family relations are reported. For the CEX, we directly observe the state of residence and
thus have matching temperature data available for each family in each month of
observation. For the NHANES, the only geographic information that is publicly
available for all samples members is the census region of the respondent (South, West,
Midwest and Northeast) and whether the respondent lives in a large city, so we cannot
link temperature information. However, we do know the interview month, so we can
infer whether the respondent was surveyed in the summer or winter.
       For the CEX analysis, our basic empirical strategy is to examine expenditure in
four categories—food consumed inside the home, food consumed outside the home,
clothing, and home fuel—in unseasonably cold or warm months. Because changes in
expenditures over the course of a year by richer families are presumably not due to
resource constraints, we use these families as a comparison group for the responses by
poor families.
       We construct a separate multivariate model of log expenditures for each of the
four expenditure categories. Explanatory variables in these models include temperature,
three income categories (the high income quartile, the middle two quartiles, and the low
income quartile), the presence of children under age 18 in the family, income interacted
with the presence of children, and temperature interacted with both income and the
presence of children.
       We include dummy variables for each year in each state to effectively de-trend
expenditures separately for each state. We also include dummy variables for each month



                                             7
to allow for seasonal patterns in expenditures. After all these dummy variables are
included, we are essentially left with variation in expenditures due to unseasonably cold
and warm months. By including these dummy variables, we are no longer simply
comparing outcomes in warm months with those in cold months. Instead, we are
comparing, for instance, unusually cold Januarys with average Januarys. As a sensitivity
check, we also estimated similar models with no dummy variables for state, month, or
year and found similar results. Throughout, we use sample weights in model estimation.
       With the estimated coefficients from the multivariate models, we predict
expenditure changes resulting from an unseasonable 10oF drop in temperature for poor
and rich families separately. These predictions are non-parametric retransformations of
the regression coefficient using the Duan (1993) smearing technique.
       In our analysis of the NHANES, we employ a similar empirical strategy, but
instead of relying directly on outcome changes related to temperature changes, we rely on
outcome changes across summer and winter. Specifically, we compare the compare the
change in nutritional outcomes separately by age (children vs. adults) and income level
(rich vs. poor). We consider an NHANES respondent to be a child if, at the time of the
interview and examination, the respondent is under 18.
       To make these nutritional comparisons, we construct linear multivariate models
for each nutritional outcome, estimating separate models for children and adults. We use
the same set of explanatory variables in each NHANES multivariate model. In addition
to the key independent variables (whether a family is poor, whether the interview took
place during the winter, and an interaction), these explanatory variables include a
quadratic in age, a gender dummy, race dummies, and region-urban dummies. With the
estimated coefficients from the multivariate models, we predict changes in nutritional
outcomes between summer and winter for a reference rich person and a reference poor
person. We rely the multivariate model to assess statistical significance. Again, we use
sample weights in all model estimation.
       There is an important caveat to our NHANES analysis. As is common in most
large-scale surveys, the NHANES relies on a clustered probability sample to reduce
survey costs. However, the clustering is much more concentrated in the NHANES than is
typical in other surveys, presumably due to the high fixed costs of the mobile



                                             8
examination units. The consequence of this clustering is that the NHANES is intended to
be nationally representative only when combining the first three years or the last three
years of survey collection. Although we are combining all six years of data for our
analyses, we are still sub-dividing the data by season and geography. Such an analysis
strategy may not be supported by the sampling scheme, depending on the path that the
mobile examination units travel. Overall, we believe these concerns are mitigated
because our analysis strategy relies on combining results from the NHANES and the
CEX to understand how consumption changes during cold weather.
        For both the NHANES and CEX analyses, we estimate the models separately for
different Census regions. The motivation for these regional sub-analyses is the intuitive
notion that people in warmer areas of the country are likely to respond differently to
temperature drops than are people in colder areas.
        Since the main comparisons in our models are between summer and winter
outcomes, it is natural to wonder whether our results are robust to less extreme
comparisons, such as between spring and winter and between fall and winter. Since
temperature changes between spring or fall and winter are smaller than changes between
summer and winter, one would expect summer vs. winter to have the largest nutritional
and budgetary effects, somewhere in between spring vs. winter or fall vs. winter effects.
We conduct such sub-analyses using both the NHANES and the CEX. There are some
limitations in the NHANES regional analysis imposed by the NHANES sampling
scheme. In particular, models for winter vs. spring are not of full rank because the
NHANES did not sample northeast rural areas in the spring, and models for winter vs.
fall are not of full rank because the NHANES did not sample the urban midwest in the
fall.
        On a related point, if some families respond to low temperature shocks in the
winter by cutting back on food, then it seems possible that some families respond to high
temperature shocks in the summer with increased expenditures on air conditioning and
decreased expenditures on food. This effect seems most likely to occur in the South,
where high summer temperatures are often accompanied by humid conditions. We test
for such “cool or eat” effects in Southern households using CEX data by limiting the
sample to July and August and conducting analyses similar to the ones described above.



                                             9
Results


CEX Results
       Table 2 shows our main results from the CEX. It consists of a series of
regressions with our four different outcome variables, run with different sets of
covariates. Both sets of regressions include ground temperature, income dummies, and
interaction terms. However, the first set includes dummies for state and for year. Since
temperature is measured for household’s state in the month and year of observation, with
these dummies, the variation left in temperature arises from month-to-month differences
within states, and from year-to-year differences for a given month within states (caused
perhaps by such weather events as El Nino). Since these sources of temperature variation
(especially the former) are likely to be very typical for the state, we interpret these
regressions as reflecting the effects of usual changes in temperature on family budgets.
       The second set of regressions in Table 2 includes state dummies interacted with
year dummies, along with a full set of month dummies. The main source of temperature
variation in these regressions is year-to-year differences for a given month within states.
Since these temperature changes are almost by definition unusual for the state, we
interpret these regressions as reflecting the effects of unusual—and perhaps
unexpected—changes in temperature on family budgets.
       The key coefficient to read in Table 2 is the coefficient on ground temperature. A
positive value indicates increased expenditures on these goods in response to increases in
temperature for poor families. For rich families with incomes above the 75th percentile,
the effect of temperature changes are reflected in the sum of two coefficients—the
ground temperature coefficient plus the ground temperature * 75th percentile income
group dummy coefficient. Since these are log regressions, the coefficients reflect
percentage changes in family budgets in response to absolute level changes in
temperature.
       Because regression coefficients such as these are often difficult to interpret, we
construct graphs that reflect the changes in predicted expenditure implied by these
regressions. Figure 1 reports the change in expenditures resulting from a 10oF drop in



                                              10
temperature for the four expenditure categories separately for rich and poor families.
These predictions are based on the multivariate analysis of the CEX data. In this figure,
increases in expenditures during periods of colder temperature are represented with
positive bars, while decreases are represented with negative bars. All differences
between expenditures by poor and rich families within categories are statically significant
at the α = 0.01 level. As one might expect, expenditures on home fuel increased for both
poor and richer families in unusually cold months. However, rich families increase home
fuel expenditures by more than poor families— a $37/month increase for poor families
compared with a $53 increase for rich families (in 1982-1984 dollars).
        Expenditures on food in the home decreased in cold months for poor families but
not for richer families. A 10oF drop in temperature is associated with a $9/month
decrease in such expenditures among poor families, compared with an $11/month
increase by richer families. This decrease in food expenditures by the poor are not offset
by increased expenditures on food outside the home or on clothing. On the contrary, cold
weather shocks are associated with only small changes in expenditures on clothing and
food away from home in both types of families. The difference between rich and poor
families in these categories is also small, though statistically significant.
        Poor families spend a greater portion of their income on food than rich families
do. They spend 29.5% of their budget on food in the home, compared with 22.5% by
rich families. Food out of the home constitutes a much smaller portion of family budgets
for both poor and rich families (5.3% vs. 7.1%). Hence, the net effect of cold weather
months on food expenditures, both in and out of the home, is greatest on the poor.
        For poor families, home fuel expenditures represent 12.3% of family budgets,
while for rich families such expenditures represent 9.7% of budgets. In effect, the $37
increase in home fuel expenditures during unusually cold months for poor families has a
larger potential impact on family budgets than the $53 increase for rich families, since it
represents a larger share of the poor families’ total budgets.


NHANES Results
        Table 3 reports the predicted changes in nutritional outcomes between summer
and winter based on the multivariate analysis of NHANES data. The regressions that



                                               11
underlie the numbers in Table 3 are shown in Appendix Tables 1a-1c. Because the unit
of analysis in the NHANES is the individual rather than the family, we can estimate
separate models for children, for adults, and for adults with children. As before, we
compare outcomes in poor families with rich families.
        Misnutrition is more prevalent among poor families than among rich families.
Both adults with children and children in poor families exhibit lower levels of dietary
quality, higher levels of serum vitamin deficiencies, and lower calorie intake (in winter
only) than do their counterparts in rich families.
        The winter resource shift induces a statistically significant reduction in caloric
intake by both children and adults in poor families. Specifically, adults consume 147
fewer calories during then winter than in the summer (a 7.9% decline), adults with
children consume 241 fewer calories (an 11.6% decline), and poor children consume 197
fewer calories (a 10.9% decline). There are increases in the prevalence of vitamin
deficiencies and anemia during the winter for children and for adults with children, but
these increases are not statistically significant.
        Children in rich families have worse diets in the winter than during the summer,
but show no differences in serum measures. Rich adults (but not adults with children) are
more likely to have low serum levels of vitamin A, C, or E in the winter, but show no
changes in dietary quality. Rich adults and children eat higher quality diets and are less
likely to have serum vitamin deficiencies than their poor counterparts. There are no other
statistically significant differences in nutritional outcomes between summer and winter
for rich families. Unlike poor families, there are no changes in caloric intake. The
statistically significant differences that exist for members of rich families are unlikely to
be explained by a “heat or eat” phenomenon, since these families increase expenditures
on food in the winter.
        If we use the summer-winter differences for richer families as a control group for
poor families, then statistical tests demonstrate that only the winter caloric intake declines
for members of poor families are significantly different from the rich (p<0.05 for adults,
p<0.05 for adults with children, p<0.01 for children). For no other summer-winter
outcome differences do richer and poor families significantly differ, including dietary
quality changes for children and vitamin deficiencies for adults.



                                               12
Specification Tests


Heat or Eat in the South
       Because the South is, on average, warmer in the winter than other parts of the
country, a winter temperature drop there can have different effects on family budgets than
in other parts of the country. Consequently, we also analyze Southern households
separately from other households. Table 4 shows the results from the CEX regressions
when only Southern households are included in the analysis. Recall that the key
coefficient to focus on is the one on ground temperature. Figures 2a and 2b show the
results from the CEX data for Southern regions. Figure 2a shows the results when only
state and year fixed effects are included in the regression (which we interpret as the
effects of typical temperature changes), while Figure 2b shows the results when state by
year and month fixed effects are included (which we interpret as the effect of unusual
temperature changes).
       As expected, compared to non-Southern households, fuel expenditures do not
increase by as much in colder months (in models with non-interacted region, month, and
year dummies), presumably because 10 degrees cooler in the South is more comfortable
than is 10 degrees cooler in the North. On the other hand, we find larger increases in fuel
expenditures in the South once we focus on unusual changes in temperature, though there
is no change in food expenditures by poor families. Recall that unusual changes are
defined as changes in temperature that differ significantly from the norm for the region in
a given month. That unusual temperature drops can have larger effects on Southern fuel
expenditures is not surprising given that homes there are less likely to have insulation.
Information on insulation from the Department of Energy recommends (not surprisingly)
that Northern homes be more fully insulated against cold.
(http://www.eren.doe.gov/consumerinfo/energy_savers/insulation.html) To the extent that
these recommendations are followed, this fact may explain why unusual cold periods in
the South—though perhaps infrequent—appear to have a large impact on fuel
expenditures.




                                             13
       As a test of whether Southern families are driving our main results about unusual
temperature changes, we re-estimated all of our CEX models excluding households from
the South. These results are reported in Figures 3a (state and year fixed effects) and 3b
(state*year and month fixed effects), and in Table 5. The results tell the same story as
when all households are included in the analysis, though the rise in fuel expenditures and
the fall in food expenditures with dropping temperatures are not as pronounced. We
conclude that “heat or eat” choices for the poor are not observable in the South, but are
observable for households elsewhere.


Summertime “Cool or Eat” in the South?
       One interpretation of our main results is that poor families are unable or unwilling
buffer cold weather shocks to their fuel bills without decreasing food budgets and intake.
Analogously, one might also think that hotter than normal months might affect food and
energy expenditures in the same way, especially in humid southern regions during the
summer months. Just as it is easy to find newspaper stories on the energy-related burdens
faced by Northern families in the winter, one can find similar stories about Southern
families in the summer, due to the use of air conditioning.
       To see how important a “cool or eat” effect might be, we restricted our CEX
sample to observations on households in Southern states in July and August. The results
of our “cool or eat” investigations are reported in Table 6 and in Figures 4a and 4b.
Unlike our main results, we find no evidence in favor of a “cool or eat” hypothesis.
Neither rich nor poor households increase their fuel expenditure in Julys and Augusts that
are 10 degrees warmer than usual. We checked in the CEX data to see if Southern
households do, in fact, own air conditioners and an increasing majority do. For example,
in 1998, 97% of rich Southern households and 85% of poor Southern households report
owning an air conditioner in the CEX—the comparable percentages for 1980 are 87%
and 61%. However, families do not increase expenditures on air conditioning in response
to an unusual rise in temperatures. Taken in context, our results suggest that many poor
Southern families “sweat” rather that spend extra money on cooling in unusually hot
summers.




                                             14
Lagged associations between temperature and fuel expenditure
       Our analyses using the CEX data relate colder than normal months to changes in
food and energy expenditures. However, one might think that the relationship between
temperature and fuel expenditure might be better modeled with a lag between
experiencing an unusually cold month and incurring increased expenditures on energy.
Energy bills might reflect energy use in the previous month or months. Also, it is
possible that households accrue balances on their energy bills; thus, energy expenditures
in a specific month likely reflect energy use in one or more previous months.
       To explore this further, we estimated additional versions of the model including
lagged effects. These versions of the food and fuel expenditure models include all the
covariates in our usual model except that temperature is measured at time t-1 instead of at
time t. These results are reported in Table 7 and in Figures 5a and 5b. In these
specification tests, we find that unusual decreases in temperature are, in fact, more
closely related to increases in fuel expenditure in the current month than in the following
month, although they are associated with slight increases in expenditure in the following
month suggesting that some expenditure on fuel is the result of accruing balances.
       Finally, to test the relative effects of temperature changes at time t and at time t-1
on family budgets, we ran another version of the food and fuel expenditure models that
includes all the covariates in our usual model except that temperature is measured at time
t-1 in addition to the temperature at time t. In this specification test, we find that higher
fuel expenditures are, in fact, more strongly related to unusual decreases in temperature
in the current month than in the previous month. We found that poor households respond
to an unusual 10 degree decrease in temperature by increasing fuel expenditure in the
current month by $11.4, but increase fuel expenditure in the following month by only
$2.9. The fact that temperature in t-1 is correlated at all suggests that some fuel
expenditures are the result of accruing balances, but that this effect is not as important as
the concurrent effect of temperature changes on family budgets.
       We are leery about our findings in these lag models for technical reasons. First,
our measure of temperature is average monthly temperature so the cold spell could be
several weeks distant from the time at which the expenditure is made, yet still be in the
same month. Second, the CEX Interview survey requires consumers to retrospectively



                                              15
report how much they spend on each item for the past three months. For items that are
purchased and received at the same point, it is clear when the expenditure took place, e.g.
for food purchased in a grocery store. However, for items like heating bills it is unclear
when the expenditure has taken place. To resolve this, the CEX asks a consumer to
report the amount of his utility bill in the month in which is was received. The exact
wording of the questions is as follows: “Since the first of [the month], have you received
any bills for any of the following utilities, fuels or services.” “Do you have any of these
bills or other records showing these charges?” and “What was the amount of the bill?”
Given these questions, it seems to us misreporting about when expenditures took place is
more likely to be a problem than how much was spent.


Comparing Winter to Fall and Winter to Spring in the NHANES
       In our main results, for the CEX we compared normal temperature months with
unusually cold months, yet for the NHANES we compared outcomes in summer and
winter. In order to test the sensitivity of our NHANES results to smaller changes in
temperature, we also ran analyses comparing outcomes in the spring and fall separately
against winter outcomes. Table 8 shows the results of the analysis comparing NHANES
participants interviewed in the fall with those interviewed in the winter, while Table 9
compares winter and spring. The regression results underlying Table 8 are shown in
Appendix Tables 3a-3c, while those underlying Table 9 are shown in Appendix Tables
2a-2c. Because the sample varies in each of these regressions, and Tables 2, 7, and 8
report predicted values from these regressions, rather than sample means, it should not
surprise readers that the values in these tables for winter participants vary among these
tables. The key outcomes to examine are the differences between winter and the other
seasons.
       Relative to spring, poor adults consume worse diets (1.3 fewer HEI points for all
adults, 2.8 fewer HEI points for adults with children), are more likely to have serum
vitamin deficiencies, and consume fewer calories (160 fewer for all adults, 118 fewer for
adults with children) in the winter. Again relative to the spring, rich adults are more
likely to be vitamin deficient and anemic in the winter, and to consumer fewer calories.
However, these results are not statistically significant for rich adults with children.



                                              16
Winter-spring differences are larger for poor adults than they are for richer adults. Poor
children consume 145 fewer calories in the winter, while rich children have worse diets
(2.4 fewer HEI points). Both of these differences for children are similar to the
analogous summer-winter differences.
        There are no statistically significant differences in nutritional outcomes for poor
families in the winter relative to the fall. Rich adults, however, consume fewer calories
in the winter (81 fewer for all adults, 237 fewer for adults with children). On average,
rich children consume 94 more calories, are less likely to be anemic, but have worse diets
in the winter than in the fall.
        Broadly speaking these analyses reveal that for poor families, nutritional
outcomes in winter are more like nutritional outcomes in the fall than they are like
outcomes in the spring or summer. For poor families, both children and adults, the drop
in caloric consumption lasts throughout the fall and winter, which is perhaps not
surprising given that temperatures start to drop in the fall. Winter outcomes, generally,
are worse than fall outcomes for these families, which is again not surprising given
temperature drops and fluctuations are greater then. For richer families, winter
nutritional outcomes seem generally worse than summer, spring, or fall outcomes. The
drop in dietary quality for rich children in the winter seems to persist in all of our
analyses.


Comparing Across Regions in the NHANES
        Finally, because we found no evidence of wintertime decreases in food
expenditures in poor Southern households, we re-estimate the NHANES nutritional
outcomes comparing summer and winter while excluding Southern families. These
results are shown in Table 10, while the regression results underlying this table are shown
in Appendix Tables 4a-4c.
        For poor families, the results in Table 10 are exactly like the results in Table 3
(where households from all regions are included), except the wintertime declines in
caloric intake for adults and children are larger when Southern families are excluded.
Poor children outside the South consume 292 fewer calories in the winter relative to the
summer, poor adults without children consume 299 fewer calories, while poor adults with



                                              17
children consume 374 fewer calories. This is entirely consistent with our findings in the
CEX that declines in food expenditures are greatest outside the South.
       For children in rich families, the results in Table 10 are quite similar to those in
Table 3. The only significant wintertime outcome change is in dietary quality. Rich
children outside the South have worse diets (nearly 4 HEI points worse) in the winter
than in the summer. For rich adults with children outside the South there is a large (12
percentage points) increase in the probability of vitamin deficiency. This increase is too
large to be credible, and may reflect differences in the NHANES samples that we do not
account for in this analysis. Finally, we find a 248-calorie winter decline in consumption
by rich adults without children outside the south that is not present when southern
households are included in the analysis. This likely reflects differences in tastes for
dieting by single people between the South and the rest of the country.


Alternative explanations for our findings
       There are at least two alternative explanations for our findings. First, enrollment
by poor children in school meal programs during the school year could explain the
decrease in food expenditures in low temperature months. This explanation, however,
cannot account for the observed decreases in caloric intake during the winter for children.
To check this explanation further, we conducted an additional analysis with the CEX data
restricting the sample to families with children who were below school-age. Table 11
and Figures 7a and 7b show the results for this analysis. For this sub-sample, we find
similar declines in food expenditure and increases in home fuel during cold months.
(Poor families increase their fuel expenditure by $10.4 and reduce their food expenditure
by $6.6 in response to an unusually cold month. While rich families increase their fuel
expenditure by $15.6, they do not reduce their food expenditure). Since children below
school-age are presumably not enrolled in school lunch programs, these programs cannot
explain the observed expenditure patterns.
       A second alternative explanation for our results is that nutritious food, such as
fresh fruits and vegetables, is cheaper and readily available in the summer. Such an
explanation might rationalize declining dietary quality in winter months, especially for
poor families who cannot afford the expense of high quality winter diets. However, this



                                             18
explanation is inconsistent with a decline in food expenditure in cold months. A textbook
result in economics is that expenditures on a good increase with price so long as that
good is relatively unresponsive to price. It is a consistent empirical result that the
demand for food is relatively unresponsive to price. For a recent estimate confirming this
fact in the United States, see van Driel, et al. (1997). Given this fact, if the price of high
quality food rises in the winter, then expenditures should also increase. Therefore, our
demonstration that expenditures decrease in the winter is inconsistent with this alternative
explanation.


Discussion
       We investigate how well poor American families protect against nutritional risk
due to budget shocks from cold weather. We find that poor families reduce their
expenditure on food in response to unusually cold weather, while richer families do not.
Among poor families, we estimate that a monthly temperature that was 10oF colder than
normal would result in a reduction in expenditures on food in the home by $11/month
and an increase in fuel expenditures by $37/month. Adults and children alike in poor
households reduce their caloric intake by 10 percent during the winter months, whereas
rich family members do not reduce their caloric intake during the winter.
       Our results based on the CEX can be summarized as follows. Poor families
decrease their expenditures on food in unusually low temperature months. Both poor
families and richer families increase heating expenditures—but the increase for the poor
is less than that for rich families, though the change is a larger proportion of poor
families’ budgets.
       Using the NHANES we find that in poor families, both adults and children
reduce their caloric intake during the winter. In rich families, nutritional outcomes do not
generally significantly differ between summer and winter for either adults or children,
with the exception that dietary quality declines for children and serum vitamin
deficiencies increase for adults (but not adults with children). Too much should not be
made of the finding for rich families because even the winter diets of rich children are of
a higher quality than the summer diets of poor children, and rich adults are always less
likely than their poor counterparts to have serum vitamin deficiencies. When rich



                                              19
families are used as a control group for poor families, only the winter declines in the
caloric intake for poor families are statistically significant. It is striking that the impact of
cold weather shocks on nutritional outcomes corresponds so closely with the impact on
expenditures.
        Our results suggest that poor American families with children face stark choices
in cold weather. In particular, they increase home fuel expenditures at the cost of
expenditures on food and nutritional well being. Our evidence also suggests that poor
parents are only imperfectly able to protect their children from the effects of cold weather
shocks. Both children and adults reduce their caloric intake during winter months.
        Given the importance of food to well being, it seems implausible that poor
families would reduce food expenditures in the winter lightly. If these families had
access to short-term credit market or to savings, they would borrow or dip into savings to
pay for high winter fuel needs, rather than reduce food expenditures. Given our results, it
is likely that these families do not have access to such resources. Our results are
consistent with the finding that nearly 25% of American families with income below
$25,600 have neither savings nor checking accounts (Hogarth and O’Donnell 1999).
        Our results should be considered in the context of another public health
problem—increasing rates of obesity, especially among the poor (see Popkin and Doak,
1998 or Flegal, 1996 for reviews of national and international trends in obesity; also see
James et. al., 1998 and Olson, 1999 for a discussion of the relationship between poverty,
nutrition, and obesity in developed countries). It is unclear whether declines in calorie
intake should be seen as an unmitigated disaster, since this decline is not accompanied by
changes in dietary quality, serum vitamin deficiency, or anemia rates. However,
increased variance in calorie intake, which is what our results imply, may not have the
same positive or even desirable health consequences as more constant caloric restrictions
for the obese.
        Finally, there are many social programs that are meant to help poor families
weather detrimental economic events, including Food Stamps, school meal programs, and
long term repayment plans offered by utility companies. Our results suggest that existing
social programs, taken together, are insufficient to buffer poor families from cold weather
shocks to family budgets.



                                               20
References

Bhattacharya J. and J. Currie (2001) "Youths at Nutritional Risk: Misnourished or
Malnourished?" in Risky Behavior among Youths, Jonathon Gruber (ed.), University of
Chicago Press.

DeAngelis CD, Feigin RD, Warshaw JB, and McMillan JA. (1999) Oski's Pediatrics :
principles and practice 3rd ed. Philadelphia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Devaney BL; Gordon AR; Burghardt JA. (1995) “Dietary intakes of students,” American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61(1 suppl):205S-212S.

Duan N. Smearing estimate: A nonparametric retransformation method. Journal of the
American Statistical Association. 1983 Sept; 78:605-610.

Flegal KM (1996) “Trends in body weight and overweight in the U.S. population”
Nutrition Reviews, 54(4 Pt 2):S97-100

Frank DA; Roos N; Meyers A; Napoleone M et al. (1996) "Seasonal variation in weight-
for-age in a pediatric emergency room." Public Health Reports, 111(4):366-71.

Hogarth JM and O’Donnell KH (1999) “Banking Relationships of Lower-Income
Families and the Governmental Trend Toward Electronic Payment,” Federal Reserve
Bulletin, July 1999: 459-470.

James WP, Nelson M, Ralph A, Leather S.(1997) “Socioeconomic determinants of
health. The contribution of nutrition to inequalities in health.” BMJ, 314(7093):1545-9

Kennedy, Eileen, James Ohls, Steven Carlson, and Kathryn Fleming. (1995) "The
Healthy Eating Index: Design and Applications", Journal of the American Dietetic
Association, October, 95 #10: 1103-1108.

Lawlor DA; Harvey D; Dews HG. (2000) Investigation of the association between
excess winter mortality and socio-economic deprivation. Journal of Public Health
Medicine, Jun, 22(2):176-81.

Middleman AB, Emans SJ, and Cox J. (1996) “Nutritional Vit B12 Deficiency and Folate
Deficiency in an Adolescent Patient Presenting with Anemia, Weight Loss, and Poor
School Performance.” Journal of Adolescent Health 19:76-9

Olson CM (1999) “Nutrition and health outcomes associated with food insecurity and
hunger.” Journal of Nutrition, 129(2S Suppl):521S-524S

Popkin BM, Doak CM (1998) “The obesity epidemic is a worldwide phenomenon”
Nutrition Reviews, 56(4 Pt 1):106-14




                                            21
Shah S; Peacock J. (1999) Deprivation and excess winter mortality. Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, Aug, 53(8):499-502.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control, (1996) “Guidelines for School Programs to Promote
Lifelong Healthy Eating,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 45(RR-9).

van Driel H; Nadall, V; Zeelenberg, K (1997) “The Demand for Food in the United
States and the Netherlands: A Systems Approach with the CBS Model” v12, n5 (Sept.-
Oct. 1997): 509-23 Journal of Applied Econometrics

Wilde P. (1997) “A Monthly Cycle in Food Use by Food Stamp Recipients.” Paper
presented at research briefing, Board on Children, Youth and Familes, May 19-20, 1997.
Cornell University. Cited in Bridgeman A, Phillips D. (eds.) (1998) New Findings on
Child Health, Poverty, and Nutrition: Summary of a Research Briefing. Washington
D.C.: National Academy Press.

Wilde P, Ranney C. (1997) “A Monthly Cycle in Food Expenditure and Intake by
Participants in the U.S. Food Stamp Program. Working Paper 97-04. Department of
Agricultural, Resource, and Managerial Economics, Cornell University.

Wilson JD; Braunwald E; Isselbacher KJ; Petersdorf RG; Martin JB; Fauci AS; Root RK
(eds.) (1991) Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine (New York: McGraw-Hill).




                                          22
             Table 1: Descriptive Characteristics for the CEX and NHANES

       CEX Variables                                               Mean               Std. Dev.
       Monthly expenditures: food in                                200.6               141.2
       Monthly expenditures: food out                                77.6               173.5
       Monthly expenditures: clothing                                69.4               160.4
       Monthly expenditures: fuel                                    74.0                70.5
       Annual income                                               19,276              19,230
       Income group: poor                                          0.223                0.416
       Income group: middle                                         0.449               0.497
       Income group: rich                                          0.328                0.470
       NHANES Variables—Children                                   Mean               Std. Dev.
       Dietary quality (HEI)                                         65.0                12.4
       Anemia                                                       0.064               0.245
       Short A, C, or E                                            0.121                0.326
       Daily calories                                               1933                 965
       Income group: poor                                          0.581                0.493
       Income group: rich                                          0.419                0.493
       Season: winter                                               0.155               0.362
       Season: spring                                              0.295                0.456
       Season: summer                                              0.259                0.438
       Season: fall                                                0.291                0.454
       NHANES Variables—Adults                                     Mean               Std. Dev.
       Dietary quality (HEI)                                         64.0                13.1
       Anemia                                                       0.060               0.238
       Short A, C, or E                                            0.125                0.331
       Daily calories                                               2204                1077
       Income group: poor                                          0.342                0.474
       Income group: rich                                          0.658                0.474
       Season: winter                                               0.138               0.344
       Season: spring                                              0.282                0.450
       Season: summer                                              0.297                0.457
       Season: fall                                                0.283                0.451
       Children in household                                       0.364                0.481

Notes: The CEX tabulations rely on 1980 to 1998 interviews. Expenditure categories are for real monthly
expenditure and income is real annual income (1982-1984 dollars). Poor indicates 25th percentile of real
income or less and rich indicates 75th percentile of real income or more. The NHANES tabulations are
based on all individuals who have income less than 1.5 of the poverty line (the poor) or income greater than
3.0 of the poverty line (the rich); the rest of the individuals are dropped. There are some missing data,
which reduces the sample size for some analysis. For example, we do not have blood measures for
individuals under the age of 3. Children are defined as individuals 17 or under, and adults are defined as
those above 17. Dietary quality is measured with the Healthy Eating Index (HEI).




                                                     23
                  Table 2: CEX Regressions for All Four Regions

                           Food In the   Food Out of
                               Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature           1.54E-03      1.62E-03    -4.07E-04    -6.82E-03
                           [9.51e-05]     [1.71e-04]   [2.63e-04]   [1.15e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.46E-03      2.93E-04    -7.24E-04    -4.13E-04
 *Inc2574                  [1.13e-04]     [1.98e-04]   [3.02e-04]   [1.34e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.75E-03      8.92E-04    -6.40E-04     1.06E-04
 *Inc75                    [1.20e-04]     [2.05e-04]   [3.12e-04]   [1.40e-04]
Income in 25th to            4.25E-01      4.23E-01     3.37E-01     2.14E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [6.50e-03]     [1.13e-02]   [1.72e-02]   [7.72e-03]
Income in 75th or            7.41E-01      9.22E-01     8.07E-01     4.88E-01
  above Percentile Range   [6.86e-03]     [1.17e-02]   [1.78e-02]   [8.07e-03]
Constant                    4.81E+00      3.40E+00     3.79E+00     4.29E+00
                           [6.30e-03]     [1.11e-02]   [1.68e-02]   [7.59e-03]
State and Year                  Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
State*Year and Month            No            No           No           No
R-squared                     0.1178        0.1136       0.0556       0.0764
N                             853307        711646       469543       747005
                           Food In the   Food Out of
                               Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature           1.02E-03      2.31E-05     3.21E-04    -9.31E-03
                           [2.01e-04]     [3.34e-04]   [4.98e-04]   [2.31e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.42E-03      3.00E-04    -8.93E-04    -3.29E-04
 *Inc2574                  [1.13e-04]     [1.97e-04]   [2.96e-04]   [1.33e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.69E-03      9.16E-04    -8.76E-04     1.16E-04
 *Inc75                    [1.20e-04]     [2.05e-04]   [3.07e-04]   [1.40e-04]
Income in 25th to            4.21E-01      4.24E-01     3.53E-01     2.09E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [6.48e-03]     [1.13e-02]   [1.69e-02]   [7.67e-03]
Income in 75th or            7.36E-01      9.21E-01     8.27E-01     4.88E-01
  above Percentile Range   [6.84e-03]     [1.17e-02]   [1.75e-02]   [8.02e-03]
Constant                    4.66E+00      3.37E+00     3.42E+00     4.44E+00
                           [1.47e-02]     [1.38e-02]   [2.08e-02]   [9.52e-03]
State and Year                  No            No           No           No
State*Year and Month            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                     0.1072        0.1084       0.0859       0.0724
N                             853307        711646       469543       747005




                                         24
                                   Table 3: Nutritional Outcomes in Winter and Summer

                                                        Poor Familiesa                                   Richer Familiesb
  Group         Nutritional Outcomes             Summer    Winter      Difference                 Summer     Winter      Difference
               Dietary Qualityc                    59.8      60.1          0.3                      64.3      64.9           0.6
  All          Serum Measures
 Adults                Anemia                     0.081            0.097           0.016            0.076           0.091           0.015
N=4,808                Low A, C, or E             0.242            0.268           0.026            0.087           0.130           0.043*
               Calories                           1858             1711            -147*            1847            1841              -6
               Dietary Qualityc                    55.3             55.4            0.1              59.9            60.8             0.9
 Adults
               Serum Measures
  with
                       Anemia                     0.072            0.085           0.013            0.056           0.077            0.021
children,
N=1,994                Low A, C, or E             0.191            0.251           0.061            0.027           0.093            0.067
               Calories                           2072             1831            -241*            1998            1973              -26
               Dietary Qualityc                    64.2             63.3            -1.0             67.2            64.9            -2.3*
               Serum Measures
Children,
                       Anemia                     0.000            0.021           0.021            0.001           0.025            0.024
N=3,779
                       Low A, C, or E             0.097            0.133           0.037            0.051           0.058            0.007
               Calories                           1807             1611            -197**           1719            1713               -7
Source: Authors’ tabulations from the NHANES.
Notes: These outcomes are based on a regression analysis in which we estimate separate models for each outcome and age (children and adults). In
addition to the key independent variables of income levels and season of interview, the regressions include race dummies, a quadratic in age, eight
region dummies, and a gender dummy. The results from these regressions are shown in Appendix Tables 1a-1c. The outcomes are the predicted
outcome for a standardized person (a white female from the urban Northeast); the age of the child is 8 and the age of the adult is 35. The statistical
tests are based on the coefficients of the regression, according to the following levels: * for 0.05 and ** for 0.01. The only statistically significant
difference between adults and children is for rich families in dietary quality (α < 0.05).
a
  Poor families have a poverty-income ratio less than 1.5.
b
  Richer families have a poverty-income ratio greater than 3.
c
  Dietary quality is measured using the Health Eating Index (on a scale from 0 to 100)—see text for an explanation.




                                                                      25
                       Table 4: Results for Southern Regions

                            Food In the   Food Out of
                                Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature            1.45E-03      2.32E-03     1.11E-03    -2.95E-03
                            [2.12e-04]     [3.94e-04]   [6.05e-04]   [2.30e-04]
Ground Temperature           -1.12E-03     -7.39E-05    -1.86E-03     1.63E-03
 *Inc2574                   [2.53e-04]     [4.53e-04]   [6.94e-04]   [2.70e-04]
Ground Temperature           -2.32E-03     -3.16E-04    -1.42E-03     2.10E-03
 *Inc75                     [2.71e-04]     [4.74e-04]   [7.22e-04]   [2.85e-04]
Income in 25th to             3.76E-01      4.50E-01     4.34E-01     7.05E-02
  74th Percentile Range     [1.65e-02]     [2.96e-02]   [4.52e-02]   [1.77e-02]
Income in 75th or             7.65E-01     1.02E+00      9.00E-01     3.65E-01
  above Percentile Range    [1.77e-02]     [3.09e-02]   [4.69e-02]   [1.87e-02]
Constant                     4.82E+00      3.36E+00     3.69E+00     4.16E+00
                            [1.52e-02]     [2.78e-02]   [4.24e-02]   [1.65e-02]
State and Year                   Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
State*Year and Month             No            No           No           No
R-squared                       0.114        0.1156       0.0582       0.0848
N                              246563        203335       134401       218912
                            Food In the   Food Out of
                                Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature            3.53E-05      2.98E-04     8.98E-05    -1.32E-02
                            [4.63e-04]     [7.84e-04]   [1.19e-03]   [4.77e-04]
Ground Temperature           -1.02E-03     -1.07E-04    -2.11E-03     1.73E-03
 *Inc2574                   [2.52e-04]     [4.53e-04]   [6.84e-04]   [2.66e-04]
Ground Temperature           -2.17E-03     -3.71E-04    -1.81E-03     2.30E-03
 *Inc75                     [2.70e-04]     [4.74e-04]   [7.11e-04]   [2.82e-04]
Income in 25th to             3.68E-01      4.54E-01     4.57E-01     6.58E-02
  74th Percentile Range     [1.65e-02]     [2.96e-02]   [4.46e-02]   [1.75e-02]
Income in 75th or             7.53E-01     1.02E+00      9.34E-01     3.51E-01
  above Percentile Range    [1.76e-02]     [3.09e-02]   [4.63e-02]   [1.84e-02]
Constant                     4.67E+00      3.43E+00     3.34E+00     5.09E+00
                            [2.31e-02]     [6.13e-02]   [5.99e-02]   [3.76e-02]
State and Year                   No            No           No           No
State*Year and Month             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                      0.1002        0.1094       0.0855       0.0972
N                              246563        203335       134401       218912




                                          26
                     Table 5: Results for Non-Southern Regions

                            Food In the   Food Out of
                                Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature            1.24E-03      1.57E-03    -3.09E-04    -7.91E-03
                            [1.13e-04]     [2.02e-04]   [3.10e-04]   [1.43e-04]
Ground Temperature           -1.04E-03      3.17E-04    -8.80E-04    -7.76E-04
 *Inc2574                   [1.37e-04]     [2.37e-04]   [3.60e-04]   [1.68e-04]
Ground Temperature           -1.29E-03      8.81E-04    -1.20E-03    -4.94E-04
 *Inc75                     [1.44e-04]     [2.45e-04]   [3.71e-04]   [1.76e-04]
Income in 25th to             4.15E-01      4.20E-01     3.35E-01     2.36E-01
  74th Percentile Range     [7.37e-03]     [1.27e-02]   [1.93e-02]   [9.07e-03]
Income in 75th or             7.24E-01      9.15E-01     8.18E-01     5.16E-01
  above Percentile Range    [7.76e-03]     [1.32e-02]   [1.99e-02]   [9.45e-03]
Constant                     4.81E+00      3.41E+00     3.79E+00     4.30E+00
                            [7.10e-03]     [1.24e-02]   [1.87e-02]   [8.86e-03]
State and Year                   Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
State*Year and Month             No            No           No           No
R-squared                      0.1197        0.1132       0.0547       0.0912
N                              606744        508311       335142       528093
                            Food In the   Food Out of
                                Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature            7.68E-04     -2.11E-05     1.66E-03    -3.00E-03
                            [2.40e-04]     [3.97e-04]   [5.86e-04]   [2.87e-04]
Ground Temperature           -1.00E-03      3.20E-04    -1.03E-03    -6.79E-04
 *Inc2574                   [1.37e-04]     [2.37e-04]   [3.54e-04]   [1.67e-04]
Ground Temperature           -1.26E-03      9.14E-04    -1.46E-03    -4.21E-04
 *Inc75                     [1.44e-04]     [2.45e-04]   [3.65e-04]   [1.75e-04]
Income in 25th to             4.12E-01      4.21E-01     3.50E-01     2.31E-01
  74th Percentile Range     [7.35e-03]     [1.27e-02]   [1.90e-02]   [9.02e-03]
Income in 75th or             7.21E-01      9.13E-01     8.38E-01     5.13E-01
  above Percentile Range    [7.74e-03]     [1.32e-02]   [1.95e-02]   [9.40e-03]
Constant                     4.68E+00      3.45E+00     3.40E+00     3.98E+00
                            [1.70e-02]     [2.78e-02]   [2.23e-02]   [2.02e-02]
State and Year                   No            No           No           No
State*Year and Month             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                      0.1095         0.108       0.0864       0.0829
N                              606744        508311       335142       528093




                                          27
   Table 6: Results for July and August in Southern Regions (Cool or Eat)

                           Food In the   Food Out of
                               Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature           1.35E-02     -4.49E-04    -5.66E-02    -2.23E-03
                           [3.04e-03]     [5.54e-03]   [8.16e-03]   [3.22e-03]
Ground Temperature          -1.06E-02      6.37E-03     1.97E-02     8.48E-03
 *Inc2574                  [2.59e-03]     [4.78e-03]   [7.05e-03]   [2.81e-03]
Ground Temperature          -1.78E-02     -3.24E-03     1.61E-02     8.84E-03
 *Inc75                    [2.75e-03]     [4.97e-03]   [7.31e-03]   [2.93e-03]
Income in 25th to           1.16E+00      -7.88E-02    -1.30E+00    -4.49E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [2.07e-01]     [3.82e-01]   [5.63e-01]   [2.25e-01]
Income in 75th or           2.04E+00      1.27E+00     -5.35E-01    -1.23E-01
  above Percentile Range   [2.19e-01]     [3.97e-01]   [5.83e-01]   [2.35e-01]
Constant                    3.81E+00      3.63E+00     8.44E+00     4.18E+00
                           [2.47e-01]     [4.48e-01]   [6.61e-01]   [2.61e-01]
State and Year                  Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
State*Year and Month            No            No           No           No
R-squared                     0.1167        0.1133       0.0397       0.1024
N                             42803         35481        23355        37855
                           Food In the   Food Out of
                               Home          Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature           5.59E-03      2.46E-03    -1.63E-02     5.21E-05
                           [3.95e-03]     [7.01e-03]   [1.03e-02]   [4.10e-03]
Ground Temperature          -8.37E-03      3.82E-03     1.89E-02     8.37E-03
 *Inc2574                  [2.61e-03]     [4.83e-03]   [7.12e-03]   [2.81e-03]
Ground Temperature          -1.55E-02     -4.27E-03     1.45E-02     9.83E-03
 *Inc75                    [2.77e-03]     [5.02e-03]   [7.38e-03]   [2.93e-03]
Income in 25th to            9.79E-01      1.35E-01    -1.23E+00    -4.37E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [2.09e-01]     [3.86e-01]   [5.69e-01]   [2.25e-01]
Income in 75th or           1.86E+00      1.36E+00     -4.07E-01    -2.01E-01
  above Percentile Range   [2.21e-01]     [4.01e-01]   [5.90e-01]   [2.35e-01]
Constant                    4.24E+00      3.26E+00     5.16E+00     3.99E+00
                           [3.13e-01]     [5.56e-01]   [8.14e-01]   [3.30e-01]
State and Year                  No            No           No           No
State*Year and Month            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                     0.1023         0.106       0.0547       0.1005
N                             42803         35481        23355        37855




                                         28
              Table 7: Results for Lagged Temperature: All Regions

                           Food In the    Food Out of
                              Home            Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature          2.23E-03        1.60E-03    -3.34E-03    -5.21E-03
                           [9.61e-05]      [1.73e-04]   [2.61e-04]   [1.17e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.98E-03       9.77E-05    -6.60E-04    -4.68E-04
 *Inc2574                  [1.14e-04]      [1.99e-04]   [2.98e-04]   [1.35e-04]
Ground Temperature          -2.22E-03       7.14E-04    -1.03E-03    -7.88E-05
 *Inc75                    [1.21e-04]      [2.07e-04]   [3.09e-04]   [1.42e-04]
Income in 25th to           4.53E-01        4.33E-01     3.34E-01     2.17E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [6.55e-03]      [1.14e-02]   [1.70e-02]   [7.81e-03]
Income in 75th or           7.67E-01        9.32E-01     8.30E-01     4.98E-01
  above Percentile Range   [6.91e-03]      [1.18e-02]   [1.76e-02]   [8.17e-03]
Constant                    4.77E+00       3.40E+00     3.94E+00     4.20E+00
                           [6.33e-03]      [1.12e-02]   [1.66e-02]   [7.66e-03]
State and Year                 Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
State*Year and Month            No             No           No           No
R-squared                     0.1181         0.1135       0.0577       0.0706
N                            853307          711646       469543       747005
                           Food In the    Food Out of
                              Home            Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature          1.23E-03        9.22E-05    -1.24E-03    -5.29E-03
                           [2.02e-04]      [3.36e-04]   [4.93e-04]   [2.32e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.93E-03       1.08E-04    -8.63E-04    -3.61E-04
 *Inc2574                  [1.14e-04]      [1.99e-04]   [2.94e-04]   [1.34e-04]
Ground Temperature          -2.14E-03       7.38E-04    -1.27E-03    -3.21E-05
 *Inc75                    [1.21e-04]      [2.07e-04]   [3.04e-04]   [1.41e-04]
Income in 25th to           4.50E-01        4.34E-01     3.51E-01     2.10E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [6.53e-03]      [1.14e-02]   [1.67e-02]   [7.74e-03]
Income in 75th or           7.61E-01        9.30E-01     8.48E-01     4.96E-01
  above Percentile Range   [6.90e-03]      [1.18e-02]   [1.73e-02]   [8.09e-03]
Constant                    4.62E+00       3.36E+00     3.76E+00     4.19E+00
                           [8.21e-03]      [1.40e-02]   [2.14e-02]   [9.62e-03]
State and Year                  No             No           No           No
State*Year and Month           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                     0.1074         0.1084       0.0861       0.0747
N                            853307          711646       469543       747005




                                         29
                                      Table 8: Nutritional Outcomes in Winter and Fall

                                                             Poor Familiesa                                  Richer Familiesb
  Group         Nutritional Outcomes               Fall         Winter      Difference              Fall         Winter      Difference
               Dietary Qualityc                    59.1           60.1          1.0                 64.6          65.0           0.4
  All          Serum Measures
Adults,                Anemia                      0.098           0.097           -0.001           0.085           0.101           0.016
N=5,500                Low A, C, or E              0.198           0.215           0.017            0.094           0.098           0.004
               Calories                           1741.0          1743.9             2.9           1928.8          1847.8           -81.0*
               Dietary Qualityc                     56.2            56.6             0.4             61.1            61.6             0.5
 Adults
               Serum Measures
  with
                       Anemia                      0.091           0.084           -0.007           0.093           0.089           -0.003
children,
N=2,357                Low A, C, or E              0.135           0.174           0.039            0.015           0.051            0.037
               Calories                           1977.0          1881.4            -95.6          2210.7          1974.0          -236.7***
               Dietary Qualityc                     62.9            63.0             0.1             66.6            64.6           -2.0***
               Serum Measures
Children,
                       Anemia                      0.001           0.020           0.019            0.039           0.023          -0.016**
N=4,496
                       Low A, C, or E              0.116           0.139           0.023            0.082           0.081           -0.001
               Calories                           1608.1          1647.1           38.9            1624.7          1718.9            94.2*
Source: Authors’ tabulations from the NHANES.
Notes: These outcomes are based on a regression analysis in which we estimate separate models for each outcome and age (children and adults). In
addition to the key independent variables of income levels and season of interview, the regressions include race dummies, a quadratic in age, eight
region dummies, and a gender dummy. The results from these regressions are shown in Appendix Tables 3a-3c. The outcomes are the predicted
outcome for a standardized person (a white female from the urban Northeast); the age of the child is 8 and the age of the adult is 35. The statistical
tests are based on the coefficients of the regression, according to the following levels: * for 0.05 and ** for 0.01. The only statistically significant
difference between adults and children is for rich families in dietary quality (α < 0.05).
a
  Poor families have a poverty-income ratio less than 1.5.
b
  Richer families have a poverty-income ratio greater than 3.
c
  Dietary quality is measured using the Health Eating Index (on a scale from 0 to 100)—see text for an explanation.




                                                                      30
                                     Table 9: Nutritional Outcomes in Winter and Spring

                                                             Poor Familiesa                               Richer Familiesb
  Group         Nutritional Outcomes              Spring        Winter      Difference             Spring     Winter      Difference
               Dietary Qualityc                    62.4           61.1        -1.3**                65.5       65.2          -0.3
  All          Serum Measures
Adults,                Anemia                      0.067          0.076            0.009            0.056           0.088          0.033***
N=5,609                Low A, C, or E              0.140           0.204          0.064***          0.038           0.093          0.055***
               Calories                           2001.8          1841.3         -160.5***         2011.2          1920.6          -90.6**
               Dietary Qualityc                     60.9           58.1            -2.8***           62.9           62.0             -1.0
 Adults
               Serum Measures
  with
                       Anemia                      0.102          0.087            -0.015           0.103           0.094           -0.010
children,
N=2,406                Low A, C, or E              0.143           0.207          0.064**           0.045           0.067           0.022
               Calories                           2049.5          1931.1          -118.4*          1969.4          1992.2            22.8
               Dietary Qualityc                     66.3           65.5             -0.8             69.2            66.8           -2.4***
               Serum Measures
Children,
                       Anemia                      0.029          0.028             0.0             0.025           0.033           0.007
N=4,687
                       Low A, C, or E              0.159           0.134            0.0             0.105           0.068           -0.037
               Calories                           1663.2          1518.2         -144.9***         1707.8          1647.4            -60.4
Source: Authors’ tabulations from the NHANES.
Notes: These outcomes are based on a regression analysis in which we estimate separate models for each outcome and age (children and adults). In
addition to the key independent variables of income levels and season of interview, the regressions include race dummies, a quadratic in age, eight
region dummies, and a gender dummy. The results from these regressions are shown in Appendix Tables 2a-2c. The outcomes are the predicted
outcome for a standardized person (a white female from the urban Northeast); the age of the child is 8 and the age of the adult is 35. The statistical
tests are based on the coefficients of the regression, according to the following levels: * for 0.05 and ** for 0.01. The only statistically significant
difference between adults and children is for rich families in dietary quality (α < 0.05).
a
  Poor families have a poverty-income ratio less than 1.5.
b
  Richer families have a poverty-income ratio greater than 3.
c
  Dietary quality is measured using the Health Eating Index (on a scale from 0 to 100)—see text for an explanation.




                                                                      31
            Table 10: Nutritional Outcomes in Winter and Summer (Excluding Southern Households)

                                                        Poor Familiesa                                    Richer Familiesb
  Group         Nutritional Outcomes             Summer    Winter      Difference                  Summer     Winter      Difference
               Dietary Qualityc                    62.7      63.7          1.0                       67.1      65.2          -1.9
 Adults
               Serum Measures
 without
                       Anemia                      0.029           0.061            0.032            0.043            0.066           0.023
children,
N=1,762                Low A, C, or E              0.239            0.134          -0.105**          0.095            0.127           0.032
               Calories                           2131.8           1833.1          -298.7*          2162.7           1914.3          -248.4**
               Dietary Qualityc                     59.6            58.4             -1.2             64.1             63.9            -0.2
 Adults
               Serum Measures
  with
                       Anemia                      0.057            0.092           0.035            0.049            0.079           0.031
children,
N=1,199                Low A, C, or E              0.181            0.225           0.044            0.041            0.161          0.120***
               Calories                           2473.5           2100.0          -373.5**         2372.0           2310.3           -61.7
               Dietary Qualityc                     64.5             61.9            -2.6*           66.8             62.9            -3.9**
               Serum Measures
Children
                       Anemia                      0.010           0.032            0.022            0.005            0.040           0.035
N=2,324
                       Low A, C, or E              0.107            0.167           0.060            0.069            0.066           -0.003
               Calories                           2051.2           1758.6         -292.6***         1946.4           1844.8           -101.6
Source: Authors’ tabulations from the NHANES.
Notes: These outcomes are based on a regression analysis in which we estimate separate models for each outcome and age (children and adults). In
addition to the key independent variables of income levels and season of interview, the regressions include race dummies, a quadratic in age, eight
region dummies, and a gender dummy. The results from these regressions are shown in Appendix Tables 4a-4c. The outcomes are the predicted
outcome for a standardized person (a white female from the urban Northeast); the age of the child is 8 and the age of the adult is 35. The statistical
tests are based on the coefficients of the regression, according to the following levels: * for 0.1, ** for 0.05, and *** for 0.01. The only statistically
significant difference between adults and children is for rich families in dietary quality (α < 0.05).
a
  Poor families have a poverty-income ratio less than 1.5.
b
  Richer families have a poverty-income ratio greater than 3.
c
  Dietary quality is measured using the Health Eating Index (on a scale from 0 to 100)—see text for an explanation.




                                                                       32
     Table 11: Results for Families with Preschool Children: All Regions

                           Food In the   Food Out of
                              Home           Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature          1.60E-03       2.14E-03    -1.83E-03    -7.32E-03
                           [1.09e-04]     [2.00e-04]   [3.15e-04]   [1.37e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.49E-03      4.91E-04    -1.16E-03    -9.32E-05
 *Inc2574                  [1.32e-04]     [2.34e-04]   [3.65e-04]   [1.61e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.75E-03      9.16E-04    -1.46E-03     4.23E-04
 *Inc75                    [1.44e-04]     [2.49e-04]   [3.86e-04]   [1.73e-04]
Income in 25th to           4.21E-01       4.33E-01     3.91E-01     1.83E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [7.58e-03]     [1.34e-02]   [2.08e-02]   [9.29e-03]
Income in 75th or           7.21E-01       9.11E-01     8.71E-01     4.48E-01
  above Percentile Range   [8.23e-03]     [1.42e-02]   [2.19e-02]   [9.95e-03]
Constant                    4.63E+00      3.39E+00     3.76E+00     4.21E+00
                           [7.33e-03]     [1.31e-02]   [2.02e-02]   [9.15e-03]
State and Year                 Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
State*Year and Month            No            No           No           No
R-squared                     0.1149        0.1091       0.0572        0.066
N                            584370         480296       294230       504052
                           Food In the   Food Out of
                              Home           Home       Clothing    Home Fuel
Ground Temperature          1.05E-03      -6.27E-04     2.05E-04    -9.54E-03
                           [2.41e-04]     [4.07e-04]   [6.22e-04]   [2.86e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.42E-03      5.13E-04    -1.20E-03    -4.11E-05
 *Inc2574                  [1.32e-04]     [2.34e-04]   [3.60e-04]   [1.60e-04]
Ground Temperature          -1.66E-03      9.62E-04    -1.56E-03     4.16E-04
 *Inc75                    [1.43e-04]     [2.49e-04]   [3.81e-04]   [1.72e-04]
Income in 25th to           4.16E-01       4.33E-01     4.00E-01     1.80E-01
  74th Percentile Range    [7.56e-03]     [1.34e-02]   [2.05e-02]   [9.22e-03]
Income in 75th or           7.12E-01       9.08E-01     8.81E-01     4.48E-01
  above Percentile Range   [8.20e-03]     [1.42e-02]   [2.16e-02]   [9.89e-03]
Constant                    4.48E+00      3.39E+00     3.53E+00     4.48E+00
                           [9.59e-03]     [1.66e-02]   [4.52e-02]   [2.09e-02]
State and Year                  No            No           No           No
State*Year and Month           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                     0.1033         0.103       0.0814        0.064
N                            584370         480296       294230       504052




                                         33
                               Figure 1: Changes in Expenditures by Category and by Income in Response to an
                                                  Unseasonable 10oF Drop in Temperature

                                        poor                                      rich
                                 60




                                 40
      Change in Real Dollars




                                 20




                                  0




                                -20       Home Fuel            Food In                   Food Out                  Clothing

Note: All the differences between poor families and rich families are statistically significant at the α = 0.01 level.




                                                                    34
Figure 2a: Results for Southern Regions: State and Year Fixed Effects

                               poor                    rich
                         20




                         10
Change in Real Dollars




                          0




                         -10




                         -20     Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing



Figure 2b: Results for Southern Regions: State by Year and Month Fixed Effects
                               poor                    rich
                         80




                         60
Change in Real Dollars




                         40




                         20




                          0
                                 Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing




                                                  35
                             Figure 3a: Results for Non-Southern Regions: State and Year Fixed Effects
                                        poor                             rich
                                  60




                                  40
Change in Real Dollars




                                  20




                                   0




                                  -20     Home Fuel         Food In             Food Out    Clothing



            Figure 3b: Results for Non-Southern Regions: State by Year and Month Fixed
                                              Effects

                                        poor                             rich
                                   20
    Change in Real Dollars




                                   10




                                    0




                                  -10     Home Fuel         Food In             Food Out    Clothing




                                                                 36
Figure 4a: Results for July and August in Southern Regions (Cool or Eat): State and
                                 Year Fixed Effects

                                  poor                    rich
                           1000
  Change in Real Dollars




                           500




                             0

                                    Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing



Figure 4b: Results for July and August in Southern Regions (Cool or Eat): State by
                           Year and Month Fixed Effects

                                  poor                    rich

                           200
  Change in Real Dollars




                           100




                             0




                           -100     Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing




                                                     37
  Figure 5a: Results for Lagged Temperature All Regions: State and Year Fixed
                                    Effects

                                 poor                    rich
                           40
  Change in Real Dollars




                           20




                            0




                           -20
                                   Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing



Figure 5b: Results for Lagged Temperature All Regions: State by Year and Month
                                 Fixed Effects

                                 poor                    rich
                           30




                           20
  Change in Real Dollars




                           10




                            0




                           -10
                                   Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing




                                                    38
Figure 7a: Results for Preschool Children All Regions: State and Year Fixed Effects

                                 poor                    rich
                           40
  Change in Real Dollars




                           20




                            0




                           -20     Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing



Figure 7b: Results for Preschool Children Lagged Temperature All Regions: State
                        by Year and Month Fixed Effects

                                 poor                    rich
                           60




                           40
  Change in Real Dollars




                           20




                            0




                           -20     Home Fuel   Food In          Food Out   Clothing




                                                    39
Appendix Table 1a: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Children (Winter vs.
                             Summer)

                              Dietary Quality      Anemia  Low A, C, or E      Calories
 Intercept                      78.44898          0.24444      0.36851        868.59883
                                [1.22464]        [0.02185]   [0.06119]       [70.63783]
 Winter                          -2.25267         0.02426      0.00655         -6.60727
                                [1.05841]        [0.02161]   [0.03390]       [71.02870]
 Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5      -2.90669      -0.00031587     0.04531         88.24343
                                [0.60466]        [0.01250]   [0.01995]       [40.16756]
 Winter*(PIR<1.5)                 1.2644           -0.0033     0.03001       -190.06141
                                [0.95720]        [0.01966]   [0.03097]       [64.02962]
 Age                             -1.34247           -0.049    -0.05724         97.45716
                                [0.23026]        [0.00406]   [0.01119]       [12.97140]
 Age2                             0.0295          0.00221      0.00224         -0.79856
                                [0.01190]     [0.00021803] [0.00052117]       [0.70559]
 Non-Hispanic Black              -1.93289         0.08517     -0.00839         32.62531
                                [0.67045]        [0.01361]   [0.02188]       [44.62221]
 Hispanic                        0.52382          -0.00781    -0.04159         29.84091
                                [0.73708]        [0.01470]   [0.02423]       [48.32086]
 Male                            0.52009          -0.03826     0.00704        466.15404
                                [0.44808]        [0.00916]   [0.01452]       [29.81237]
 Northeast Region                -4.84147          0.0571    -0.01449         109.71674
                                [0.92999]        [0.01943]   [0.03115]       [61.90200]
 Midwest Region                  -2.45418         0.02558      0.07546        126.56446
                                [0.96461]        [0.01953]   [0.03110]       [63.77893]
 South Region                    -2.80527         0.04228      0.08333        -60.93906
                                [0.96286]        [0.01974]   [0.03153]       [64.53640]
 Urban                            -2.4424         0.00675     -0.00254        122.06971
                                [1.07057]        [0.02178]   [0.03431]       [71.34714]
 Northeast*Urban                 6.21753           -0.0055     0.00707       -178.46327
                                [1.43356]        [0.02980]   [0.04725]       [95.07697]
 Midwest*Urban                   1.73273          0.01074      0.02847       -250.82428
                                [1.39205]        [0.02815]   [0.04433]       [92.40528]
 South*Urban                     3.95284          -0.00749    -0.04485        146.98465
                                [1.33838]        [0.02705]   [0.04277]       [89.31249]
 R2                               0.1124           0.0915       0.0506          0.2151

 Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
 summer and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                            40
Appendix Table 1b: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Adults with Children
                        (Winter vs. Summer)

                               Dietary Quality      Anemia  Low A, C, or E       Calories
  Intercept                      65.75433           -0.1013    -0.13673       2457.14155
                                 [3.09897]        [0.06014]   [0.08639]       [251.78144]
  Winter                          0.87649          0.02102      0.06658         -25.59276
                                 [1.19374]        [0.02358]   [0.03434]        [96.98726]
  Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5      -4.58202         0.01571      0.16388          73.14429
                                 [0.77651]        [0.01539]   [0.02204]        [63.08898]
  Winter*(PIR<1.5)                -0.75364         -0.00846   -0.00587        -215.23236
                                 [1.16637]        [0.02297]   [0.03317]        [94.76376]
  Age                             -0.05997         0.00688      0.00564         -18.93863
                                 [0.14944]        [0.00289]   [0.00416]        [12.14120]
  Age2                            0.00236       -0.00006935 -0.00004879           0.03344
                                 [0.00191]     [0.00003677] [0.00005285]        [0.15495]
  Non-Hispanic Black              -2.61467         0.09679      -0.0708          109.7095
                                 [0.87632]        [0.01734]   [0.02502]        [71.19855]
  Hispanic                         3.8704          0.02128     -0.09653          83.37496
                                 [0.92461]        [0.01798]   [0.02592]        [75.12160]
  Male                            -1.22564         -0.07879     0.00594         899.09699
                                 [0.55289]        [0.01086]   [0.01566]        [44.92044]
  Northeast Region                -4.68954         -0.01186     0.03223         303.18543
                                 [1.17660]        [0.02303]   [0.03309]        [95.59523]
  Midwest Region                  -2.07107         0.03549      0.08796          51.54706
                                 [1.24268]        [0.02462]   [0.03514]       [100.96348]
  South Region                    -4.07721         0.03275      0.10201          50.61006
                                 [1.21833]        [0.02424]   [0.03553]        [98.98561]
  Urban                           -6.64195         0.00174      0.02564         163.10875
                                 [1.24656]        [0.02458]   [0.03599]       [101.27918]
  Northeast*Urban                12.45891          0.07337      -0.0478        -474.85327
                                 [1.68797]        [0.03317]   [0.04835]       [137.14207]
  Midwest*Urban                   8.98476          -0.01101     0.01908        -169.93695
                                 [1.67505]        [0.03318]   [0.04798]       [136.09222]
  South*Urban                     7.62285          -0.01394     0.00647        -194.97414
                                 [1.59501]        [0.03135]   [0.04553]       [129.58979]
  R2                               0.0962           0.0711       0.0829            0.2002

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  summer and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                             41
Appendix Table 1c: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for All Adults (Winter vs.
                             Summer)

                               Dietary Quality        Anemia  Low A, C, or E    Calories
  Intercept                       64.3689            0.03691      -0.21147   2467.92121
                                 [1.56515]          [0.02957]    [0.03968]   [117.46038]
  Winter                          0.58132            0.01494       0.04303      -5.72135
                                 [0.82161]          [0.01563]    [0.02108]    [61.65987]
  Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5      -4.53649           0.00505       0.15467      11.71685
                                 [0.52742]          [0.01008]    [0.01342]    [39.58125]
  Winter*(PIR<1.5)                -0.23503        0.00060109     -0.01737    -141.58457
                                 [0.84832]          [0.01614]    [0.02152]    [63.66407]
  Age                             -0.01074        -0.00054713      0.00985    -14.67841
                                 [0.06243]          [0.00118]    [0.00158]     [4.68542]
  Age2                            0.00198         0.00001299   -0.00010489      -0.00776
                               [0.00063673]      [0.00001201] [0.00001610]     [0.04779]
  Non-Hispanic Black              -3.96446           0.09122      -0.01528      -9.08117
                                 [0.64131]          [0.01226]    [0.01649]    [48.12861]
  Hispanic                        1.65758            0.00701      -0.06992     -51.21137
                                 [0.72592]          [0.01381]    [0.01848]    [54.47870]
  Male                            -3.24459           -0.04913      0.03513    848.79972
                                 [0.36991]          [0.00703]    [0.00938]    [27.76115]
  Northeast Region                -0.98518           0.00692       0.03792      43.04681
                                 [0.82062]          [0.01547]    [0.02070]    [61.58556]
  Midwest Region                  -0.91411           0.01551       0.05366      72.86628
                                 [0.82548]          [0.01586]    [0.02086]    [61.95017]
  South Region                    -2.48755           0.02564       0.08295       9.73671
                                 [0.87675]          [0.01670]    [0.02255]    [65.79830]
  Urban                           -2.07826           0.04226       0.08239     -97.64326
                                 [0.92782]          [0.01760]    [0.02375]    [69.63068]
  Northeast*Urban                 4.29763             0.0078      -0.09585     -16.36218
                                 [1.16376]          [0.02205]    [0.02973]    [87.33768]
  Midwest*Urban                   4.36679            -0.04393    -0.05045       49.29778
                                 [1.17342]          [0.02242]    [0.02995]    [88.06238]
  South*Urban                     3.15321            -0.01759     -0.07998    108.31043
                                 [1.16165]          [0.02203]    [0.02958]    [87.17925]
  R2                               0.1151             0.0391        0.0625        0.2272

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  summer and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                             42
Appendix Table 2a: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Children (Winter vs.
                              Spring)

                              Dietary Quality     Anemia   Low A, C, or E    Calories
 Intercept                      80.50243          0.3121       0.48192      960.21406
                                [1.07377]       [0.01974]    [0.05163]     [64.62119]
 Winter                            -2.441        0.00749      -0.03712      -60.37262
                                [0.74307]       [0.01508]    [0.02379]     [50.87364]
 Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5      -2.96726        0.00342       0.05327      -44.58281
                                [0.52438]       [0.01068]    [0.01727]     [35.46800]
 Winter*(PIR<1.5)                1.64462         -0.00875      0.01272      -84.56922
                                [0.86267]       [0.01747]    [0.02780]     [58.79276]
 Age                             -1.51484        -0.05123     -0.06792      110.24338
                                [0.20177]       [0.00355]    [0.00959]     [11.68992]
 Age2                            0.02833         0.00235       0.00231       -1.60619
                                [0.01041]     [0.00018987] [0.00044757]     [0.63133]
 Non-Hispanic Black              -1.47136        0.08626      -0.02483       43.48662
                                [0.62453]       [0.01264]    [0.02080]     [41.90602]
 Hispanic                        -0.78637        -0.00866     -0.00324        9.24233
                                [0.54289]       [0.01093]    [0.01782]     [36.73182]
 Male                             -0.6307        -0.04126      0.01256       430.3714
                                [0.39710]       [0.00802]    [0.01300]     [26.81809]
 Northeast Region                1.71346         -0.01576    -0.09295       108.46196
                                [1.89106]       [0.04448]    [0.06693]    [125.90259]
 Midwest Region                  -3.28184        -0.02884    -0.03797        43.95876
                                [0.83681]       [0.01637]    [0.02717]     [56.28186]
 South Region                    -2.82203        -0.01659      0.12282      -22.57408
                                [0.74187]       [0.01471]    [0.02401]     [50.07453]
 Urban                           -0.95612        -0.02698      0.01885      -31.60127
                                [0.64419]       [0.01293]    [0.02112]     [43.43743]
 Northeast*Urban                      -              -             -              -
                                      -              -             -              -
 Midwest*Urban                   0.16055         0.01564       0.11407     -135.29891
                                [1.08024]       [0.02194]    [0.03547]     [72.41517]
 South*Urban                     3.05363         0.04278       -0.0753      233.57317
                                [1.03421]       [0.02043]    [0.03308]     [69.92604]
 R2                               0.1531          0.0927        0.0891         0.2131

 Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
 spring and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                            43
Appendix Table 2b: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Adults with Children
                         (Winter vs. Spring)

                               Dietary Quality     Anemia   Low A, C, or E       Calories
 Intercept                       55.78216         0.15004      -0.05225       2064.25313
                                 [2.55443]       [0.05593]    [0.08238]       [210.39888]
 Winter                           -0.96849        -0.00963      0.02216          22.78072
                                 [0.81840]       [0.01758]    [0.02553]        [67.40871]
 Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5       -2.06953        -0.00135      0.09772           80.1145
                                 [0.68551]       [0.01503]    [0.02132]        [56.46301]
 Winter*(PIR<1.5)                 -1.78769         -0.0053      0.04196       -141.17141
                                 [1.01729]       [0.02194]    [0.03149]        [83.79022]
 Age                              0.25527         -0.00117      0.00599          -2.54436
                                 [0.11936]       [0.00261]    [0.00391]         [9.83158]
 Age2                             -0.00178      0.00001725   -0.0000737          -0.13557
                                 [0.00146]     [0.00003195] [0.00004849]        [0.12027]
 Non-Hispanic Black               -3.12691        0.09789      -0.04655          97.85062
                                 [0.80983]       [0.01789]    [0.02559]        [66.70278]
 Hispanic                         4.02304         0.02665      -0.06349         -54.20387
                                 [0.70241]       [0.01516]    [0.02167]        [57.85526]
 Male                             0.43835         -0.10733      0.02941         940.62291
                                 [0.49738]       [0.01078]    [0.01539]        [40.96759]
 Northeast Region                 -3.38503        0.03608       0.03706        -403.42789
                                 [2.78189]       [0.06047]    [0.08582]       [229.13385]
 Midwest Region                   0.14735         -0.04451      0.09042          52.09406
                                 [1.05673]       [0.02307]    [0.03300]        [87.03924]
 South Region                     0.14189         -0.01649      0.07176         -15.23304
                                 [0.92283]       [0.02025]    [0.02919]        [76.00986]
 Urban                            0.39255         -0.02701     -0.02185         160.24583
                                 [0.82873]       [0.01815]    [0.02613]        [68.25921]
 Northeast*Urban                      -                -            -                 -
                                      -                -            -                 -
 Midwest*Urban                    -0.77049        0.04512       0.01974        -303.49432
                                 [1.32153]       [0.02904]    [0.04121]       [108.84943]
 South*Urban                      1.25569         0.03205       0.05244        -154.86136
                                 [1.24209]       [0.02685]    [0.03840]       [102.30595]
 R2                                0.0592           0.065        0.0508            0.1993

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  spring and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                             44
Appendix Table 2c: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for All Adults (Winter vs.
                              Spring)

                               Dietary Quality    Anemia  Low A, C, or E    Calories
 Intercept                       59.50766         0.1287      -0.03798     2328.2078
                                 [1.40736]      [0.02776]    [0.03841]   [105.80553]
 Winter                            -0.311        0.03281       0.05455     -90.61667
                                 [0.53605]      [0.01055]    [0.01473]    [40.30062]
 Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5       -3.06779       0.01144       0.10173      -9.38395
                                 [0.47404]      [0.00933]    [0.01289]    [35.63857]
 Winter*(PIR<1.5)                 -0.98745       -0.02404       0.0093     -69.83991
                                 [0.74555]      [0.01464]    [0.02034]    [56.05080]
 Age                              0.09862        -0.00254      0.00422     -13.38764
                                 [0.05369]      [0.00105]    [0.00145]     [4.03661]
 Age2                           0.00078449     0.00003051  -0.00005336      -0.02464
                               [0.00054206] [0.00001060] [0.00001467]      [0.04075]
 Non-Hispanic Black                -3.932        0.10342       0.00848     -34.67683
                                 [0.61497]      [0.01229]    [0.01712]    [46.23396]
 Hispanic                         2.31862        0.02275      -0.05366     -82.48201
                                 [0.55711]      [0.01096]    [0.01523]    [41.88358]
 Male                             -1.62608       -0.07055       0.0524     848.39848
                                 [0.34004]      [0.00669]    [0.00925]    [25.56430]
 Northeast Region                 -4.28351       -0.01814      0.06726     -433.8681
                                 [1.53178]      [0.02955]    [0.04131]   [115.15970]
 Midwest Region                   -1.92209       -0.01637      0.08351     165.47382
                                 [0.75429]      [0.01500]    [0.02087]    [56.70773]
 South Region                     -0.51255        -0.0197      0.04021     179.43836
                                 [0.69860]      [0.01389]    [0.01937]    [52.52102]
 Urban                            1.59195        -0.02164     -0.00653     181.71733
                                 [0.64582]      [0.01288]    [0.01794]    [48.55321]
 Northeast*Urban                      -               -            -            -
                                      -               -            -            -
 Midwest*Urban                    -0.08658       0.06208       0.01234    -359.38587
                                 [0.93119]      [0.01860]    [0.02561]    [70.00721]
 South*Urban                      -0.13772       0.04377      -0.00634    -148.44308
                                 [0.94483]      [0.01867]    [0.02590]    [71.03283]
 R2                                0.1075         0.0458        0.0491       0.2388

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  spring and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                             45
Appendix Table 3a: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Children (Winter vs. Fall)

                                Dietary Quality     Anemia   Low A, C, or E     Calories
   Intercept                      77.27947         0.18515       0.38798      927.54078
                                  [1.48097]       [0.02844]    [0.06287]      [93.06765]
   Winter                          -2.02445        0.06201      -0.00136       94.15251
                                  [0.73736]       [0.01524]    [0.02417]      [50.20979]
   Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5      -3.67666        0.03991       0.03426       -16.59941
                                  [0.53249]       [0.01096]    [0.01780]      [35.67354]
   Winter*(PIR<1.5)                2.14923         -0.04324      0.02397       -55.23207
                                  [0.86276]       [0.01777]    [0.02877]      [58.29154]
   Age                             -1.33206        -0.04169     -0.05591       110.9079
                                  [0.20132]       [0.00352]    [0.00988]      [11.24479]
   Age2                            0.03097         0.00176       0.00173        -1.94114
                                  [0.01040]     [0.00018861] [0.00045969]      [0.61413]
   Non-Hispanic Black               -0.8228        0.08594       0.01806       16.30151
                                  [0.54254]       [0.01114]    [0.01850]      [36.20957]
   Hispanic                        -0.41039        -0.00493      0.00136      -144.92418
                                  [0.59247]       [0.01200]    [0.01980]      [39.61034]
   Male                             0.7876         -0.01479      0.02304      476.30899
                                  [0.39570]       [0.00807]    [0.01323]      [26.44353]
   Northeast Region                3.01342         0.05755       0.03081      331.76177
                                  [1.38738]       [0.02824]    [0.04566]      [94.11513]
   Midwest Region                  0.04286         -0.01124      0.12312      248.15061
                                  [1.80474]       [0.03620]    [0.05857]     [119.93513]
   South Region                    -2.06067        0.02937       0.10178      -125.51424
                                  [1.16221]       [0.02370]    [0.03889]      [78.85333]
   Urban                           -2.01841        -0.00344      0.03034       -65.83996
                                  [1.25248]       [0.02587]    [0.04245]      [84.73660]
   Northeast*Urban                 0.78854         -0.02278     -0.04746      -206.63707
                                  [1.56431]       [0.03215]    [0.05210]     [105.94900]
   Midwest*Urban                        -           -0.2416          -        -265.82928
                                        -         [0.41685]          -      [1453.94105]
   South*Urban                     3.30964         0.00609      -0.06269      154.69064
                                  [1.35950]       [0.02806]    [0.04608]      [91.77206]
   R2                               0.1244          0.0987        0.0792         0.2217

    Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
    fall and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                               46
Appendix Table 3b: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Adults with Children
                          (Winter vs. Fall)

                              Dietary Quality      Anemia  Low A, C, or E         Calories
 Intercept                       59.34716         0.04914     -0.18883         2652.79073
                                 [2.79760]       [0.06047]   [0.08853]         [226.06393]
 Winter                           0.45739         -0.00346     0.03679          -236.66913
                                 [0.87833]       [0.01884]   [0.02716]          [70.97458]
 Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5       -4.92444        -0.00134     0.12032          -233.68743
                                 [0.70871]       [0.01522]   [0.02199]          [57.26846]
 Winter*(PIR<1.5)                 -0.04941          -0.004     0.00194          141.10986
                                 [1.08163]       [0.02308]   [0.03343]          [87.40289]
 Age                              0.14122         0.00153      0.00551           -24.79192
                                 [0.11470]       [0.00251]   [0.00362]           [9.26885]
 Age2                          -0.00088161     -0.00001203 -0.00003883            0.10965
                                 [0.00139]    [0.00003073] [0.00004435]          [0.11232]
 Non-Hispanic Black                -1.3272        0.10655     -0.01887           -49.00072
                                 [0.72832]       [0.01572]   [0.02276]          [58.85261]
 Hispanic                         3.68863         0.02855      0.00975            -4.08347
                                 [0.81311]       [0.01711]   [0.02485]          [65.70419]
 Male                             -0.97203        -0.10354      0.0669          886.88117
                                 [0.50675]       [0.01086]   [0.01570]          [40.94898]
 Northeast Region                 3.02258         -0.03463     0.07787          -261.50166
                                 [1.79372]       [0.03901]   [0.05815]         [144.94428]
 Midwest Region                   8.02317          -0.0705     0.02436           -20.56397
                                 [2.50387]       [0.05368]   [0.07894]         [202.32848]
 South Region                     -0.22974        0.03248      0.16913          241.53642
                                 [1.52145]       [0.03306]   [0.05005]         [122.94321]
 Urban                            -2.10537        0.00465      0.05816          291.29772
                                 [1.62695]       [0.03523]   [0.05322]         [131.46798]
 Northeast*Urban                  4.64188         0.02534     -0.10837          237.29053
                                 [2.01211]       [0.04356]   [0.06478]         [162.59128]
 Midwest*Urban                         -               -           -                  -
                                       -               -           -                  -
 South*Urban                      2.88356         -0.01678    -0.10291          -357.65251
                                 [1.75516]       [0.03800]   [0.05711]         [141.82847]
 R2                                0.0917          0.0762       0.0599              0.207

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  fall and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                             47
Appendix Table 3c: NHANES Outcomes Regressions for All Adults (Winter vs.
                               Fall)

                              Dietary Quality    Anemia  Low A, C, or E           Calories
 Intercept                      63.73906        0.08044      -0.08489          2385.07019
                                [1.80775]      [0.03605]    [0.05167]          [136.44166]
 Winter                           0.4462        0.01644        0.0045             -81.0086
                                [0.56366]      [0.01123]    [0.01586]           [42.54250]
 Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5      -5.45358       0.01292       0.10418            -187.8382
                                [0.48167]      [0.00960]    [0.01359]           [36.35462]
 Winter*(PIR<1.5)                0.55572        -0.01754      0.01266            83.90234
                                [0.78214]      [0.01554]    [0.02199]           [59.03297]
 Age                             -0.05774       -0.00155       0.0034            -18.40713
                                [0.05780]      [0.00115]    [0.00163]            [4.36273]
 Age2                            0.00196      0.00002455  -0.00004404             0.02129
                              [0.00059104] [0.00001173] [0.00001666]             [0.04461]
 Non-Hispanic Black              -2.57179       0.11165    0.00058325            -69.12638
                                [0.54439]      [0.01095]    [0.01554]           [41.08814]
 Hispanic                        2.12422        0.01889      -0.01621             -67.1783
                                [0.62551]      [0.01234]    [0.01756]           [47.21070]
 Male                            -2.42654       -0.06967      0.07832           847.59421
                                [0.35093]      [0.00699]    [0.00988]           [26.48703]
 Northeast Region                2.07342        -0.02658      0.10252            -42.78635
                                [1.39143]      [0.02780]    [0.04007]          [105.01975]
 Midwest Region                  3.54684        -0.03912      0.10611            106.3765
                                [1.68314]      [0.03350]    [0.04823]          [127.03655]
 South Region                    -0.25782       0.01473       0.14346           294.52914
                                [1.20767]      [0.02416]    [0.03507]           [91.14976]
 Urban                           0.47171        0.02881       0.11364           161.90501
                                [1.28330]      [0.02570]    [0.03724]           [96.85793]
 Northeast*Urban                 1.98891        0.00804      -0.20404           344.30394
                                [1.53610]      [0.03069]    [0.04416]          [115.93826]
 Midwest*Urban                       -              -             -                   -
                                     -              -             -                   -
 South*Urban                     0.82808        -0.02428     -0.15441           -147.48128
                                [1.35788]      [0.02718]    [0.03929]          [102.48717]
 R2                                0.096         0.0524        0.0469              0.2394

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  fall and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0.




                                             48
Appendix Table 4a: Winter vs. Summer NHANES Outcomes Regressions for
               Children (Excluding Southern Households)

                                Dietary Quality     Anemia   Low A, C, or E      Calories
Intercept                         78.33519         0.23802        0.34544      867.82467
                                  [1.50238]       [0.02493]     [0.07502]      [80.51615]
Winter                             -3.91234        0.03494       -0.00261      -101.55793
                                  [1.61974]       [0.03084]     [0.04915]     [102.45931]
Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5          -2.3164        0.00476        0.03849      104.82842
                                  [0.69480]       [0.01353]     [0.02187]      [43.61265]
Winter*(PIR<1.5)                   1.34453         -0.01282        0.0623      -191.04099
                                  [1.56949]       [0.03070]     [0.04967]      [99.00513]
Age                                -1.25422         -0.0498      -0.05314       86.88435
                                  [0.29224]       [0.00489]     [0.01399]      [15.49051]
Age2                                0.0263         0.00225        0.00208        0.17089
                                  [0.01510]     [0.00026395] [0.00065078]       [0.84431]
Non-Hispanic Black                  -3.7208        0.08037        0.03657        6.98608
                                  [0.94115]       [0.01805]     [0.02947]      [59.18857]
Hispanic                            0.0308         0.00589       -0.03604        80.9396
                                  [1.02734]       [0.01923]     [0.03278]      [62.84234]
Male                               0.51767         -0.03066      -0.00571      489.01053
                                  [0.57519]       [0.01114]     [0.01804]      [36.08447]
Northeast Region                    -5.4969        0.05966      -0.00633        74.51475
                                  [1.04957]       [0.02059]     [0.03353]      [65.96770]
Midwest Region                     -2.94315        0.02883        0.07767      105.05968
                                  [1.08578]       [0.02065]     [0.03347]      [67.78372]
Urban                              -1.41864        0.00265       -0.00103      177.18026
                                  [1.29495]       [0.02451]     [0.03925]      [81.24793]
Northeast*Urban                    5.64942         -0.00424   -0.00061495      -229.77602
                                  [1.68403]       [0.03257]     [0.05232]     [105.21927]
Midwest*Urban                       1.0855         0.01505        0.02016      -305.48989
                                  [1.63480]       [0.03084]     [0.04938]     [102.37101]
R2                                  0.1172          0.1018         0.0542         0.2487

 Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
 summer and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0. It excludes southern
 households.




                                            49
Appendix Table 4b: Winter vs. Summer NHANES Outcomes Regressions for Adults
                with Children (Excluding Southern Households)

                                   Dietary Quality     Anemia   Low A, C, or E      Calories
    Intercept                        71.48488         -0.05569      -0.16493     2469.41773
                                     [4.00111]       [0.07164]     [0.09998]     [331.42033]
    Winter                            -0.21866         0.0306        0.12023       -61.68929
                                     [1.68059]       [0.03086]     [0.04403]     [139.20660]
    Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5        -4.53794        0.00859        0.13995      101.49048
                                     [0.89444]       [0.01650]     [0.02298]      [74.08818]
    Winter*(PIR<1.5)                  -0.96592        0.00404      -0.07602       -311.81809
                                     [1.92861]       [0.03562]     [0.05116]     [159.75077]
    Age                               -0.30228        0.00424        0.00683       -17.47384
                                     [0.19634]       [0.00348]     [0.00486]      [16.26317]
    Age2                              0.00528         -3.9E-05   -0.00005906        0.01735
                                     [0.00251]     [0.00004408] [0.00006154]       [0.20770]
    Non-Hispanic Black                 -4.5348        0.10166       -0.00807       72.44221
                                     [1.23706]       [0.02293]     [0.03222]     [102.46784]
    Hispanic                          2.72044          0.0058       -0.08418       -34.52193
                                     [1.32445]       [0.02411]     [0.03407]     [109.70673]
    Male                              -1.81212        -0.06335       0.00413      912.97522
                                     [0.70944]       [0.01303]     [0.01829]      [58.76420]
    Northeast Region                  -5.45039        -0.00907       0.04178      248.76145
                                     [1.32555]       [0.02414]     [0.03366]     [109.79789]
    Midwest Region                    -2.73185        0.04011        0.09412        -5.88635
                                     [1.39533]       [0.02571]     [0.03563]     [115.57821]
    Urban                             -6.24094        -0.00535       0.00626      181.62168
                                     [1.45344]       [0.02676]     [0.03799]     [120.39168]
    Northeast*Urban                  12.52241         0.08317       -0.04062       -469.2031
                                     [1.93808]       [0.03554]     [0.05039]     [160.53499]
    Midwest*Urban                     8.98862         -0.00475       0.02782      -171.07401
                                     [1.91774]       [0.03542]     [0.04983]     [158.85048]
    R2                                  0.103          0.0684         0.0684         0.2026

    Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
    summer and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0. It excludes southern
    households.




                                               50
Appendix Table 4c: Winter vs. Summer NHANES Outcomes Regressions for All
                  Adults (Excluding Southern Households)

                                 Dietary Quality     Anemia   Low A, C, or E      Calories
  Intercept                        64.20584         0.08698       -0.20732     2467.99225
                                   [2.51519]       [0.04486]     [0.05874]     [176.25689]
  Winter                            -1.93877          0.023        0.03247      -248.41575
                                   [1.77288]       [0.03142]     [0.04099]     [124.23843]
  Poverty-Income Ratio < 1.5        -4.47286        -0.01386       0.14415       -30.95028
                                   [0.83030]       [0.01485]     [0.01920]      [58.18478]
  Winter*(PIR<1.5)                  2.93831         0.00885      -0.13743         -50.2613
                                   [2.39088]       [0.04353]     [0.05577]     [167.54559]
  Age                             0.00000609        -0.00285       0.01013       -10.93942
                                   [0.10009]       [0.00178]     [0.00233]       [7.01376]
  Age2                              0.00179        3.24E-05    -0.00010644        -0.03669
                                   [0.00101]     [0.00001794] [0.00002341]       [0.07086]
  Non-Hispanic Black                -5.15545        0.09443        0.03863       -88.06676
                                   [1.33101]       [0.02386]     [0.03133]      [93.27349]
  Hispanic                          -2.04029         -0.018       -0.05789      -226.42354
                                   [1.50568]       [0.02739]     [0.03581]     [105.51364]
  Male                              -4.40516        -0.03472       0.05842      848.35523
                                   [0.61878]       [0.01104]     [0.01426]      [43.36243]
  Northeast Region                  1.30496         0.02568        0.02568      -171.83826
                                   [1.26270]       [0.02231]     [0.02898]      [88.48658]
  Midwest Region                    -0.12396        0.01387        0.02184       11.95257
                                   [1.24536]       [0.02249]     [0.02860]      [87.27136]
  Urban                             2.83248         0.06853        0.11468      -133.22856
                                   [1.65881]       [0.02936]     [0.03831]     [116.24435]
  Northeast*Urban                   -2.37769        -0.03432      -0.13103       142.6764
                                   [1.95107]       [0.03453]     [0.04509]     [136.72561]
  Midwest*Urban                     -0.65116        -0.07491     -0.09712        65.98162
                                   [1.97279]       [0.03522]     [0.04560]     [138.24728]
  R2                                 0.1182           0.034         0.0647         0.2693

  Note: The sample for these regressions consists of NHANES households who responded in
  summer and winter months and who had a PIR < 1.5 or a PIR > 3.0. It excludes southern
  households.




                                             51
                 Appendix Table 5. Laboratory Cutoffs for Serum Measuresa

Condition                     Ages/Gender         Criteria
Anemia                        0-11                hemoglobin < 11.5 g/dL and hematocrit < 35%
                              12-17               hemoglobin < 12 g/dL and hematocrit < 37%
                              >18/Female          hemoglobin < 12 g/dL and hematocrit < 36%
                              >18/Male            hemoglobin < 13 g/dL and hematocrit < 39%

Short Vitamin C                                   < 11.4 mmol/L

Short Vitamin A                                   < 1.05 µmol/L

Short Vitamin E                                   < 11.6 µmol/L

a
    Sources: Wilson et al. (1991) and DeAngelis et al. (1999)




                                                      52
