NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GAINS FROM FDI INFLOWS WITH INCOMPLETE INFORMATION

Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka

Working Paper 9008
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9008

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Gains from FDI Inflows with Incomplete Information
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 9008
June 2002
JEL No. F2, F3

ABSTRACT
The paper develops an international macroeconomic model of FDI flows with a unique feature:
a hands-on management ability to react in real time to changing economic environments. Anticipating
this advantage, foreign direct investors can outbid other investors in a certain industry in which they
specialize in the source country. The model can explain both two-way FDI flows among developed
countries and one-way FDI flows from developed to developing country. The unique gains from FDI to
the host country stem from the increased eciency of domestic investment.

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, 69978
Israel
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il

Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, 69978
Israel

Gains from FDI Inflows with Incomplete Information∗
Assaf Razin†and Efraim Sadka‡
March 2002

Abstract
The paper develops an international macroeconomic model of FDI flows with a unique feature: a
hands-on management ability to react in real time to changing economic environments. Anticipating
this advantage, foreign direct investors can outbid other investors in a certain industry in which they
specialize in the source country. The model can explain both two-way FDI flows among developed
countries and one-way FDI flows from developed to developing country. The unique gains from FDI
to the host country stem from the increased eﬃciency of domestic investment.
JEL.Nos. F2. F3.
Keywords: FDI vs. Portfolio. Free-Rider Problem. Control. Gains-from-Capital Inflows. Asymmetric Information.

1

Introduction

In perfect capital markets (with full information) all forms of capital flows (FDI, debt and portfolio
equity) are indistinguishable. In the presence of incomplete information, these flows are diﬀerent from
one another.1 For instance, firm mnagement with portfolio investment might be plagued by a “freerider" problem. As noted succintly by Oliver Hart (2000), “if the shareholder does something to improve
∗

The authors are grateful to Philip Lane and Morten Raven for helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft
and to the European Commission for financial support for the RTN project, "Analysis of International Capital Markets:
Understanding Europe’s Role in the Global Economy."
†
Mario Henrique Simonsen Professor of Public Economics, Tel-Aviv University and Friedman Professor of International
Economics, Cornell University, razin@post.tau.ac.il; fax: 972-3-6409908.
‡
Henry Kaufman Professor of International Capital Markets, Tel-Aviv University, sadka@post.tau.ac.il; fax: 972-36409908.
1
Other models that attempt to distinguish among capital flows [e.g., Gordon and Bovenberg (1996), Razin, Sadka and
Yuen (1998, 1999)] assumed segmented markets both across FDI, debt and portfolio equity and across countries. In these
models there is an information asymmetry between domestic and foreign investors, which leads to a home bias in portfolio
equity investment. An interesting empirical study of these asymmetry and bias is provided in Portes and Rey (1999).

1

the quality of management, then the benefits will be enjoyed by all shareholders. Unless the shareholder
is altruistic, she will ignore this beneficial impact on other shareholders and so will under-invest in the
activity of monitoring or improving management."
We view FDI as having a unique characteristic with respect to the quality of management. Foreign
direct investors, by definition, acquire some significant control over the firm they invest in. They can
then apply hands-on management (micro-management) standards that enable them to react in real
time to changing economic environments.They can obtain the full benefits of their actions of monitoring
the firm for themselves because they gain control over the firm, and thereby mitigating the free-rider
problem. This feature may stem from a specialization by the foreign direct investors in a certain niche.2
This could explain both two-way flows of FDI among developed economies, and one-way flows from
developed to developing economies.
In this paper we explore the implications of this unique feature of FDI for the eﬃciency of domestic
investment and the gains from FDI inflows. The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2
develops a model of FDI flows with incomplete information and micro-management of FDI-controlled
firms. In Section 3 we describe the equilibrium in the absence of FDI. Section 4 discusses the gains from
FDI trade. Section 5 concludes.

2

Free Flow of FDI

Suppose there is a very large number (N) of ex-ante identical domestic firms. Each firm employs capital
input (K) in the first period, in order to produce a single composite good in the second period. We
assume that capital depreciates at the rate δ(< 1). Output in the second period is equal to F (K)(1 + ε),
where F (·) is a production function exhibiting diminishing marginal productivity of capital and ε is a
random productivity factor. The latter has zero mean and is independent across all firms. Naturally, ε
is bounded below by −1, so that output is always non-negative; and for notation ease we also assume
that ε is bounded from above by 1. Suppose that ε is purely idiosyncratic, so that there is no aggregate
uncertainty. Consumer-investors are well diversified and will thus behave in a risk-neutral way. We
denote by G(·) the cumulative distribution function of ε and by g(·) = G0 (·) the corresponding density
function.
At the starting point of the decision process of agents in the first period, the random productivity
factor (ε) is revealed to no-one. Each firm is endowed with an initial stock of capital K0 . In order to
2

See Gopinath (2001) for an interesting application of a search model for a study of FDI flows to developing economies.

2

invest and augment this stock of capital the firm must incur first a fixed setup cost of C. Because the
firms are all ex-ante (that is, in the first period, when investments are made) identical, they all choose
the same investment, K1F − (1 − δ)K0 to augment their capital stock to K1F . The investment decision
is based on the average value of ε (which is zero) according to the first-order marginal productivity
condition:

F 0 [K1F ) = δ + rF ,

(1)

where rF is the exogenously given world rate of interest. Because the firm has also the alternative of
not investing at all and avoiding the setup cost, then it will indeed invest and augment its capital stock
to K1F , if and only if:

F (K1F ) + (1 − δ)K1F
− [K1F − (1 − δ)K0 − C]
1 + rF
{F [(1 − δ)K0 ] + (1 − δ)2 K0 }
.
=
1 + rF

(2)

The left-hand-side of (2) is equal to cash flow (in present value) with new investment, whereas the
right-hand-side is equal to the corresponding cash flow with no new investment. We assume that this
condition indeed holds so that all firms would have indeed invested K1F − (1 − δ)K0 ,if this were all the
information available at this stage.
Now, suppose that at this stage (before ε is revealed) foreign direct investors step in and bring
with them their superior micro-management skills. Specifically, we assume that an FDI investor, once
acquiring and managing a firm, can better monitor the productivity of the firm (before investment in
physical capital is carried out) than her domestic counterpart. To simplify things, assume that the FDI
investor can actually elicit the true ε of the firm, after she acquires control of the firm, but before she
has to carry out the investment plan. She can thus fine tune the level of the capital stock to the true ε.
Put diﬀerently, the FDI investor will carry out an ε−dependent schedule, K1F (ε) which is determined
as follows. First, if the firm decides to make new investment, it will change the capital stock to K̂1F (ε)
defined implicitly by:
³
´
F 0 K̂1F (ε) = rF + δ.

(3)

Naturally, the firm will actually carry out this investment plan only if it is preferable to not investing
3

at all. Therefore, there exists a cutoﬀ level of the productivity factor, denoted by εF0 , such that the
firm will indeed augment its capital stock to K̂1F (ε), if its productivity factor is above this threshold;
otherwise the firm will make no new investment and operate do with its initial stock of capital [namely,
(1 − δ)K0 ]. That is:

 (1 − δ)K0 if ε 5 εF
0
F
K1 (ε) =
.
 K̂ F (ε) if ε = εF
1

(4)

0

The cutoﬀ level εF0 is defined implicitly by an indiﬀerence condition between investing and not
investing:

i
F [K̂1F (εF0 )](1 + εF0 ) + (1 − δ)K̂1F (εF0 ) h F F
−
K̂
(ε
)
−
(1
−
δ)K
−
C
0
1
0
1 + rF
F [(1 − δ)K0 ] + (1 − δ)2 K0
.
=
1 + rF

(5)

Anticipating this fine-tuned investment schedule, the value to a potential FDI investor of a domestic
firm at the time of purchase (namely, before ε is revealed), denoted by V, is given by:

V =

Z

1

−1

where

½

¾
¤
F [K1F (ε)](1 + ε) + (1 − δ)K1F (ε) £ F
− K1 (ε) − (1 − δ)K0 − α(ε)C dG(ε),
1 + rF


 0 if ε < εF
0
.
α(ε) =
 1 if ε ≥ εF
0

(6)

(7)

The initial domestic owner, if she does not sell the firm, will carry out the same (ε−independent)
investment [namely, K1F − (1 −δ)K0 ] for all the (ex-ante identical) firms. Therefore the reservation price
of the initial domestic owner, denoted by RF , is the expected value of its discounted cash flow which is
given by:

RF =

F (K1F ) + (1 − δ)K1F
− [K1F − (1 − δ)K0 − C].
1 + rF

(8)

Note that the value of a firm to an FDI investor (namely, V ), which is generated by a fine-tuned
investment schedule, K1F (ε), will be higher than the reservation price of the domestic owner (namely,
4

RF ). Therefore, FDI investors will outbid domestic investors for all the firms in this industry. Because
we assume that there is an infinitely elastic supply of foreign direct investors faced by our small open
economy, then competition among these investors will drive the price up to V, thereby generating a pure
rent of V − RF to the initial owners of each of the fixed number of the domestic firms.
To complete the description of the equilibrium, denote the aggregate output available in the first
period for consumption and investment by F (K0 ). Then the consolidated (present-value) resource constraint is given by:

C1F +

C2F
= F (K0 ) + V,
1 + rF

(9)

where CiF is consumption in period i = 1, 2. (For notational ease we ignore all other industries in this
economy.) We also have the standard intertemporal-consumption allocation rule:

u1 (C1F , C2F )/u2 (C1F , C2F ) = 1 + rF ,

(10)

where u(·) is the representative utility function and where ui (·), i = 1, 2, stands for a partial derivative.

3

Absence of FDI Flows

In order to assess the gains from FDI (to be discussed in the next section), we must consider an
equilibrium where FDI is absent. To save on words, we refer to this equilibrium as an autarky. Denoting
the equilibrium interest rate by RA , we implicitly define the equilibrium stock of capital, K1A , by:
F 0 (K1A ) = rA + δ

(11)

F (K1A ) + (1 − δ)K1A
F [(1 − δ)K0 ] + (1 − δ)2 K0
A
A
−
[K
+
(1
−
δ)K
−
C]
≥
,
1
1
1 + rA
1 + rA

(12)

We assume that:

so that it is indeed worthwhile to augment the capital stock of all the ex-ante identical firms to K1A .
The period-by-period resource constraints, that must hold at autarky, are given by:

C1A + [K1A (1 − δ)K0 − C] = F (K0 )
and
5

(13)

C2A = F (K1A ) + (1 − δ)K1A ,

(14)

and the intertemporal allocation condition is:

u1 (C1A , C2A )/u2 (C1A , C2A ) = 1 + rA ,

(15)

where CiA is the consumption in period i = 1, 2 at autarky.

4

Gains from FDI

The ex-ante (expected) gains from FDI are in line with the traditional trade proposition: They accrue
entirely to the domestic, small economy. (Recall that the FDI investors pay a price V for all domestic
firms which captures all the benefits from the superior FDI management skills, thus leaving the FDI
investors with a return just equalling the world rate of interest.) We can classify these gains into
two categories. First, there are the conventional gains that stem from opening up the economy to
the flow of capital, thereby allowing a more eﬃcient intertemporal allocation of consumption (usually
via consumption smoothing) and investment. Second, there are the intrinsic gains associated with the
superior micro-management by FDI investors. These gains stem from a fine-tuned capital stock, K1F (·)
brought about by FDI investors, as opposed to a uniform (over all firms) capital stock, K1F , which
domestic investors would have chosen in the absence of FDI. This advantage gives rise to a value of
V for a domestic firm to an FDI investor, which is higher than the value of the firm (namely, the
reservation price RF ) in the absence of FDI. But this gap (namely, V − RF ) is entirely captured by
the domestic economy, because of perfect competition among FDI investors for the fixed number of the
domestic firms. These fine-tuning gains are represented by:

F

V −R =−

Z

1

−1

{F [K1F (ε)] − F (K1F )}(1 + ε) − (rF + δ)[K1F (ε) − K1F ]
dG(ε) + G(εF0 )C.
1 + rF

(16)

These fine-tuning gains consist of: (i) the expected present value of the additional benefits from
having a capital stock of K1F (ε) instead of K1F ,when the productivity factor is ε; 3 and (ii) the saving
of the “sunk" cost C in all the low-productivity firms [whose number is G(εF0 )].
3

The additional benefits consist of the extra output, {F [K1F (ε)] − F (K1F )}(1 + ε), minus the user cost of the additional
capital, (r F + δ)[K1F (ε) − K1F ].

6

5

Conclusion

The model presented here is extended in Razin and Sadka (2002) to include a screening (or search)
technology that at some fixed cost per firm can elicit the true value of the productivity factor of the
firm, ε. A potential buyer can apply the technology after she acquires and gains control of the
firm. We assume that foreign direct investors have a cutting-edge advantage over domestic investors in
extracting information about the true value of the firm. If they acquire a domestic firm, they can apply
their superior micro-management skills in order to elicit the true value of the productivity factor. This
advantage stems from their special experience and know-how in this particular industry. In this case
FDI investors outbid other investors for the top productivity firms.
Empirically, developing countries with weak financial institutions, and low corporate governance and
accounting standards attract a higher share of their capital inflows in the form of FDI [see, for instance,
Loungani and Razin (2001)]. This finding is consistent with the main implication of our model. In a
similar vein, our model can explain two-way flows of FDI among developed countries, as each country
can specialize and acquire better management standards in diﬀerent niches.

References
[1] Gopinath, Gita (2001), ”Lending Booms, Sharp Reversals and the Real Exchange Dynamics”,
mimeo, University of Chicago, GSB.
[2] Gordon, Roger H. and A. Lars Bovenberg (1996), ”Why is Capital so Immobile Internationally?
Possible Explanations and Implications for Capital Income Taxation”, American Economic Review
86, 1057-75.
[3] Hart, Oliver (2000), “Financial Contracting," Nancy L. Schwartz Lecture, Kellogg Graduate School
of Management, Northwestern University.
[4] Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (1999), ”The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flow: The
Geography of Information,” NBER Working Paper No. 7336.
[5] Loungangi, Prakash and Assaf Razin (2001), “Foreign Direct Investment: A Critical View,” Financial and Development, Volume 38, Number 2, June, pp. 6-10.

7

[6] Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2002), “FDI Flows, Portfolio Flows and Domestic Investment: The
Role of Information," paper presented at the Sapir Center Conference “FDI: Theory and Evidence,"
Tel-Aviv University, May 15.
[7] Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chi-Wa Yuen (1998), ”A Pecking Order of Capital Inflows and
International Tax Principles”, Journal of International Economics 44, 45-68.
[8] __________(1999), ”Implications of the Home Bias: A Pecking Order of Capital Flows and
Corrective Taxation”, in: Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka (editors), Globalization: Public Economics
Perspectives, Cambridge University Press.

8

