                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BIDDER DISCOUNTS AND TARGET PREMIA IN TAKEOVERS


                                           Boyan Jovanovic
                                          Serguey Braguinsky


                                         Working Paper 9009
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9009


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We thank Luis Cabral, Masako Ueda, and the Finance Lunch group at the GSB of the University of Chicago
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Boyan Jovanovic and Serguey Braguinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Bidder Discounts and Target Premia in Takeovers
Boyan Jovanovic and Serguey Braguinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 9009
June 2002
JEL No. G3



                                               ABSTRACT

        When a takeover is announced, the sum of the stock-market values of the firms involved often
falls, and the value of the acquirer almost always does. Does this mean that takeovers do not raise the
values of the firms involved? Not necessarily. We set up a model in which the equilibrium number of
takeovers is constrained efficient. Yet, upon news of a takeover, a target's price rises, the bidder's price
falls, and, most of the time the joint value of the target and acquirer also falls.




Boyan Jovanovic                                                    Serguey Braguinsky
Department of Economics                                            The George Stigler Center
University of Chicago                                              Walker Hall
1126 E. 59th St.                                                   University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637                                                  Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                           serguey@uchicago.edu
bjovanov@uchicago.edu
Bidder Discounts and Target Premia in Takeovers∗
                    Boyan Jovanovic†and Serguey Braguinsky‡
                                        June 3, 2002


                                           Abstract
            When a takeover is announced, the sum of the stock-market values of the
        firms involved often falls, and the value of the acquirer almost always does.
        Does this mean that takeovers do not raise the values of the firms involved? Not
        necessarily. We set up a model in which the equilibrium number of takeovers
        is constrained eﬃcient. Yet, upon news of a takeover, a target’s price rises,
        the bidder’s price falls, and, most of the time the joint value of the target and
        acquirer also falls.


1       Introduction
On news of a takeover, the share price of the target firm usually rises sharply, while
that of the acquiring firm usually falls. The joint value may or may not rise. Surveying
the field, Andrade, Mitchell and Staﬀord (2001) report that since 1973 target premia
were 20 or 30 percent, acquirer discounts were minus 3 or 4 percent, and that the joint
value shows no clear pattern. They conclude (p. 118) that “the fact that mergers
do not seem to benefit acquirers provides a reason to worry ...[that mergers do not
raise value].” To explain such evidence (Shleifer and Vishny 2001) have assumed that
investors are irrational and (Roll 1986) has assumed that managers use takeovers
to extend their empires at the expense of the shareholder. The evidence about the
bidder discount and joint discount has been taken to imply that takeovers often just
redistribute rents from acquirers to their targets or that they even destroy rents.
    We show, however, that even when investors are rational, when agency problems
are absent, and when mergers do create value, the acquirer’s value and even the joint
value of the bidder and target may fall when a takeover is announced. The bidding
firm’s value falls because its bid reveals that its internal investment opportunities are
    ∗
     We thank Luis Cabral, Masako Ueda, and the Finance Lunch group at the GSB of the University
of Chicago for helpful comments.
   †
     NYU and the University of Chicago.
   ‡
     The University of Chicago and SUNY Buﬀalo


                                               1
poor. The target’s value rises because an acquisition signals that the target’s internal
investment opportunities are good. A takeover benefits both parties, and the number
of takeovers is, in a sense, constrained-eﬃcient. And yet the bidder discount usually
outweighs the target premium so that the joint value drops.
    We discuss other related work later on in the paper; the highlights there are
Holmes and Schmitz (1990, 1995), Campa and Kedia (forthcoming), Villalonga (2001),
Gort, Grabowski, and McGuckin (1985), and Myers and Majluf (1984). But first we
present the model and then discuss its robustness.


2       Model
In the model that we are about to describe, takeovers are the mechanism that moves
good projects from bad managers to good managers. At the outset firms diﬀer in the
quality, x, of their management.1 Each firm then draws a project and the quality, z,
of projects, too, diﬀers over firms. Some good managers end up with bad projects
and vice versa. Takeovers then serve to shift the good projects from bad managers
to good managers. A firm’s output is
                                                  xz.                                                (1)
Thus the quality of a project, z, and the firm’s ability to implement a project, x,
are complements. Among firms, x ≥ 0 is distributed according to the cumulative
distribution function F (x). Projects are either good or useless: z ∈ {0, 1}. A fraction
λ of projects is good, and the fraction 1 − λ is useless.
      A firm cannot change the quality of its management. It can, however, acquire
another firm and manage its project. A manager can handle only one project. If a
firm (x, z) buys firm (x0 , z 0 ), it then uses its own management, x, and the project,
z 0 , of the firm that it has acquired. It drops its own, useless project, and lets go the
manager of the target. The output of the merged entity will be2
                                                  xz 0 .                                             (2)


   To an acquirer, then, only the target’s z 0 matters. The departing manager receives
no severance payment and does not stand in the way of the takeover as long as it
    1
      Andrade et al (2001) and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002) report evidence that acquisitions are
disproportionately made by high-Q firms.
    2
      This partially reflects findings by McGuckin and Ngyen (1995) and Schoar (2000) that the
productivity of the target’s plants rises (in this case from x0 to x) while that of the acquirer’s plants
falls (in this case from z to zero as the plant is ‘abandoned’). We re-visit this issue in Section 4. The
merged firm produces more output than the combined stand-alone outputs of the two firms. Hence,
productivity rises after a merger. Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987) find that plants changing owners
had lower initial levels of productivity and higher subsequent productivity growth than plants that
did not change hands.

                                                    2
benefits the shareholders of his firm. We assume that all mergers are driven only by
the prospect of real gain, all investors are rational and all managers act only in the
long-term interests of shareholders. This is not to suggest that, empirically, mergers
are always exactly like that. Rather, we assume that all mergers create value, that
the stock market is eﬃcient, and that there is no agency problem, in order to see
exactly where these extreme assumptions lead.

2.1    A sketch of equilibrium
We begin with an intuitive derivation of the equilibrium takeover activity and of the
price, q, of targets.
    The supply of targets.–Let us start oﬀ by assuming as a constraint something
that will later emerge as an equilibrium action; namely, that, before it can be taken
over, a firm must certify that its z = 1. The total mass of potential targets is λ. The
act of certifying the quality of its project costs the firm c. If the firm does not wish
to be a target and if, instead, it were to manage its own project, its payoﬀ would be
x. Thus the direct plus the foregone-earnings costs of being a target are c + x. Thus,
at a price of q, the number of willing targets would be all the z = 1 firms for which
c + x is less than q. That number is

                                 λF (q − c) ≡ S (q) .

Evidently, S (q) is an upward sloping supply curve that is continuous if F is.
    The demand for targets.–Any firm that drew a project z = 0 is a potential
acquirer. Unless it manages to acquire another firm, this firm faces a revenue of zero.
The number of such firms is 1 − λ. If firm x manages to buy another firm with a
certified z = 1 project, its revenue will be x. Thus, at a price of q, the number of
willing acquirers would be the z = 0 firms for which x − q is positive. That number
is
                              (1 − λ) [1 − F (q)] ≡ D (q) ,
a downward sloping demand curve.
    Figure 1 shows the equilibrium price of targets q E and number of takeovers T E ,
where the two curves intersect. At q = 0, all the 1 − λ firms with z = 0 projects are
willing to buy, hence the demand curve cuts the horizontal axis at the point 1 − λ. As
q gets large, all the λ firms with z = 1 projects are willing to sell, and so the supply
curve approaches λ. Rents are split between the targets and the acquirers, with the
largest rents in each group going to the highest-x acquirers and the lowest-x targets.
    Figure 1 relates to a stage of the game at which most of the uncertainty has been
resolved. It says nothing about bidder discounts and target premia. Here now is a
more precise account of the game.



                                           3
             Price
             of                                         S(q)
             targets
                                 D(q)




                     qE




                      c                                                  Number of
                                                                         takeovers
                                          TE          1-λ         λ



                          Figure 1: Supply and Demand for Targets

2.2     The five stages of the game
We shall treat all takeovers as cash sales although this is done purely for expositional
reasons. The dividends of the combined entity are then paid to the shareholders of
the acquiring firm. Shareholders are risk neutral and they hold on to their shares until
the firm pays its dividend and liquidates or until it is bought by another firm. We
assume that a manager acts in the shareholder’s interest. That is, he puts the firm up
for sale if the cash payment, q, exceeds his firm’s stand-alone dividend. Alternatively,
the manager buys another firm if the dividend he can secure his original shareholders
net of the cash paid for the acquired firm, exceeds his firm’s stand-alone dividend.
    Events occur in five stages:

   1. Firms form. Based on its x (which is public knowledge) each firm is sold at its
      Stage-1 price p (x) .

   2. The firm privately observes z. It may (thruthfully) disclose its z to everyone at
      a cost c.3
   3
    In reality there is a whole set of indicators of project quality, and each of them probably carries
a diﬀerent c. Gray et al (1990, Table 1) report 33 of them. Firms seem to favor disclosing of their
major new products and major capital expenditure projects in progress, but do not favor disclosing
their major patents.


                                                  4
   3. Firm may enter the takeover market as a buyer or a seller.4

   4. Based on its Stage-2 and Stage-3 choices, the firm’s price takes on its “Stage-4”
      level. (It is to this stage that Figure 1 relates)

   5. The firm pays its dividend and liquidates.

2.3     Stage-3 actions and Stage-4 prices
Equilibrium.–Key to equilibrium is a pair of real numbers, x0 , and x1 , where x0 < x1 .
These two numbers divide the set of x’s into three regions — top, middle, and bottom.
Targets come from the bottom region, acquirers from the top region. Firms from the
middle region stay out of the takeover market. We start describing the equilibrium
with an account of the Stage-3 actions and Stage-4 prices of the firms in each region.
   The bottom region — x ≤ x0 .–If such a firm draws z = 1, it discloses that fact. It
becomes a takeover target and sells at the price q. All targets sell at the same price.5
Firm x0 is indiﬀerent between disclosing z (and getting its shareholders a payoﬀ of
q − c), and not disclosing and managing its own project (and getting its shareholders
a payoﬀ of x0 ). That is,
                                     q − c = x0 .                                    (3)
If such a firm does not disclose its z, the market rationally infers that any firm with
x < x0 that has not disclosed is a z = 0 firm. The Stage-4 price of such a firm is
zero. To sum up, then, in the bottom region, a firm’s Stage-4 price is q if z = 1, and
it is zero if z = 0.
     The middle region — x ∈ (x0 , x1 ).–Such a firm does not disclose its z and it does
not bid for other firms. The market infers nothing from its inaction. If such a firm
has z = 1, it can guarantee its shareholders more than q − c, and it would refuse
(and successfully repel) any takeover bid at the price q. If, on the other hand, such
a firm has z = 0, buying another firm at the price q would leave it with a negative
net payoﬀ. Thus, if a firm from this region did not refuse a takeover bid, it would
reveal itself to be a “lemon”. Thus no one bids for firms in this region and their prices
remain unchanged at λx.
   4
     I.e., a firm can repel an unwanted bid. Of all takeover bids, only 8.3% of all bids are hostile and
only 4.4% eventually succeed (Andrade et al, 2001). We do not explain such mergers.
   5
     Strictly speaking, disclosure should occur before the takeovers announcement. Certainly the
price of the target-to-be does rise a bit before the takeover announcement (Pound and Zeckhouser
1990). Firms must, in fact, disclose business plans and other trade secrets at the IPO stage, and
when taking out patents. Many firms are taken over during the several months’ waiting period
between an IPO filing and SEC approval. Some are taken over precisely for their intellectual prop-
erty, i.e., their patents. The direct costs of such disclosures may be small, but they may help the
firm’s competitors and any profits thus foregone should also be a part of c. Firms seem to regard
‘competitive disadvantage’ as the largest part of c (Gray et al 1990, Table 4).




                                                   5
                          Prices                                  x
                                      targets


                         q
                                                               x-q

                                                      λx
                       q- c
                                                                 bidders
                               45
                                       x0        x1                   x

                                    Figure 2: Stage-4 Prices

   The top region — x ≥ x1 .–A firm that has drawn z = 0 has spare capacity in its
organization capital x that it will seek to employ. Such a firm buys a discloser from
the first region thereby raising its own output and dividend from zero to x; and its
Stage-4 price is x − q. The lowest-quality bidder x1 is indiﬀerent between bidding
(and getting a payoﬀ of x1 − q), and managing its own project (and getting zero), so
that
                                        q = x1 .                                   (4)
If it does not bid, this signals to the market that the firm’s z = 1, and its Stage-4
price is x.


    Why don’t the z = 0 firms refrain from bidding and thereby secure a jump in
their price? Because it then would deliver a zero dividend to its shareholders who are
following a “buy and hold” strategy.6 To sum up, then, in the top region, a firm’s
Stage-4 price is x if z = 1, and x − q if z = 0. These Stage-4 prices are depicted by
heavy lines in Figure 2. In the middle region there is just one heavy line because, at
stage-4, the market cannot distinguish the good firms from the lemons. In the other
two regions, the actions of the firms have fully revealed their type.
    The discontinuities in the price-functions of Figure 2 are misleading; the share-
holders of the good firms receive a continuous payoﬀ as we raise x, and so do the
shareholders of the bad firms. The situation is illustrated in Figure 3. Now the gains
   6
   If enough shareholders were to sell their shares at Stage 4, and if the manager wanted to
maximize interim shareholder utility, he would refrain from bidding and masquerade as z = 1 firms.
Other shareholder holding strategies may induce z = 0 firms to not bid.

                                                6
                         Prices                             x

                               Dividends of
                               z = 1 firms


                                                         x- q


                       q- c                               Dividends of
                                                          z = 0 firms



                                        x0    x1                  x

             Figure 3: How Equilibrium Dividends Depend on x and z

to trade are apparent; in the absence of takeovers, the z = 1 firms would be paying
their shareholders a dividend of x (i.e., the 450 line), and the z = 0 firms would be
paying their shareholders a dividend of zero (i.e., the horizontal axis). But what we
end up with is a Pareto improvement, with the targets and the bidders doing strictly
better than they would if there were no trade.


    Market clearing.–The Stage-4 prices must guarantee that the takeover market
clears, i.e., that the demand for targets equals their supply:
                              λF (q − c) = (1 − λ) (1 − F [q])                       (5)
so that we are at an intersection of the two curves in Figure 1.

2.4    Stage-1 prices, p (x)
For firms in the middle region the Stage-1 prices are the same as the Stage-4 prices,
namely, λx. In the two other regions, a firm’s Stage-1 price is a weighted sum of the
prices it will fetch at stage 4, the weights being the probabilities of z being zero and
one. The stage-1 prices are:
                         
                                λ (q − c)               if x ≤ x0 ,
                p (x) =          λx                      if x ∈ (x0 , x1 ) ,          (6)
                         
                                λx + (1 − λ) (x − q)      if x ≥ x1 .
Since there are no aggregate shocks, the value of the stock market as a whole is the
same at Stage 4 as it is at Stage 1. But the dispersion of prices is higher at Stage 4.

                                              7
2.5    Existence of a positive-takeover equilibrium
Trade in firms stems from diﬀerences in comparative and absolute advantage in man-
agement, i.e., from the dispersion in x’s. Let xmin be the smallest and xmax the largest
value of x in the support of F . If the range of x is larger than c, takeovers will take
place in equilibrium.

Proposition 1 (Existence) If F is continuous, if 0 < λ < 1, and if

                                     c < xmax − xmin ,                               (7)

then takeovers do occur in equilibrium,

                                       x1 = x0 + c                                   (8)

and q ∈ (c, xmax ) uniquely solves

                           λF (q − c) = (1 − λ) (1 − F [q]) .                        (9)

    Proof. Solving (3) for q and substituting into (4) implies that if equilibrium
exists, (8) must hold. Eq’s (3), (4), and (5) imply (9). It remains to be shown that,
for each λ and c, (9) has a unique solution for q. This follows in 2 steps: (i) at
q = xmax the RHS of (9) is zero whereas, by (7), the left-hand side of (9) is strictly
positive and (ii) at q = c the opposite is true. Since the LHS of (9) is continuous and
increasing in q whereas the RHS is continuous and decreasing, we are done.

2.6    Comparative statics
The parameters of the model are c, λ, and F . The conditions of the existence theorem
provide clues to how the solution changes when the parameters change. Condition (7)
emphasized that takeovers are driven by the dispersion of x’s, summarized by their
range — no takeovers can occur if (7) fails. But the theorem also requires that there be
dispersion in the z’s; if all firms had the same-quality projects (which would happen
if λ = 0 or λ = 1), again there would be no takeovers. The number of equilibrium
takeovers is therefore non-monotonic in λ. Finally, takeover activity declines with c.
Formally, diﬀerentiation of (9) reveals that
                             ∂q                      ∂q
                                <0         and          > 0.                        (10)
                             ∂λ                      ∂c
When λ is high, there are more good projects in total and the demand for targets
falls relative to their supply and, hence, so does q. On the other hand, when it costs
more to disclose quality, the price of targets will rise so as to reflect that fact. Eq’s
(4) and (10) imply that
                             ∂x1                   ∂x1
                                 <0        and         > 0,                         (11)
                             ∂λ                    ∂c
                                            8
so that the number of takeovers, (1 − λ) [1 − F (x1 )] decreases with c. Eq’s (3) and
(10) imply that
                              ∂x0                 ∂x0
                                   < 0,    and        < 0,                         (12)
                              ∂λ                   ∂c
this latter because we just established that the number of takeovers, which also equals
λF (x0 ), decreases with c.

2.7     Discounts and premia
At Stage 4, all targets trade at a premium over their Stage-1 prices, and all bidders
trade at a discount. We measure the premia and discounts as percentages of Stage-1
prices p (x).
    The target premium.–From (6), the premium is
                        (q − c) − p (x)   (1 − λ) (q − c)   1−λ
                                        =                 =     ,
                             p (x)           λ (q − c)       λ
and it is the same for all targets. The target premium is high when good projects are
scarce and when, as a result, a disclosure that z = 1 is especially good news. Since
target premia are on average about 0.2, the relevant value seems to be λ ≈ 0.83.
    The bidder discount.–Conversely, the bidder discount is high when good projects
are plentiful and when, as a result, the revelation of z = 0 that is implicit in a firm’s
decision to acquire another, is especially bad news. The discount is smaller for the
high-x bidders because all bidders pay the same price, q, but the high-x bidders
benefit more. The absolute value of bidder’s discount, i.e., the fraction of value lost
upon announcement, is
                                               λq
                                  δ (x) ≡               .
                                          x − (1 − λ) q
From (4) x1 = q, and so δ (x1 ) = 1; the marginal bidder loses all of his value. As x
rises, the discount steadily shrinks and converges to zero as x gets large.
    The values combined.–The target’s x’s do not aﬀect their prices at any stage.
Therefore only the acquirer’s x aﬀects the sum of the two firms’ Stage-1 and Stage-4
prices. Relative to the sum of the two firms’ ex-ante values, the ex-post “joint” value
of the merged firm is
                                              x−c
                             J (x) =                        ,                        (13)
                                      q (2λ − 1) + (x − λc)
an expression that is relevant for x ≥ x1 only. The next proposition reports a result
that we shall use later: For λ ≥ 1/2, the joint values drop:7
  7
    The model also impies a rise in the price of the non-bidders with x > x1 . This “non-bidder
premium” is
                                  x − p (x)        (1 − λ) x1
                                            =                        .
                                    p (x)     λx + (1 − λ) (x − x1 )
At x = x1 , this is the same as the target premium, and it goes to zero as x gets large.

                                              9
Proposition 2 (Joint values). For any c, J (x) is strictly increasing in x if λ ≥
1/2 and
                   J (x) < 1 for all (c, x) and all λ ≥ 1/2.                  (14)

    Proof. The first claim follows immediately from (13). As for (14), the right-hand
side of (13) is less than unity when λ = 1/2 and it is even smaller when λ > 1/2
because q > 0.
    Since it does not involve x, (14) applies to the joint value of all takeovers. The
drop is smaller for the high-x firms.
    In all cases, including those in which the joint value drops, the merger raises the
joint output of the two firms by an amount xA − xT where xA is the acquirer’s x and
xT is the target’s x.

2.8       Takeovers and exits
Takeover activity is often measured by the value of the targets as a fraction of stock-
market capitalization.8 The total spent on takeovers is qλF (x0 ), and so the capital-
ization of targets relative to total capitalization is

                                                 qλF (x0 )
                                      m = R∞                  .                    (15)
                                             0
                                                 p (x) dF (x)

Another interesting statistic is the fraction of exits — firms that end up not producing
output for reasons other than that they are taken over. In the model, such firms
are those whose z is zero and whose x is below x1 . The number of such firms is
(1 − λ) F (x1 ), but their Stage-4 value is zero. Relative to the stock market, the
Stage-1 value of these firms combined is
                                  h                     R x1        i
                         (1 − λ) (q − c) λF (x0 ) + λ x0 xdF (x)
                    ε=                 R∞                             .             (16)
                                        0
                                           p (x) dF (x)

We shall calculate m and ε in the following example.

2.9       Example: Uniformly distributed x
We briefly show the kinds of statistics that a model of this general type can gener-
ate. We choose λ so as to fit the target premium of 0.2, and then ask what other
quantitative implications this has.
    Assume that F (x) = x; i.e., x uniformly distributed on [0, 1]. Then (9) reads

                                   λ (q − c) = (1 − λ) (1 − q)
  8
      E.g., Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002), Figures 1 and 8.


                                                  10
                  δ(x)

                     1


                   0.8


                   0.6


                   0.4


                   0.2
                                    x1

                     0                    0.4        0.6   0.8     1   x
                             0.17

                         Figure 4: δ (x) when λ = 0.83 and c = 0

so that
                 q = x1 = 1 − λ (1 − c)         and x0 = (1 − λ) (1 − c)
The target premium is (1 − λ) /λ. When c = 0, q = x0 = x1 = 1 − λ, and the bidder’s
discount is
                                           λ (1 − λ)
                                 δ (x) =              .
                                         x − (1 − λ)2
In the rest of this section we assume that λ = 0.83 so that our model fits the target
premium or 0.20. Using this value of λ, we plot δ (x) in Figure 4.


    The bidder discount is an order of magnitude too large, especially at the lower
values of x. In section 4 we show how this quantitative error can be fixed by allowing
a larger span of control for managers. The joint premium J, as x ranges over the set
of possible bidder-types x ∈ [1 − λ, 1] , is
                                                  x
                              J (x) =                         .
                                         x + (1 − λ) (2λ − 1)
Taking the value λ = 0.83 under which the model fits the target premium, we plot
J (x) in Figure 5.


The model also overpredicts J (x) in the negative direction. In Section 4.1, we also
show that raising managerial span of control can push J (x) towards, and even above
unity. The non-bidder premium, [x − p (x)] /p (x) is 0.20 at x = x1 , but at x = 1 it
is only 0.03.

                           x − p (x)        (1 − λ) x1
                                     =                        ,
                             p (x)     λx + (1 − λ) (x − x1 )

                                                11
                       J(x)
                          1


                         0.9


                         0.8


                         0.7


                         0.6                 x1

                               0   0.17           0.4        0.6       0.8    1
                                                                                  x

Figure 5: The ratio of post-bid joint values to the pre-bid joint values when λ = 0.83
and c = 0.

    Still assuming c = 0, the value of each target is q = 1 − λ = 0.17, whereas the
capitalization of the average acquirer is −q + E (x | x ≥ 0.17) = 0.42. Therefore the
capitalization of the average acquirer is 2.5 times that of the average target. In fact,
this ratio is somewhere between 5 and 10 (Andrade et al Table 1). This the model can
easily handle once we raise the managerial span of control as we explain in Section 4.
    On the other hand, when λ = 0.83, m = 0.049, which slightly overpredicts the
relative capitalization of targets (0.025) during the period 1970-2000, and ε = 0.008,
which is about 2.3 times lower than the relative capitalization of non-acquired firms
(0.019) that de-listed from NYSE and Nasdaq since 1970.9
    How much value do takeovers add? In other words, how much more output do we
have compared to the case in which takeovers are not allowed? Without takeovers,
aggregate output would be
                                          1
                                   λµx = λ = 0.415.
                                          2
Maximal output with takeovers occurs when c = 0, and, from (17) below, it is
                                 Z 1               Z 0.17
                   λµx + (0.17)       xdx − (0.83)        xdx = 0.486.
                                          0.17                     0
                                                                             0.486−0.415
As a fraction of the no-takeover output, the maximal gain is                    0.415
                                                                                           = 0.17.


3         Welfare
Our welfare measure is net aggregate output, Y . If agents could not recontract
from the Stage-2 random assignment of z to x, aggregate output would be λµx ≡
    9
        Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002).

                                                        12
    R∞
λ   0
         xdF (x). With takeovers, however, output net of disclosure costs becomes
                                       Z ∞          Z x0
                     Y = λµx + (1 − λ)      xdF − λ       (c + x) dF              (17)
                                         x1              0

This is how much could be produced if, at a cost c, the planner could truthfully elicit
all the z = 1 from firms with x < x0 , and reassign them to firms with x > x1 . It
turns out that the equilibrium maximizes Y with respect to x0 and x1 , subject to the
resource constraint
                            λF (x0 ) = (1 − λ) [1 − F (x1 )]

Proposition 3 (Equilibrium Maximizes Y ). The equilibrium allocations maximize
Y. Moreover, when c ∈ (0, xmax − xmin ) ,

                                  dY
                                     = −λF (x0 ) < 0.
                                  dc
     Proof. The Lagrangian is

                       L = Y + θ {λF (x0 ) − (1 − λ) [1 − F (x1 )]}

The first-order conditions are

                                   − (c + x0 ) + θ = 0

and
                                      −x1 + θ = 0
The second-order derivatives with respect to x0 and x1 are negative and the cross
partials are zero. Therefore L is globally strictly concave in the vector (x0 , x1 ) .
Combining the two conditions and observing that the constraint must hold proves
the first claim. The second claim then follows from the envelope theorem. The strict
inequality follows from Proposition 1 (eq. [9]) by which F (x0 ) > 0.
   So, if the planner must pay c for every discovery of a z = 1 firm, then the
equilibrium also maximizes aggregate output net of disclosure costs, much as one
would expect based on Figure 1. In this sense, then, equilibrium is constrained
eﬃcient.
   As c → 0, x0 and x1 tend to the same value, call it x∗ which solves the equation

                              λF (x) = (1 − λ) (1 − F [x]) ,

Letting x∗ denote the optimum and simplifying,

                                     F (x∗ ) = 1 − λ.                             (18)


                                              13
so that the number of projects reassigned, λF (x∗ ) , is just λ (1 − λ) . This is also
the first-best level of takeovers because this is what a planner could attain if he had
knowledge of the z’s without having to bear the disclosure costs.
    The welfare properties of equilibrium seem to be unrelated to the change in the
joint total value of the bidder and the target (Proposition 2) — takeovers are always
associated with a level of output that exceeds λµx regardless of what δ (x) and J (x)
happen to be. This is because without aggregate risk, all future welfare gains from
reassignment are already included in p (x).


4     Extensions
In this section we relax some of the assumptions and look into some other implications
of the model.

4.1    Larger span of control
Suppose that a manager can handle up to n projects, and that the production function
of his firm is
                                         X n
                                   y=x       zi
                                            i=1

To keep things simple, each manager is still endowed with just one project to begin
with. Take the case where c = 0. Then there are just 2 regions, i.e., x0 = x1 ≡
x̂. Bidders in the region where x ≥ x̂ wish to acquire n firms if their endowed
project is bad, and n − 1 firms if their endowed project is good. (5) reads λF (x̂) =
n (1 − λ) (1 − F [x̂]) + (n − 1) λ (1 − F [x̂]), or simply

                                  λ = n (1 − F [x̂])

Conditions (3) and (4) are unchanged and therefore
                                            µ     ¶
                                         −1   n−λ
                              q = x̂ = F
                                               n

Note that limn→∞ x̂ = xmax . The number of takeovers,
                                           µ     ¶
                                             n−λ
                               λF (x̂) = λ         ,
                                              n

rises with n, because the best managers now have a wider span of control.
    Thus modified, the model now yields a smaller bidder’s discount — roughly by
a factor of 1/n. That is because only 1/nth of a firm’s eventual operations have a
quality that is in doubt at Stage 1. The remaining n − 1 projects will, after the

                                          14
takeover market has cleared, all be of quality z = 1, and the firm’s Stage-1 price,
p (x) will reflect that fact. The target premium is not aﬀected, however, because a
firm for which x < x̂ still becomes a target with probability 1 and so for such a firm,
p (x) = λx as before.

4.2     Pooling equilibria
Pooling equilibria exist when c is high. In such an equilibrium, targets do not disclose
anything, and the acquirer is not sure what z he is getting. Acquirers come from the
top region, as before, but the logic behind (4) now implies that

                                           λx1 − q = 0                                          (19)

The equilibrium still has three regions, firms with x < x0 disclose nothing and sell
for the price of q. Again a middle set (x0 , x1 ) exists where firms do not disclose and
no one bids for them. Firms with x < q must not want to repel, and therefore

                                              x0 = q                                            (20)

which, of course, is the same as (3). It is the xmax firm that cares the most about
having a z = 1 project to manage for sure. Its expected gain from being sure of
having a good project would be (1 − λ) xmax . A firm that disclosed that it had z = 1
could therefore extract from the bidder at most (1 − λ) xmax . Therefore, under no
circumstance would any firm disclose if the following condition held:

                                        c > (1 − λ) xmax                                        (21)

Thus we have

Proposition 4 (Pooling Equilibrium) If (21) holds, a pooling equilibrium exists
in which x0 , x1 , and q satisfy (19), (20), and (5). Moreover, when

                                        c > xmax − xmin ,                                       (22)

the pooling equilibrium is unique.

When x is bounded and λ is relatively close to unity, there are values of c for which
both equilibria exist.10 Such an equilibrium does not entail any spending on disclo-
sure, and projects do flow towards better managers, though at a rate smaller than
the first-best level x∗ . Hence, takeovers raise total output. The pooling equilibrium
entails bidder discounts, but no target premia.
  10
    As in Jovanovic (1982), a coexistence of disclosure and pooling regions appears to be a possibile
equilibrium for some parameter values, but these, too, disappear when xmax → ∞.



                                                 15
    This equilibrium is of little interest because (21) is not likely to hold practice:
payments made to investment banks and other certifiers of quality at the takeover
stage amount to at most a percent or two of target value. Even if we add to c the cost
of leaking trade secrets to competitors, c should still be far smaller than the RHS of
(21). To see this, consider once more the case in which x is uniformly distributed, as
in Section 2.9. The RHS of (21) is 1 − λ, which also happens to be the gross value of
the target. Hence, the disclosure costs have to be comparable with the total value of
the target in order for the pooling equilibrium to exist.

4.3    Correlated x and z
For takeovers to arise at Stage 4, some good managers must, at stage 2, have drawn
bad projects. If, instead of being constant, the probability of drawing a good projects
were to rise with x, the fraction of bad matches would fall. Let

                               Pr {z = 1 | x} ≡ λ (x) ,

where λ0 (x) > 0. Holding constant the overall number of good projects
                                   Z ∞
                              λ̄ =     λ (x) dF (x) ,
                                      0

a more positive slope of λ (x) would (a) raise the Stage-2 correlation between x and z
and, hence, reduce the number of takeovers, activity, and, (b) raise the target premia
and the bidder discounts. Intuitively, this would be because z = 1 would now be a
bigger positive surprise for a low-x firm, and z = 0 would be an even bigger negative
surprise for a high-x firm.

4.4    Market for x
Since x is that part of a firm that is common knowledge, why would there be no market
for x? Indeed, if we do assume that x is some attribute of the firm’s human capital,
there in fact is a market for x — the labor market — that our model assumes does
not function. Suppose, for the moment, that x is something that the firm actually
owns and not, as is the case with human capital, something that it rents. A low-x
firm with a z = 1 could buy a higher x from a firm that has z = 0. Since x is public
knowledge, no disclosure would be needed, and the equilibrium would have x0 = x1 ,
with (1 − λ) (1 − F [x1 ]) units of x moving from the high-x firms with z = 0 projects
to the λF (x0 ) low-x firms with z = 1 projects. Finally, total output in (17) would
correspond to its level when x0 = x1 and c = 0.
    Why, then, is this a model of the takeover market, and not a model of a market
for one of the firms’ components, namely x? The answer must be that human capital
is costly to move from firm to firm, specially when it is specific to a team. Most of

                                          16
what we call “firm-specific” human capital is probably tied to the group of workers
employed by that firm. If the whole team were to move to another firm — this
sometimes happens on Wall Street when an entire team of analysts moves from one
investment bank to another — this capital would be just as useful in the new firm as it
was in the old one. And yet we would call this human capital firm specific precisely
because it is virtually impossible for a large team to move to another firm and stay
intact unless the new firm literally is right across the street. Prescott and Visscher
(1980) call such capital organization capital, and they describe the costs of creating
it.
    To sum up, we intend x to stand for an asset that firms have used for a while,
the expertise of a team that has managed projects in the past and that have learned
to function well as a unit. When the team finds itself with spare capacity, instead of
dispersing, it will look for takeover opportunities. Gort, Grabowski, and McGuckin
(1985) also argued this.

4.5    The Q-theory of takeover investment
The model is a version of the Q-theory of takeover investment, in that projects tend
to move from low-Q firms to high-Q firms. By a firm’s Q we mean the ratio of the
Stage-1 market value of the firm, p (x), to the ‘replacement’ value of its ‘capital’.
Recall that a firm cannot replace its x, only its z, and so we think of the firm’s
tangible capital as its z — this is what a firm can ‘replace’.
   Let pz denote the Stage-1 replacement cost of an unscreened z. Then the Stage-1
Q is defined as
                                               p (x)
                                     Q (x) =         .
                                                pz
Since pz is common to all firms, we have

Proposition 5 Acquirers have higher Q’s than do the targets

    Proof. From (6), for x < x0 , Q (x) = p1z λ (q − c). But (6) and (4) imply that
Q (x1 ) = p1z λq. That is, the lowest-Q acquirer has at least as high a Q as does any
target. And, since Q is strictly increasing in x for x > x1 , the same is true for any
acquirer.
    A merger raises the joint output of the two firms by an amount xA −xT where xA is
the acquirer’s x and xT is the target’s x. Since Q is increasing in x, this translates into
the statement that joint gains should be higher and joint losses smaller for mergers
in which QA − QT is high. Lang, Stultz, and Walkling (1989) and Servaes (1991) find
that the mergers that create the most value are those between high-Q bidders and
low-Q targets, which is consistent with Proposition 5.




                                            17
5    Relation to the literature
Holmes and Schmitz (1990, 1995) study the transfer of businesses through sale rather
than takeover. In their 1990 model, good managers acquire firms from good devel-
opers of new ideas. And in their 1995 model, whether a firm stands alone, sells its
business or exits depends on the quality of the firm, and on the quality of the match
between the entrepreneur (manager) and his firm. A manager of a high quality busi-
ness to which he is poorly matched will sell that business, while a manager who is
matched badly to a low-quality firm will exit. In our model, by contrast, a good
manager is better at managing any project and, if his firm does not have a good
project, he will look to acquire one that does. In the Holmes and Schmitz model,
low-quality managers sell their businesses to new entrants. So, in their models, as in
ours, who manages what firm depends entirely on fundamentals.
    McCardle and Viswanathan (1994) study a firm that contemplates entering a new
market. It can do this on its own, or, instead it can bid for one of the incumbents. A
takeover bid reveals weak internal investment opportunities and leads to a reduction
in the bidder’s stock price even though the takeover has a positive value for the bidder.
The target’s price rises because a takeover removes the threat of direct entry, thus
raising the bargaining power of the targeted firm. Because it is the entrant that bids
for an incumbent, their model is better suited to conglomerate diversification into an
oligopolistic market. Our model, by contrast, is better suited to horizontal mergers
because we assume that any manager can manage any firm’s project equally well.
    The bidder discount in our model arrises for reasons similar to the discount that
arises upon an equity issue in Myers and Majluf (1984). Campa and Kedia (forthcom-
ing), Villalonga (2000) have argued that the so-called diversification discount arises
purely because of selection bias. These notions go back to simultaneous equations
bias involving endogenous discrete variables as in Heckman (1978).


6    Conclusion
Initially we wanted to build an equilibrium model in which takeover targets experi-
enced jumps in price and acquirers experienced price declines. In the model, the sole
purpose of a takeover is to transfer a business project to a better manager. Although
quality of a project is assumed to be known only to the firm itself, to our surprise
the equilibrium turned out to be constrained-eﬃcient and, for reasonable parameter
values the joint value of the target and acquirer falls.
    As Proposition 5 shows, this is a version of the Q-theory of investment. The
pre-announcement Q’s of the acquirers exceed those of the targets. Jovanovic and
Rousseau (2002) find that such a model helps explains some of the takeover invest-
ment, although it cannot explain all of it. We noted a few other explanations in the
introduction and there may, indeed, be several reasons for takeovers. We have shown


                                           18
that the facts on Q can be explained by a model in which takeovers improve eﬃciency,
even though stock prices react negatively to their announcements.


References
 [1] Andrade, Gregor; Mitchell, Mark and Staﬀord, Erik. “New Evidence and Per-
     spective on Mergers.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2001, 15(2):
     103-120.

 [2] Campa, Jose Manuel, and Simi Kedia. “Explaining the Diversification Discount.”
     Journal of Finance (forthcoming)

 [3] Gort, Michael, Henry Grabowski, and Robert McGuckin. “Organization Capital
     and the Choice Between Diversification and Specialization.” Managerial Decision
     Economics 6 (1985): 2-10.

 [4] Gray, Sidney J. Lee H. Radebaugh, Clare B. Roberts. “International Perceptions
     of Cost Constraints on Voluntary Information Disclosures: A Comparative Study
     of U.K. and U.S. Multinationals.” Journal of International Business Studies 21,
     No. 4. (4th Qtr., 1990), pp. 597-622.

 [5] Heckman, James. “Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation
     System.” Econometrica 46, No. 4. (July 1978), 931-959.

 [6] Holmes, Thomas J., James A. Schmitz, Jr. “A Theory of Entrepreneurship and
     Its Application to the Study of Business Transfers.” Journal of Political Economy
     98, No. 2. (April 1990), 265-294.

 [7] Holmes, Thomas J. and James A. Schmitz, Jr. “On the Turnover of Business
     Firms and Business Managers”, Journal of Political Economy 103, no. 5 (October
     1995): 1005-1038.

 [8] Jovanovic, Boyan. “Truthful Disclosure of Information.” Bell Journal of Eco-
     nomics 13, no. 1. (Spring, 1982): 36-44.

 [9] Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau. “The Q-Theory of Mergers.” AEA
     Papers and Proceedings May 2002.

[10] Lang, Larry H. P., Rene M. Stulz and Ralph A. Walkling. ”Managerial Perfor-
     mance, Tobin’s Q, And The Gains From Successful Tender Oﬀers.” Journal of
     Financial Economics 1989, v24(1), 137-154.

[11] Lichtenberg, Frank and Donald Siegel. “Productivity and Changes in Ownership
     of Manufacturing Plants.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1987, no. 3,
     Special Issue On Microeconomics. (1987), 643-673.Kevin F.

                                         19
[12] McCardle, Kevin, and S.Viswanathan, “The Direct Entry versus Takeover De-
     cision and Stock Price Performance around Takeovers,” Journal of Business 67
     no. 1 (1994): 1-43.

[13] McGuckin, Robert, and Sang Ngyen. “On Productivity and Plant Ownership
     Change: New Evidence form the Longitudinal Research Database.” Rand Jour-
     nal of Economics 26 (1995): 257-76.

[14] Myers, S.C.; Majluf, N.S. “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
     Firms Have Information that Investors do not Have.” Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics (1984): 187-221.

[15] Pound, John, and Richard Zeckhauser. “Clearly Heard on the Street: The Eﬀect
     of Takeover Rumors on Stock Prices.” Journal of Business 63, no. 3. (July 1990):
     291-308.

[16] Prescott, Edward C., and Michael Visscher. “Organization Capital.” Journal of
     Political Economy 88, No. 3. (Jun., 1980), 446-461.

[17] Roll, Richard. “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers.” Journal of
     Business 59 (1986): 197-216

[18] Schoar, Antoinette. “Eﬀects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity.” MIT
     Sloan School Working Paper, 2000.

[19] Servaes, Henri. “Tobin’s Q and the Gains from Takeovers.” Journal of Fi-
     nance.46, no. 1 (March 1991): 409-419.

[20] Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. “Stock-Market Driven Acquisitions.” NBER
     Working Paper No.w8439, August 2001.

[21] Villalonga, Belén. “Does diversification cause the diversification discount?” Har-
     vard Business School 2001.




                                          20
