                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  BANKRUPTCY AND SMALL FIRMS’ ACCESS TO CREDIT


                                           Jeremy Berkowitz
                                           Michelle J. White


                                          Working Paper 9010
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9010


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We are grateful to Emily Lin for research assistance and to Patrick Bolton, Ronald Mann, Mitchell Peterson,
Rob Porter, Katherine Samolyk, John Wolken, Mark Weinstein and two referees for very helpful comments.
Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the N.B.E.R. Corporate Finance Meeting, the Federal Reserve
System Conference on Small Business Access to Capital and Credit, Washington, D.C., March 1999, and
the ASSA Meetings, Boston, January 2000. The Federal Reserve System and the N.S.F., under grant number
SBR-9617712, provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Jeremy Berkowitz and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Bankruptcy and Small Firms’ Access to Credit
Jeremy Berkowitz and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 9010
June 2002
JEL No. K2, E5



                                               ABSTRACT

        In this paper, we investigate how personal bankruptcy law affects small firms’ access to credit.
When a firm is unincorporated, its debts are personal liabilities of the firm’s owner, so that lending to the
firm is legally equivalent to lending to its owner. If the firm fails, the owner has an incentive to file for
personal bankruptcy, since the firm's debts will be discharged and the owner is only obliged to use assets
above an exemption level to repay creditors. The higher the exemption level, the greater is the incentive
to file for bankruptcy. We show that supply of credit falls and demand for credit rises when
non-corporate firms are located in states with higher bankruptcy exemptions. We test the model and find
that, if small firms are located in states with unlimited rather than low homestead exemptions, they are
more likely to be denied credit, they receive smaller loans and interest rates are higher. Results for
non-corporate versus corporate firms suggest that lenders often disregard small firms’ organizational
status in making loan decisions.




Jeremy Berkowitz                                                   Michelle J. White
Department of Finance                                              Department of Economics
C.T. Bauer College of Business                                     University of California, San Diego
University of Houston                                              La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
4800 Calhoun                                                       and NBER
Houston, TX 77204-6021                                             miwhite@ucsd.edu
Introduction
         Small businesses are the primary source of new jobs in the U.S. economy. From 1990 to
1995, businesses with fewer than 500 employees accounted for 76.5 percent of net new jobs.
But small businesses have a very high turnover rate compared to large businesses. Over 13
percent of U.S. jobs in 1995 were in firms that did not exist before 1990 and over 12 percent of
jobs in 1990 were in firms that had ceased to exist by 1995.2 Despite the importance and the
complexity of small business as a contributor to the U.S. economy, there has been surprisingly
little academic research on the economic environment faced by small business owners or the
effects of policy variables on small business success.
         In this paper, we investigate how personal bankruptcy law affects small firms’ access to
credit. It is well known that the U.S. has separate bankruptcy procedures for individuals versus
corporations. What is less well known is that personal bankruptcy procedures also apply to small
firms. When a firm is non-corporate, its debts are personal liabilities of the firm’s owner, so that
lending to the firm is legally equivalent to lending to its owner. If the firm fails, the owner can
file for bankruptcy and his/her business and unsecured personal debts will be discharged. When
a firm is a corporation, limited liability implies that the owner is not legally responsible for the
firm’s debts. However, lenders to small corporations often require that the owner guarantee the
loan and may also require that the owner give the lender a second mortgage on his/her house.
This wipes out the owner’s limited liability for purposes of the particular loan and makes small
corporate firms into corporate/non-corporate hybrids. Thus personal bankruptcy law applies to
non-corporate firms and may also apply to small corporate firms.3
         We test whether variation in personal bankruptcy exemptions across U.S. states affects
small firms’ access to credit, using the 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finance
(NSSBF). We find that small businesses are more likely to be denied credit if they are located in
states with high rather than low homestead exemptions and that, if they receive loans, the loans
are smaller and interest rates are higher. We also find that bankruptcy exemption levels affect


2
 See U.S. Small Business Administration (1998).
3
 Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook (1989) surveyed a sample of individuals who filed for bankruptcy during the
1980’s and estimated that around 20% had debts from a failed business. This is nearly double the proportion of all
U.S. households that has self-employment income.



                                                         2
both non-corporate and corporate firms, suggesting that lenders often ignore small business’
organizational status in making their loan decisions.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After a brief literature review, section
2 discusses personal bankruptcy law. Section 3 discusses a simple model of small business credit
markets. Section 4 presents the empirical results and Section 5 concludes.


1. Literature Review
        We know of only one article that examines the effect of personal bankruptcy law on
business credit markets. Scott and Smith (1986) examined the effect of the new U.S. Bankruptcy
Code, adopted in 1978, on business credit markets. They argued that adoption of the Code
caused the cost of business loans to increase and that lenders raised interest rates in response.
They found support for this hypothesis in their empirical work. However their study examined
only the net effect on interest rates of many changes adopted simultaneously as part of the 1978
Code, all of which applied uniformly over the U.S. Our study, in contrast, uses cross-section
variation in bankruptcy exemption levels across U.S. states to examine whether exemption levels
affect the availability of small business credit.
        On the personal bankruptcy side, Gropp, Scholz and White (1997) investigated how
varying bankruptcy exemption levels across states affect markets for non-business loans. They
found that in states with higher exemption levels, applicants were more likely to be turned down
for credit, but demand for loans increased. Overall they found that higher bankruptcy exemption
levels shift credit from households with low assets to those with high assets, since lenders are
willing to accommodate the increased demand of the latter group but not the former. Berkowitz
and Hynes (1999) and Lin and White (2001) re-examined this issue for mortgage loans.
        Peterson and Rajan (1994, 1996) examine small business credit markets using earlier
versions of the NSSBF. They are mainly concerned with examining the effects of long term
relationships between firms and banks and the effects of concentration in local banking markets
on interest rates and availability of business credit. More recent research on banking
relationships, using a later version of the NSSBF, includes Cole (1998) and Cole, Goldberg, and
L. White (1999). Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken (1999) examine patterns of race




                                                    3
discrimination in banking relationships. There are also a number of theoretical models that
examine the effects of bankruptcy on credit markets.4


2. Bankruptcy Law and Small Firms
         When unincorporated firms fail, their owners typically have high debt levels, much of
which consists of debts of the failed firm. Owners have an incentive to file for bankruptcy, both
because their unsecured personal and business debts will be discharged and because creditors
must immediately terminate collection efforts and legal actions to obtain repayment.5 Under the
Chapter 7 bankruptcy procedure, debtors’ future earnings are completely exempt from the
obligation to repay pre-bankruptcy debt, but they must turn over any assets they own above an
exemption level to the bankruptcy trustee, who uses these assets to repay debt. When debtors
file under Chapter 7, they cannot file again for 6 years.
         While bankruptcy is a matter of Federal law and the procedure is uniform across the
country, Congress gave the states the right to set their own bankruptcy exemption levels and
these vary widely. Most states have several types of exemptions: for equity in owner-occupied
principle residences (the homestead exemption), for equity in cars, for cash, and for various
types of goods (furniture, clothing, cooking utensils, farm implements, family bibles, tools of the
trade, sometimes a horse, etc.). In most states, the homestead exemption is the largest and other
exemptions are small. Debtors therefore have an incentive to convert cash or financial assets
into additional home equity by repaying part of their mortgage loans before filing for
bankruptcy, if their home equity is less than the homestead exemption.6
         There is also a second personal bankruptcy procedure, Chapter 13, and debtors are
allowed to choose between them. Under Chapter 13, debtors must propose a plan to use some of
their future earnings to repay part or all of their debt, but all of their assets are exempt. This
procedure is generally less favorable to business owners than Chapter 7, because failed
entrepreneurs often have no non-exempt assets and because having an obligation to repay past

4
  Bester (1994) predicts that firms are less likely to default when loans are collateralized and Hart and Moore (1989)
predict that firms are more likely to default when they have a single creditor rather than multiple creditors and when
the liquidation value of the firm's assets is lower. Unfortunately our data do not allow these predictions to be tested,
because default can occur anytime during the seven years prior to the survey while other firm characteristics are for
the time of the survey only.
5
  One might question whether potential entrepreneurs would be familiar with bankruptcy law and bankruptcy
exemptions. We found that self-help manuals such as Legal Guide to Starting & Running a Small Business, Vol. 1,
contain a clear explanation of bankruptcy. See Steingold (1999).
6
  White (1998b) discusses various strategies for sheltering assets in bankruptcy.


                                                           4
debt from future earnings would make it difficult to start a new business. Because creditors are
entitled to receive no less in Chapter13 than they would have received in Chapter 7 (13 U.S.C.
Section 1325(a)(4)), exemption levels are likely to have similar effects on credit markets
regardless of the chapter that business owners would choose if they filed for bankruptcy.7
         Now consider the possibility that the firm is incorporated. Corporate firms are legally
separate from their owners, so that owners are not personally responsible for the debts of their
corporations. Holding everything else constant, this means that small corporations are less credit-
worthy than small non-corporate firms, because the former have only the corporation’s assets to
back up business debt, while the latter have both the firm’s assets and the owner’s personal
assets. Lenders also know that owners of small corporations can easily shift assets between their
personal accounts and their corporations’ accounts, so that lenders may not view the
corporate/non-corporate distinction as meaningful for small firms. In making loans to small
corporations, lenders therefore may require that owners personally guarantee the loans. This
abolishes the legal distinction between corporations and their owners for purposes of the
particular loan and puts the owner’s personal assets at risk to repay the loan.


    3. A Stylized Model
         Suppose an entrepreneur owns a non-corporate firm and wishes to invest in a risky
project. In period 1, the entrepreneur has wealth W. She can apply for a loan, D, to be used for a
project with risky return, R. Assuming that the loan is made, it will have an interest rate of r and
be due in period 2. The owner’s wealth in period 2 if she repays the loan will be W + R –
D(1+r) which we denote Z. We further assume that Z has strictly positive density, f(Z).8
         In period 2, the owner may file for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. Denote the combined
value of the various bankruptcy exemptions in the owner’s state of residence as X. Also suppose
the cost of filing for bankruptcy is C, where C < D(1+ r). C is assumed to include both the out-
of-pocket cost of filing and the cost of reduced access to credit in the future. If the owner files
for bankruptcy, then the debt of D(1+ r) will be discharged, but she must use any wealth that
exceeds the exemption level, or max[Z – X - C, 0], to repay the debt. Let Z* be the level of
period 2 wealth at which owners are indifferent between filing versus not filing for bankruptcy,

7
  An additional restriction that makes Chapter 13 less attractive than Chapter 7 to small business owners is that
unsecured debt discharged in Chapter 13 cannot be higher than $250,000. There is no limit in Chapter 7.




                                                          5
so that they file for bankruptcy if Z < Z* and repay in full otherwise. In the region around Z*,
owners’ net wealth is Z –D(1+ r) if they do not file for bankruptcy and X if they do (assuming
that they pay the cost of bankruptcy C before filing). Therefore they are indifferent between
filing versus not filing at the wealth level Z* = X + D(1 + r). This means that owners’ net
wealth in period 2 has three regions: a high region in which owners repay the debt in full and
their net wealth is Z – D(1+r); a middle region in which owners file for bankruptcy, repay Z – X
– C in bankruptcy, and have net wealth of X; and a low region in which owners file for
bankruptcy, repay nothing, and have net wealth of Z – C. The dividing point between the
middle and low regions is Z = X + C.
        A representative lender maximizes expected profits,
                   X + D ( r )(1+ r )                                       ∞

                          ∫
                        X +C
                                        ( Z − X − C ) f ( Z ) dZ +          ∫
                                                                     X + D ( r )(1+ r )
                                                                                          D ( r )(1 + r ) f ( Z ) dZ ,         (1)

with respect to the interest rate they are willing to offer. The first term on the left hand side is the
expected value of repayment if owners file for bankruptcy and the second term is the expected
value of repayment if owners avoid bankruptcy.
        Lenders realize that the amount of debt that owners apply for depends on the interest rate
and the exemption level, so that D = D ( X , r ) . Solving for the first order condition of (1) with
respect to r and assuming for simplicity that C = 0 , we get:
                                ∞

                                ∫ [ D ′ ( X , r )(1 + r ) + D( X , r )] f ( Z )dZ = 0
                          X + D (1+ r )
                                          r                                                                              (2)


Since f(Z) is positive, this becomes D ( X , r ) = − Dr/ ( X , r )(1 + r ) . To ensure that both D and (1+r)

are nonnegative, the sign of D r/ must be negative, i.e., entrepreneurs’ demand for debt must be
negatively related to the interest rate.
        As an example, suppose the demand curve for debt is additive, D(X, r) = α(X) - βr
where β is a positive constant. The optimal interest rate is r = (1/2)((α(X)/β) -1). Here the slope
of the relationship between the interest rate and exemption level is determined by the sign of
α(X). Moreover, substituting r into the demand curve, we find D=(1/2)(β+α(X)). Thus loan size
should vary in the same way as the interest rate in response to changes in the exemption.


8
 The model would be unchanged if part of the uncertainty in the entrepreneur’s period 2 wealth came from other
sources, such as risky projects that the entrepreneur invested in before period 1.


                                                                     6
        We expect the sign of α(X) to be generally positive. Bankruptcy provides partial wealth
insurance to business owners by transferring some wealth from non-bankruptcy to bankruptcy
states. When the exemption level rises, the level of partial wealth insurance increases.
Assuming that owners are risk averse, they benefit from the additional wealth insurance and
therefore their demand for loans increases.9
          The market clearing condition for this model is that expected return (1) equal lenders’
opportunity cost of funds, or:
                                                    ∞                     X + D (1+ r )
                       D (1 + rf ) = D (1 + r ) ∫               fdZ + ∫                   ( Z − X ) fdZ   (3)
                                                X + D (1+ r )         X


where rf is the available risk free rate. Eq. (3) implies that the market clearing interest rate r is
positively related to the probability of owners filing for bankruptcy and negatively related to the
lender’s expected percentage return conditional on bankruptcy. As the exemption level rises,
the probability of bankruptcy rises and the expected percentage return in bankruptcy falls (since
entrepreneurs repay Z-X if X ≤ Z ≤ Z * ), so that the market clearing interest rate must rise. If
the exemption level is high enough, credit rationing occurs because no interest rate is high
enough to clear the market and/or owners’ demand for credit falls to zero. Note that in this
simple model, owners always file for bankruptcy if the exemption level is unlimited. Therefore
lenders would never lend in states with unlimited exemptions.
        In this model, there is either no credit rationing or complete credit rationing that shuts the
loan market down completely. But partial credit rationing would occur in the model if individual
owners’ creditworthiness varied according to some observable characteristic, such as owners’
wealth or their firms’ wealth in period 1. Then the threshold for credit rationing would vary with
wealth as well as the exemption level. As the exemption level rises, lenders first reach the no-
lending threshold for owners who have low wealth. They cease lending to low-wealth owners,
but continue to lend to owners having medium or high wealth. As the exemption level continues
to rise, lenders would reach the no-lending threshold for owners with medium wealth. They
cease lending to medium-wealth owners, but continue to lend to owners having high wealth.
Thus as the exemption level rises, lenders gradually impose credit rationing on a higher fraction
of potential borrowers.10

9
  See Fan and White (2001) for discussion of how bankruptcy provides partial wealth insurance for entrepreneurs
and a derivation of the optimal bankruptcy exemption level.
10
   Credit rationing is usually associated with models that assume heterogeneous borrowers and asymmetric
information concerning borrowers’ types. However as the discussion here shows, it may also occur when all


                                                                7
         Finally, note that although we did not differentiate between the homestead and other
exemptions, it is straightforward to show that the predictions are qualitatively the same for both.
Berkowitz and Hynes (1999) and Lin and White (2001) present models that differentiate between
the two types of exemptions and also differentiate between secured (mortgage) versus unsecured
(business) loans.


4. Empirical Tests
         Our primary data source is the 1993 NSSBF. This survey covers a representative sample
of U.S. non-financial, non-farm, for-profit businesses that have fewer than 500 employees. There
are approximately 1,750 non-corporate firms and 2,800 corporate firms in the sample.11
         The NSSBF asks managers whether their firms applied for credit within the past three
years and, if so, was the most recent application for credit denied. Managers are also asked
whether they were discouraged from applying for loans at any time during the past three years
because they anticipated being turned down. We define a dummy variable,
“discouraged/denied”, which equals one if managers either were discouraged from applying for
credit or applied but were turned down on their most recent application within the past three
years. We refer to firms that are discouraged/denied as credit rationed and we run separate
regressions explaining whether corporate and non-corporate firms are credit rationed.12
         The main explanatory variables of interest are the homestead and personal property
exemptions in the state where the firm is located. The personal property exemption is defined as
the sum of the state’s exemptions for cash and for equity in vehicles, plus the value of the
wildcard exemption. Table 1 shows the two exemptions by state in 1993. The homestead
exemption varies widely across states, from zero in one state to unlimited in seven states, with a
median value of $15,000. In contrast, the personal property exemption is both smaller and less

information is common knowledge. Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) show that credit rationing may occur when increases
in the interest rate would cause borrowers to shift from safe to risky projects or would cause adverse selection
among borrowers. Applied to our context, this suggests that in response to an increase in the exemption level,
lenders may impose credit rationing rather than raise the interest rate, because raising the interest rate would reduce
lenders’ return by lowering borrower quality. Credit rationing of this type could occur at any exemption level,
although it seems more likely to occur at medium or high exemption levels. See Longhofer (1997) for a model of
credit rationing with heterogeneous borrowers and common knowledge.
11
   The NSSBF is produced by the Federal Reserve Board and the Small Business Administration. See Cole and
Wolken (1995) for discussion. We use the internal version of the dataset, which identifies the state in which the
firm is located.




                                                           8
variable. The median value of the personal property exemption is $7,000, with a minimum value
of $2,800. The maximum personal property exemption is $60,000 in Texas, but only two other
small states besides Texas have personal property exemptions higher than $25,000. The
correlation between the two exemptions is .24, but falls to .094 if Texas is excluded.13
         We enter the homestead exemption as dollar value (in thousands of dollars) and dollar
value squared. For states with unlimited homestead exemptions, we set the homestead
exemption equal to the maximum dollar value across all states, which is $160,000. We also
enter a separate dummy variable which equals one for states that have unlimited homestead
exemptions. This means that the coefficient of the unlimited exemption dummy captures the
marginal effect of the homestead exemption being unlimited rather than $160,000. We enter the
personal property exemption as dollar value (in thousands of dollars) and dollar value squared.
Since no states have unlimited personal property exemptions, there is no unlimited dummy.
         An important issue is whether the bankruptcy exemption level can be treated as
exogenous to lenders’ decisions to ration credit. As part of the 1978 Bankruptcy Code, Congress
adopted a uniform Federal bankruptcy exemption, but it gave the states the right to opt out of the
Federal exemption by adopting their own exemptions. All states did so by 1983, although about
one-third allowed their residents to choose between the state’s exemption and the Federal
exemption.14 Between 1983 and 1993, only a few states changed their exemption levels each
year and the Federal bankruptcy exemptions remained unchanged. Exemption levels do not
appear to be correlated with state loan market or demographic characteristics: a recent study
explaining state exemption levels in the 1990’s found that the only significant correlate was the
state’s exemption level in the 1920’s (Posner, Hynes, and Malani, 2001).15 We therefore treat
exemption levels as exogenous.

12
   Firms may be both discouraged and denied, because they may have been turned down on their most recent loan
application and also discouraged from applying for a loan at some time during the past three years. See below for
tests of whether the two types of firms differ.
13
   In computing a dollar value for the personal property exemption, we ignore exemptions for specific goods and use
only exemptions for cash, vehicles and near-cash assets such as jewelry that are specified as dollar values. Two
states have unlimited exemptions for a single vehicle: Louisiana (for a “non-luxury auto”) and Hawaii (for an
otherwise unspecified vehicle). We code these at $20,000 and $40,000, respectively.
14
   Sixteen states allowed their residents to choose between the state and the Federal exemptions as of 1993. We
substitute the Federal exemption for the state exemption if the firm is located in a state that allows its residents to
choose and the Federal exemption is higher. Some states also have higher exemptions for married couples who file
for bankruptcy and, if so, we use the exemptions applicable to married couples.
15
   The authors also ran a regression explaining state exemption levels in the 1920’s and found that the population
density and the proportion of farmers at that time were statistically significant. They interpret this result as
indicating that debt relief was a more salient political issue in the past than it is now.


                                                           9
         Other important variables are measures of the owner’s and the firm’s previous financial
difficulties. A previous bankruptcy filing has a theoretically ambiguous effect on credit-
worthiness. Because debtors who have filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 cannot file again
under Chapter 7 for six years, they are more credit-worthy from lenders’ viewpoint. But debtors
can still file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 or default on repaying their loans without filing for
bankruptcy. If they do the latter, then lenders have the right to sue for repayment, but such
lawsuits are often not financially worthwhile. In addition, a past bankruptcy filing is evidence of
weak entrepreneurial ability. These considerations suggest that lenders may view a past
bankruptcy filing as negative evidence of credit-worthiness. In contrast, a past personal or
business delinquency is unambiguously negative evidence concerning credit-worthiness. It
signals weak entrepreneurial ability and also signals that debtors are knowledgeable about
default procedures and willing to use them. Our bankruptcy variable is a dummy variable that
equals one if the firm or its principle owner filed for bankruptcy within the past seven years. Our
delinquency variables are separate dummy variables for whether owners have been delinquent on
personal financial obligations during the past 3 years and whether the firm has been delinquent
on business obligations during the past 3 years.16
         We include a number of firm demographic characteristics as additional evidence
concerning firms’ perceived creditworthiness. These are the firm’s age, the owner’s age,
separate dummy variables for whether more than 50% of the firm’s equity is owned by an
African-American or a member of another minority group (Hispanic or Asian), separate dummy
variables for whether the firm is family-owned or female-owned, and the firm's total
employment in log form. Financial variables include the firm's ratio of debts to assets, its ratio
of profits to assets,17 the rate of growth of sales between 1990 and 1992, and a vector of dummy
variables for the firm's sector (results for the latter are not shown).18 We also include a dummy


16
   The personal financial delinquency variable equals one if the owner has been delinquent by 60 days or more on
one or more personal obligations. The business delinquency variable is similarly defined. All of the bankruptcy
and financial delinquency variables in our data are self-reported. But lenders can and routinely do obtain
information on past bankruptcy filings and past financial delinquencies from credit reporting services. See White
(1998a) for a model of the relationship between default and bankruptcy.
17
   Because the latest loan application can be any time during the past three years, financial variables such as the level
of debt and the level of assets may or may not include the proceeds of the latest loan. See below for discussion of
robustness checks in which we compare the results for firms that applied for loans more recently versus further back
in time.
 18
    Gordon and Mackie-Mason (1994) argue that firms have tax incentives to choose corporate versus non-corporate
form, which implies that the two types of firms may differ systematically. In particular, owners of money-losing
firms have an incentive to choose non-corporate status so that the firm's losses can be deducted against other income


                                                           10
variable for a high Herfindahl index of bank deposit concentration in the market where the firm
is located and the number of lenders that the firm borrows from. If the lender is a bank, we
include the number of years that the firm and the bank have had a relationship and we also
include a dummy variable that equals one if the years of relationship variable is missing. We
also include dummy variables for whether the firm has a checking or saving account with the
bank and for whether the firm purchases services from the bank that are information intensive.19
Finally, as a measure of local macroeconomic conditions, we include the unemployment rate in
the state where the firm is located.
         Table 2 shows summary statistics.20 Statistics are shown by type of firm and separately
by whether firms are credit rationed (discouraged/denied). The overall probability of firms being
credit rationed is 526/(526+1303) = .29 for non-corporate firms versus 736/(736+2072) = .26 for
corporations. Firms that are credit rationed are much more likely to have owners who have filed
for bankruptcy or have been financially delinquent in the past. The proportion of credit rationed
firms/owners that have filed for bankruptcy is .06-.08, compared to only .01 for non-credit-
rationed firms/owners. The proportion of credit rationed firms that have past business
delinquencies is .36 for non-corporate firms and .45 for corporate firms, compared to only .11
and .13 for non-corporate and corporate firms that are not credit-rationed, respectively. The
figures for past personal delinquency have a similar pattern. Among the important differences
between the two types of firms are that corporate firms are larger on average, less likely to be
family owned, and less likely to be owned by African-Americans or other minorities.
         Credit rationing. Table 3 shows the results of logit regressions explaining whether
firms are credit rationed. Non-corporate firms are in the left hand column and corporate firms
are in the right hand column.21 Variables that are significant at the 95% level are asterisked. The
dollar homestead exemption variable and the unlimited homestead exemption dummy have the



of the owner; while owners of profitable firms have an incentive to choose corporate form in order to take advantage
of corporate tax rates that tend to be lower than the top individual tax rate. Thus choice of organizational form may
signal the firm's profit level. However because we control for individual firms' profit levels (relative to assets), we
do not expect the choice of organizational form to bias our results for the effects of bankruptcy exemption levels.
19
   The “years of relationship missing” variable is included because otherwise we would have to drop 120 non-
corporate and 50 corporate observations. We follow Petersen and Rajan (1994) in our choice of financial variables.
Following their lead, we truncate sales growth at the 95% level and define the cutoff for a high Herfindahl index at
HHI ≥ 1800.
20
   In all calculations, we use the NSSBF sampling weights which make the sample representative of the target
population of U.S. small businesses.
21
   Robust standard errors clustered by state are reported. See Moulton (1986).


                                                          11
predicted positive signs in both regressions, while the squared dollar homestead exemption
variables are negative in both regressions.22
         The personal property exemption coefficients are not statistically significant for either
type of firm. This probably reflects the fact that the personal property exemption is smaller and
less variable than the homestead exemption. In addition, the state that has by far the largest
personal property exemption—Texas—also has an unlimited homestead exemption, so that the
homestead exemption may be capturing part of the effect of the personal property exemption on
lending behavior.23
         The past bankruptcy filing and past personal and business delinquency variables are all
positive and significant for both types of firms. The sizes of the coefficients are similar in the
two samples, suggesting that lenders view the effects of past bankruptcy and delinquency
similarly for non-corporate and corporate borrowers. Although the theoretical prediction for the
sign of the past bankruptcy variable is ambiguous, the results suggest that lenders view a past
bankruptcy filing as a clear negative signal concerning credit-worthiness. The positive signs of
the past financial delinquency variables are also in line with our predictions.24
         We calculated the predicted probability of firms being credit rationed for various
exemption levels. We assume that both types of firms are family-owned, are not African-
American- or other minority-owned, and have average values for the other right-hand-side
variables. If a non-corporate firm is located in a state whose homestead and personal property
exemptions are both at the 25th percentile of the relevant distributions and if neither the firm nor
its owner has previously filed for bankruptcy or been delinquent, then its probability of being
credit rationed is .122. This figure rises to .140 if the homestead exemption in the firm's state is
instead at the 50th percentile, and to .196 if the homestead exemption is at the 75th percentile.


22
   The linear term for corporations and the unlimited dummy for noncorporates were not significant. However, an F-
test shows that the three homestead exemption variables are jointly statistically significant at the .99 level in both
samples.
23
   Studies of the effect of bankruptcy exemptions on whether loan applicants are denied mortgage loans have found
positive and significant effects for the personal property exemption. But these studies use much larger datasets. See
Berkowitz and Hynes (1999) and Lin and White (2001).
24
   The results for the demographic and lender relationship variables have been discussed by other authors. Petersen
and Rajan (1994) and Berger and Udell (1995) found that the number of years that the firm has had a relationship
with its lender, whether the firm has a checking account with the lender, and whether the firm buys information-
intensive services from the lender are important determinants of whether firms are credit rationed. For discussion of
the result that African-American and minority-owned firms are more likely to be credit rationed, see Cole (1998),
Cole, Goldberg, and L. White (1999), and Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken (1999). All of these papers used
the same or earlier versions of the NSSBF.


                                                         12
Overall, the probability of non-corporate firms being credit rationed rises by 32% if firms are
located in states with unlimited rather than low homestead exemptions.
     For corporate firms, the pattern is similar. The predicted probability of being credit rationed
is .196 if both exemptions are at the 25th percentile, .221 if the homestead exemption rises to the
70th percentile, .172 if the exemption rises to the 80th percentile and .255 if the exemption is
unlimited. Overall, the probability of corporate firms being credit rationed rises by 30% if firms
are located in states with unlimited rather than low homestead exemptions. These results are
generally supportive of the theoretical model discussed in the previous section. Risk averse
entrepreneurs gain from having partial wealth insurance and this causes demand for loans to rise
even though interest rates are rising.
       Nevertheless, the probability of credit rationing is not monotonically increasing in the
homestead exemption level. For non-corporates, for example, the probability drops from .196 at
the 75th percentile to .154 at the 90th percentile, and then rises to .161 if the homestead exemption
becomes unlimited. For corporates, the probability of credit rationing drops in the 70th – 100th
percentile range, before rising again when the exemption level becomes unlimited. We do not
have a good explanation for why the probability of credit rationing displays this non-monotonic
behavior when the homestead exemption level is high but not unlimited.
       These results have several implications. First, corporations are more likely to be credit
rationed than non-corporate firms over most of the observed range (though not when the
homestead exemption is around the 90th percentile). This is in accord with our predictions, since
owners’ assets always guarantee the debt of non-corporate firms but do not always guarantee the
debt of corporate firms. All else equal, more assets are available to back up loans to non-
corporations. Second, the marginal effect of bankruptcy exemptions are larger for non-corporate
than corporate firms. This makes sense because the sample of corporate firms is a mixture of
corporations that are able to borrow on their own and corporations that are unable to borrow
unless their owners provide guarantees. For the former group, the exemption level is irrelevant
and, for the latter, it should have the same marginal effect as for the sample of non-corporations.
Because the marginal effects of the exemption variables for corporations are an average over the
two types, we expect them to be smaller than the marginal effects for non-corporate firms.
       Holding the exemption levels fixed, the probability of firms being credit rationed
approximately triples when their owners have previously filed for bankruptcy and approximately
doubles when firms or their owners have previous financial delinquencies, with a previous


                                                 13
business delinquency having a larger effect than a previous personal delinquency. These effects
are similar for both non-corporate and corporate firms. Both types of firms have about a 50%
probability of being credit rationed if their owners have previously filed for bankruptcy. The
results suggest that a past bankruptcy filing or a past delinquency severely handicaps
entrepreneurs who attempt to obtain loans for a new business.25
         The effect of bankruptcy exemptions on the probability of credit rationing should depend
on the wealth of the potential borrower, since debtors are less likely to file for bankruptcy at a
given exemption level when they have higher wealth. Because our dataset consists of small
businesses, we do not know the business owner’s personal wealth. But we do know the net value
of business assets minus liabilities and we use this as a proxy for entrepreneurs’ wealth. We
reran the model in table 3 with interactions between all of the exemption variables and a dummy
variable that equals one if business net assets are in the top half of the distribution.
         The results are shown in table 4 for the exemption variables only. Firms with relatively
few net assets have exemption coefficients that are larger in absolute value and more statistically
significant than the results for the entire sample in table 3. For firms with high net assets, the
overall effect--calculated by adding the coefficient for the low asset firms plus the coefficient on
the interaction term--is close to zero. Thus the exemption is more important as a determinant of
credit rationing for firms with low net asset levels than for firms with high net asset levels.
         This finding is as expected. Demand for loans is increasing in the exemption, regardless
of whether the firm has high or low wealth. But while lenders accommodate the increased loan
demand for customers whose businesses have high net assets; they respond by rationing credit to
customers whose businesses have low net assets.26

25
  We ran several additional checks to determine whether the results are robust to changes in the specification of the
model. First, we checked whether the two types of credit rationed firms--“discouraged” versus “denied”--differ
systematically from each other. To do so, we reran the model in table 3 for each group separately. Second, we
redefined our benchmark credit rationing variable so that firms were treated as credit rationed if they were denied
credit on a prior loan application, even though their most recent application was approved, or if they were offered
credit but on worse terms than they applied for. Third, firms’ most recent loan application may occur anytime
during the three years prior to the survey. Early loan applications present potential endogeneity problems, because
the bankruptcy exemption variables and the other control variables are for the year of the survey. We reran the
models in table 3, but excluded firms whose most recent loan applications occurred more than one year prior to the
survey. In all cases, the results for the exemption and financial delinquency variables remained substantially the
same as those in table 3.
26
  See Gropp, Scholz and White (1997) for discussion of the effect of borrowers’ wealth on access to credit by
households. They find similar differences in the probability of credit rationing for low versus high wealth
borrowers.



                                                         14
         Interest rates. Table 5 gives the results of Tobit regressions explaining the interest rate
on the most recent loan that the firm obtained.27 The samples are the same as for the model of
credit rationing in table 3. All firms that did not receive credit are right censored at an interest
rate of 17 percent (the maximum interest rate in the sample is 16.5 percent).28 All of the
homestead exemption variables are statistically significant in both samples, except for the
unlimited homestead exemption dummy in the corporate sample. The results are similar to the
credit rationing results: the homestead exemption coefficients are positive, the squared
exemption coefficients are negative, and the unlimited exemption coefficients are positive.
Again, none of the personal property exemption variables are statistically significant. The past
bankruptcy variables are significantly positive as expected in both samples, but of the past
delinquency variables, only the personal delinquency variable in the corporate sample is
statistically significant. Among the other variables, an interesting result is that the high
Herfindahl index variable and the number of lenders variable are significantly negative (though
only at the 10% level for non-corporate firms). Small businesses pay lower interest rates when
there is more competition in the local lending markets and when firms borrow from more
lenders. Larger firms also pay lower interest rates and firms owned by African-Americans and
other minorities pay higher interest rates.
         We calculated the predicted effects of changes in the homestead exemption level on
interest rates, following the same procedure as used above. If the homestead exemption
increases from the 25th to 50th percentile, the interest rate for non-corporate firms is predicted to
rise by .60 percentage points and, if the exemption increase is from the 50th to the 75th percentile,
it rises by a further 1.33 percentage points. The predicted overall increase from the 25th
percentile to unlimited is 2.15 percentage points. For corporate firms, the interest rate rises by
.27 percentage points when the exemption level increases from the 25th to the 50th percentile and
by a further .56 percentage points from the 50th to the 75th percentile. For both firm types,




27
   We did not use a two-stage Heckman model because it did not seem possible to separate the credit rationing
model from the interest rate determination model, since any observable information that affects what interest rate
lenders charge also affects whether they ration credit.
28
   Because we have no information concerning the interest rate for firms that were credit rationed, we reran the
model with the truncated interest rate set at levels between 18 and 30%. The results for higher interest rates were
that the size and significance of the homestead exemption coefficients gradually increased, but everything remained
the same. We report the results for the interest rate of 17% because this specification has the highest log-likelihood
value.


                                                          15
however, the increase in interest rates is non-monotonic when exemptions are above the 75th
percentiles. This result is surprising but consistent with the credit rationing results.
         As expected, the responsiveness of the interest rate to changes in the exemption level is
higher for non-corporate firms than corporations. This is presumably because lenders are willing
to lend to some small corporate firms qua corporations, but treat other small corporate firms as
though they were non-corporate—i.e., they require that owners personally guarantee the loans
and therefore bankruptcy exemption levels matter. A past bankruptcy filing also has a larger
effect on non-corporate than corporate firms: it is predicted to increase the interest rate for non-
corporate firms by 5.4 percentage points and for corporate firms by 2.1 percentage points.
         Loan size. For the most recent loan application, the NSSBF asks the size of the loan that
the lender offered.29 We ran Tobit models explaining loan size (in logs) for the samples of non-
corporate and corporate firms where loan size is left censored at zero. Again, we expect the
coefficients to reflect a combination of supply and demand considerations. An increase in the
bankruptcy exemption level causes entrepreneurs to demand larger loans because the
consequences of business failure are not as bad, but also causes lenders to reduce loan supply
because lending is more risky. Thus we could observe either positive or negative coefficients on
the exemption variables, depending on which effect is larger.
         The results are shown in table 6. For both types of firms, the signs of the homestead
exemption variables are reversed from the previous results—the homestead exemption and
unlimited homestead exemption variables have negative signs, but the squared homestead
exemption variables are positive. All three variables are statistically significant for non-
corporate firms, but the unlimited exemption dummy is insignificant for corporate firms. The
personal property exemption variables are not significant in either sample. As expected, the past
bankruptcy filing and past personal delinquency variables are negative and significant in both
regressions, but the past business delinquency variables are insignificant.
         Finally we turn to the predicted effects of the homestead exemption level on loan size.
For non-corporate firms, if the exemption increases from the 25th to the 75th percentile, loan size
falls by about $79,000. The overall change predicted by an increase of the exemption from the

29
  The NSSBF actually asks separately how much the firm applied for and how much the lender offered. In theory,
these separate measures might allow us to separately estimate a demand curve from the former and a supply curve
from the latter. However, in practice, the two variables are extremely closely related, with a correlation coefficient
of .994. Presumably, firms apply for the amount of credit that they expect lenders to provide and lenders may tell
borrowers in advance how much they are willing to lend.


                                                          16
25th percentile to unlimited is a reduction of $198,000. For corporate firms, if the exemption
increases from the 25th to the 75th percentile, loan size is predicted to fall by $68,000 and when
increased from the 25th percentile to unlimited, loan size falls by $41,000. The general
decreasing relationship between loan size and the exemption level is consistent with our model,
but there is again a region above the 75th percentile where predicted loan size rises rather than
falls as the exemption level increases. As predicted, the marginal effects of changes in the
exemption level are larger for non-corporate firms than for corporations. Finally, a past personal
bankruptcy filing is predicted to reduce loan size for non-corporate firms by $470,000 and for
corporations by $72,000.


5. Conclusion
       This paper investigates how personal bankruptcy law affects small firms’ access to credit.
We show that higher personal bankruptcy exemptions are predicted to cause increased credit
rationing and higher interest rates. These predictions apply to both non-corporate firms and
corporations, although the marginal effects are should be larger for non-corporate firms.
Personal bankruptcy exemptions affect credit markets for small corporate firms because small
business owners can easily transfer funds from the firm to themselves even if the firm is
corporate. Thus lenders may not view the corporate/non-corporate distinction as meaningful for
small firms.
       We test the model and find that small businesses located in states with high homestead
exemptions are more likely to be credit rationed and, if they receive loans, interest rates are
higher and loan size is smaller. However we find that the effect of increases in exemption levels
is non-monotonic: as the exemption level rises, the probability of credit rationing and the
interest rate first rise, then fall, and then rise again when the exemption level becomes unlimited.
For loan size, the pattern is the same with the opposite sign. We also find that the effect of
changes in exemption levels on the probability of credit rationing is much larger for firms with
low net assets than for firms with high net assets, regardless of whether they are corporate or
non-corporate. When owners of either type of firm have previously filed for bankruptcy, the
probability that their firms are credit rationed triples and, when firms or their owners have
previously been delinquent on personal or business obligations, the probability that firms are
credit rationed doubles.



                                                 17
       Each year for the past several years, the U.S. Congress has adopted legislation that
would limit homestead exemptions to a maximum of $100,000. Although the intended effect of
the change is to discourage well-off consumers from taking advantage of bankruptcy to shield
their assets from creditors, our results suggest that the change would make it easier for small
businesses to obtain credit.




                                                18
                                           References

Berger, A.N., and G.F. Udell, “Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm
       Finance,” J. of Business, vol. 68 (1995), pp. 351-82.

Berkowitz, J., and R. Hynes, “Bankruptcy Exemptions and the Market for Mortgage
      Loans,” J. of Law and Economics, vol. 42 (1999), 809-830.

Bester, H., “The Role of Collateral in a Model of Debt Renegotiation,” J. of Money, Credit and
        Banking, vol. 26:1 (1994), 72-86.

Cavalluzzo, K., L. Cavalluzzo, and J. Wolken (2000), “Competition, Small Business Financing,
       and Discrimination: Evidence from a New Survey,” Business Access to Capital and
       Credit, edited by J.L. Blanton, A. Williams, and S.L.W. Rhine. Washington, D.C.:
       Federal Reserve System.

Cole, R.A., “The Importance of Relationships to the Availability of Credit,'' J. of Banking and
       Finance, vol. 22 (1998), 959-977.

Cole, R.A., and J.D. Wolken, “Financial Services used by Small Businesses: Evidence
       from the 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances,” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
       (1995) July.

Cole, R.A., L.G. Goldberg and L.J. White, “Cookie-Cutter versus Character: The
       Microstructure of Small Business Lending by Large and Small Banks,” in Business
       Access to Capital and Credit, edited by J.L. Blanton, A. Williams, and S.L.W. Rhine.
       Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System (2000).

Elias, S., A. Renauer, and R. Leonard. How to File for Bankruptcy, 4th edition. Berkeley:
        Nolo Press (1994).

Fan, W., and M.J. White, “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
      Activity,” working paper, University of Michigan Department of Economics (2000).

Gordon, R.H., and J.K. Mackie-Mason, “Tax Distortions to the Choice of Organizational
      Form,” J. of Public Economics, vol. 55 (1994), pp. 279-306.

Gropp, R., J. K. Scholz and M.J. White, “Personal Bankruptcy and Credit Supply and
       Demand,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. CXII (1997), pp. 217-252.

Hart, O., and J. Moore, “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,”
       working paper 520, M.I.T. Dept. of Economics (1989).

Leonard, R., Chapter 13 Bankruptcy: Repay Your Debts, 3rd edition. Berkeley, CA:
      Nolo Press (1998).



                                                19
Lin, E.Y., and M.J. White, “Bankruptcy and the Market for Mortgage and
       Home Improvement Loans.” J. of Urban Economics, vol. 50:1 (2001), pp. 138-62.

Longhofer, S., “Absolute Priority Rule Violations, Credit Rationing, and Efficiency,” J.
      of Financial Intermediation, 6(3) (1997), pp. 249-67.

Moulton, B.R., “Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates,”
      Journal of Econometrics, vol. 32 (1986), pp. 385-97.

Petersen, M.A., and R.G. Rajan, “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small
Business Data,” J. of Finance, vol. 49:1 (1994), pages 3-37.

Petersen, M.A., and R.G. Rajan, “The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
       Relationships,” Quarterly J. of Economics, vol. 110:2 (1995), pp. 407-43.

Petersen, M.A., and R.G. Rajan, “Trade Credit: Theories and Evidence,” Rev. of Fin.
       Stud., vol. 10:3 (1997), pages 661-91.

Posner, E., R. Hynes, and A. Malani, “The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws,”
       working paper, Law School, University of Chicago (2001).

Scott, J.A., and T.C. Smith, “The Effect of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 on Small
        Business Loan Pricing,” J. of Fin. Econ., vol. 16 (1986), pp. 119-140.

Stiglitz, J.E., and A. Weiss, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,”
        Am. Ec. Review, vol. 71:3. (1981), pp. 393-410.

Sullivan, T., E. Warren and J. Westbrook. As We Forgive Our Debtors. New York:
       Oxford University Press (1989).

U.S. Small Business Administration, Small Business Growth by Major Industry, 1988-
       1995 (1995).

Wang, H.J. and M.J. White, “An Optimal Personal Bankruptcy System and Proposed Reforms,”
      Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. XXXIX:1 (2000), pp. 255-286.

White, M.J., “Why Don't More Households File for Bankruptcy?” Journal of Law,
       Economics, and Organization, vol. 14:2 (1998a), pp. 205-231.

White, M.J., “Why It Pays to File for Bankruptcy: A Critical Look at Incentives under
       U.S. Bankruptcy Laws and A Proposal for Change,” Univ. of Chicago Law Rev., vol. 65
       (1998b), pp. 685-732.




                                               20
                           Table 1: 1993 Bankruptcy Exemptions by State
Chapter 7 bankruptcy exemption levels are reported by state from Elias, Renauer and Leonard (1994). The
homestead exemption is for equity in owner-occupied principle residences. The personal property exemption is the
sum of the state’s exemptions for cash, equity in vehicles, and near cash assets such as jewelry.
                                      Homestead exemption ($)          Personal prop. exemption ($)
                Alabama               10,000                           6,000
                Alaska                54,000                           6,000
                Arizona               100,000                          3,300
                Arkansas              Unlimited                        2,900
                California            75,000                           5,000
                Colorado              60,000                           2,000
                Connecticut           15,000                           10,700
                D.C.                  15,000                           10,700
                Delaware              15,000                           10,700
                Florida               Unlimited                        2,000
                Georgia               10,000                           2,800
                Hawaii                40,000                           42,000
                Iowa                  Unlimited                        10,200
                Idaho                 100,000                          3,000
                Illinois              15,000                           6,400
                Indiana               15,000                           8,200
                Kansas                Unlimited                        40,000
                Kentucky              10,000                           7,000
                Louisiana             15,000                           25,000
                Massachusetts         100,000                          3,350
                Maryland              0                                11,000
                Maine                 15,000                           3,200
                Michigan              15,000                           10,700
                Minnesota             Unlimited                        6,000
                Missouri              8,000                            3,500
                Mississippi           150,000                          20,000
                Montana               80,000                           1,200
                North Carolina        20,000                           10,000
                North Dakota          160,000                          12,400
                Nebraska              20,000                           5,000
                New Hampshire         60,000                           2,000
                New Jersey            15,000                           10,700
                New Mexico            40,000                           9,000
                Nevada                95,000                           3,000
                New York              20,000                           9,800
                Ohio                  10,000                           3,600
                Oklahoma              Unlimited                        6,000
                Oregon                20,000                           16,200
                Pennsylvania          15,000                           10,700
                Rhode Island          15,000                           10,700
                South Carolina        15,000                           10,700
                South Dakota          60,000                           4,000
                Tennessee             7,500                            8,000
                Texas                 Unlimited                        60,000
                Utah                  10,000                           3,000
                Virginia              10,000                           10,000
                Vermont               60,000                           21,200
                Washington            60,000                           7,000
                Wisconsin             40,000                           4,400
                West Virginia         15,000                           2,800
                Wyoming               20,000                           4,000



                                                       21
                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics
 This table gives means and standard deviations of select variables from 1993 National Survey of
 Small Business Finance. Noncorporate firms include proprietorships and partnerships; corporate
 firms include corporations and S-corporations. Credit-constrained indicates that the firm was
 either discouraged from applying for a loan or applied and was denied, both within the past three
 years. All dollar amounts are in thousands.

                             Noncorporate     Noncorporate       Corporate        Corporate
                             Not credit       Credit constrained Not credit       Credit constrained
                             constrained                         constrained
Variable                         Mean Std Dev     Mean Std Dev       Mean Std Dev     Mean Std Dev

Discouraged/denied               0.00        0.00     1.00      0.00      0.00      0.00     1.00      0.00
Discouraged                      0.00        0.00     0.95      0.22      0.00      0.00     0.93      0.25
Denied                           0.00        0.00     0.57      0.50      0.00      0.00     0.47      0.50
Homestead exemption             61.86      57.18     66.73     56.69     56.14     57.68    55.74     56.16
Personal prop. exemption        12.64      16.27     12.84     17.00     11.61     14.47    10.83     13.73
Past bankruptcy filing           0.01        0.11     0.06      0.25      0.01      0.11     0.08      0.27
Past personal delinquency        0.09        0.28     0.37      0.48      0.05      0.22     0.25      0.43
Past business delinquency        0.11       0.31      0.36      0.48      0.13      0.33     0.45      0.50
Owner’s age                     50.65      11.83     46.51     10.18     51.57     11.27    47.99     10.63
Firm’s age                      15.43      13.77     10.95      8.57     17.26     14.61    12.76     12.19
Family owned                     0.89        0.31     0.94      0.23      0.75      0.44     0.77      0.42
Female owned                     0.23        0.42     0.26      0.44      0.21      0.41     0.27      0.44
African-American owned           0.06        0.24     0.26      0.44      0.04      0.20     0.18      0.39
Other minority owned             0.23        0.42     0.51      0.50      0.13      0.34     0.32      0.47
Employment                       9.31      30.19      6.23     21.35     52.69     76.86    29.52     54.90
Profits/assets ratio             1.26        6.31     1.22      4.24      0.49      2.81     0.47      3.70
Debt/assets ratio                0.53        0.82     0.70      0.80      0.60      0.62     1.03      2.94
Sales growth                    15.39     416.72      3.12     43.69      2.38     39.29     1.25      2.40
HHI > 1800                       0.53        0.50     0.47      0.50      0.49      0.50     0.42      0.49
Years of bank relationship       9.83        8.82     6.91      5.95     10.00      9.39     6.72      6.52
Checking account at bank         0.94        0.25     0.89      0.32      0.94      0.24     0.87      0.34
Number of lenders                0.03        0.24     0.06      0.39      0.19      0.67     0.27      0.98
State unemployment rate          0.07        0.02     0.07      0.02      0.07      0.02     0.07      0.02
Loan size                      759.92   5539.52     308.73   1234.63   1406.30   5265.58   849.02   2893.89
Interest rate                    8.91       2.40     10.17      3.76      8.05      1.76     8.96      2.56

No. of observations             1303                  526                2072                736




                                                       22
        Table 3: Logit Regressions Explaining Whether Firms are Credit Rationed

The dependent variable is whether firms were credit constrained (discouraged/denied) within the
past three years. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance at the
95% level.

                                              Non-corporate firms        Corporate firms
                                              Coefficient Std.error    Coefficient Std.error

    Homestead exemption                      0.0186*       (.0074)       0.0115      (.00625)
    Homestead exemption squared              -.00011* (.000045)       -.000120* (.0000438)
    Unlimited homestead exemption              0.512        (.377)        1.69*        (.436)
    Personal property exemption               0.0118       (.0209)       0.0104       (.0223)
    Personal property exemption squared      -.000218 (.00033)         -.000281     (.000376)
    Past bankruptcy                            1.58*        (.444)        1.58*        (.364)
    Past personal delinquency                 0.902*        (.219)       0.791*        (.219)
    Past business delinquency                  1.24*        (.175)        1.16*        (.169)
    Owner’s age                              -0.0143*      (.0069)     -0.00823      (.00568)
    Firm’s age                               -0.0103      (.00857)     -0.00728      (.00664)
    Family owned                              0.492*        (.254)       0.0635        (.100)
    Female owned                               -0.156       (.126)        0.126        (.154)
    African-American owned                     1.20*        (.180)       1.008*        (.214)
    Other minority owned                       0.548*       (.173)        0.212        (.176)
    Employment (in logs)                      -0.0750      (.0865)      -0.176*       (.0604)
    Profit/asset ratio                        0.0119      (.00857)     -0.0493*       (.0210)
    Debt/asset ratio                           0.197        (.110)       0.265*        (.095)
    Sales Growth                             -.000157 (.000227)        -.000453      (.00102)
    HHI > 1800                                -0.0633       (.184)      -0.0312        (.198)
    Years of bank relationship               -0.0264*      (.0142)     -0.0240*       (.0117)
    Years of bank relationship missing          -.195       (.310)         .297        (.584)
    Checking account at bank                   -0.369       (.273)      -0.700*        (.215)
    Number of lenders                          0.356        (.215)       0.0619       (.0612)
    State unemployment rate                     1.92        (3.93)       -1.415        (5.02)
    Number of observations                            1801                      2780
    Pseudo-R2                                         0.189                     0.160




                                                23
         Table 4: Logit Regressions Explaining Whether Firms are Credit Rationed
                           When Net Assets are High versus Low

The model is the same as in table 3, except that the exemption variables are interacted with a
dummy variable equaling one if the firm’s net assets are in the top half of the distribution.
Assets are net of liabilities. Only the results for the homestead exemption variables are given.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Asterisks indicate significance at the 95% level.


                                                Non-corporate firms            Corporate firms
                                              Coefficient   Std.error      Coefficient Std.error
Homestead exemption                             .0248*      (.00793)         .0167*      (.00631)
Homestead exemption squared                   -.000167*    (.000050)       -.000190* (.000045)
Unlimited homestead exemption                    .949*        (.413)          2.37*        (.626)

Homestead exemp x high asset dummy              -.0129*       (.00443)       -.00964       (.00651)
Homestead exemp squared x high asset           .000105*      (.000034)      .000127*      (.000057)
dummy
Unlimited homestead exemp x high asset           -.947            (.567)      -1.25            (.850)
dummy
Pseudo-R2                                                0.1919                       0.1647




                                                24
    Table 5: Effects of Bankruptcy Exemptions on Interest Rates
This table presents results from Tobit regressions explaining the interest rate on loans for non-
corporate and corporate firms. Interest rates for firms that were credit rationed are right censored
17 percent, which is above the maximum value of 16.5 percent in the sample. Asterisks indicate
statistical significance at the 95 percent level.


                                          Non-corporate firms       Corporate firms
                                          Coefficient p-value       Coefficient p-value
 Homestead exemption                        0.0824*      .009          0.0367*      .033
 Homestead exemption squared              -0.000588* .007            -0.000271* .030
 Unlimited homestead exemption               4.91*       .025             1.70      .168
 Personal property exemption                 -0.139      .233           0.0652      .283
 Personal prop. exemption squared           0.0011       .565         -.000939      .362
 Past bankruptcy                             5.71*       .052            2.20*      .053
 Past personal delinquency                    2.03       .077            1.45*      .021
 Past business delinquency                   -0.867      .392           -0.540      .250
 Owner’s age                                0.106*       .002          0.0887*      .000
 Firm’s age                                 -0.0257      .467           0.0191      .317
 Family owned                                 2.28       .058          -0.905*      .030
 Female owned                                0.501       .541            0.513      .189
 African-American owned                      5.26*       .027            8.31*      .000
 Other minority owned                        9.10*       .000            1.88*      .007
 Employment (in log form)                    -1.35*      .001           -1.33*      .000
 Profit/asset ratio                          0.111       .171           0.139*      .017
 Debt/asset ratio                            -0.507      .177           -0.206      .205
 Sales growth                              -0.00104      .102          0.00952      .442
 HHI > 1800                                   -1.18      .088          -0.854*      .015
 Years of bank relationship                0.000923      .986         -0.00365      .989
 Years of bank relationship missing           -.480     .769             3.95*      .007
 Checking account at bank lender              1.31       .328            0.844      .196
 Number of lenders                            -2.43      .058          -0.939*      .000
 Intercept                                   15.2*       .000            13.1*      .000

 Number of observations                              1801                      2779
 Pseudo R 2                                         .0508                     .0205
 Log likelihood                                   -2140.96                  -5808.21




                                                25
             Table 6: Effects of Bankruptcy Exemptions on Loan Size

This table presents results from Tobit regressions explaining loan size (in log form) for non-
corporate and corporate firms. Loan size for all firms that did not receive credit is censored at
zero. P-values are given and asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 95 percent level.

                                         Non-corporate firms            Corporate firms
                                      Coefficient p-value         Coefficient p-value
 Homestead exemption                  -0.0970*        .010          -0.0382          .077
 Homestead exemption squared          0.000677*       .010         0.000304          .051
 Unlimited homestead exemption          -5.18*        .050          -2.34            .129
 Personal property exemption            0.126         .371          -0.0802          .290
 Personal prop. exemption squared     -0.00082        .723         0.00114           .376
 Past bankruptcy                       -7.56*         .034          -2.99*           .036
 Past personal delinquency             -3.07*         .027          -1.93*           .014
 Past business delinquency              1.08          .371           0.730           .213
 Owner’s age                           -0.127*        .002          -0.120*          .000
 Firm’s age                             0.0333        .434          -0.0153          .519
 Family owned                          -2.74          .057           1.27*           .015
 Female owned                          -1.13          .247          -0.782           .110
 African-American owned                -5.26          .061          -10.04*          .000
 Other minority owned                  -10.7*         .000          -2.35*           .007
 Employment (in log form)               1.68 *        .000           1.95*           .000
 Profit/asset ratio                    -0.164         .109          -0.173*          .017
 Debt/asset ratio                       1.02*         .016           0.284           .158
 Sales growth                         0.000927        .209         -0.00851          .576
 HHI > 1800                             1.74*         .036           1.047*          .017
 Years of bank relationship            -0.0209        .737         -0.00436          .898
 Years of bank relationship            -9.99          .000         -5.89             .002
 missing
 Checking account at bank lender       -1.363          .400        -1.34               .100
 Number of lenders                      2.83           .068         1.17*              .000
 Intercept                              2.28           .495         4.98*              .002

 Number of observations                            1801                       2780
 Pseudo R 2                                       .0485                       .0220
 Log likelihood                                 -2275.52                    -6133.26




                                                  26
