                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WOMEN, WAR AND WAGES:
                         THE EFFECT OF FEMALE LABOR SUPPLY ON
                          THE WAGE STRUCTURE AT MID-CENTURY


                                            Daron Acemoglu
                                            David H. Autor
                                              David Lyle


                                          Working Paper 9013
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9013


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We thank Joshua Angrist, John Bound, David Card, Olivier Deschênes, Alan Krueger, Lawrence Katz, Peter
Kuhn, Casey Mulligan, Bas ter Weel, Linda Wong, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Università
Bocconi, the European University Institute, the University of Michigan, MIT, UC Santa Barbara, UC Santa
Cruz, Stanford University, UCLA, University of British Columbia and Wharton for valuable suggestions,
and the National Science Foundation and the Russell Sage Foundation for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu, David H. Autor and David Lyle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Women, War and Wages: The Effect of Female Labor Supply
on the Wage Structure at Mid-Century
Daron Acemoglu, David H. Autor and David Lyle
NBER Working Paper No. 9013
June 2002
JEL No. J21, J22, J31, J16, N32, H56



                                             ABSTRACT

        This paper investigates the effects of female labor supply on the wage structure. To identify
variation in female labor supply, we exploit the military mobilization for World War II, which drew many
women into the workforce as males exited civilian employment. The extent of mobilization was not
uniform across states, however, with the fraction of eligible males serving ranging from 41 to 54 percent.
We find that in states with greater mobilization of men, women worked substantially more after the War
and in 1950, though not in 1940. We interpret these differentials as labor supply shifts induced by the
War. We find that increases in female labor supply lower female wages, lower male wages, and increase
the college premium and male wage inequality generally. Our findings indicate that at mid-century,
women were closer substitutes to high school graduate and relatively low-skill males, but not to those
with the lowest skills.




Daron Acemoglu                      David H. Autor                       David Lyle
Department of Economics             Department of Economics              Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B                       MIT, E52-371                         MIT
50 Memorial Drive                   50 Memorial Drive                    50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347            Cambridge, MA 02142-1347             Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER                            and NBER                             dlyle@mit.edu
daron@mit.edu                       dautor@mit.edu
     “In May, 1947, 31.5 per cent of all women 14 years of age and over were workers as
     compared to 27.6 per cent in 1940. This proportion has been increasing for many
     decades. However, both the number and the proportion of women working in 1947
     are believed to be greater than would have been expected in this year had there not
     been a war.” Constance Williams, Chief of the Research Division of the Women’s
     Bureau of the United States Department of Labor, 1949.

                                      1   Introduction

In 1900, 82 percent of U.S. workers were male, and only 18 percent of women over the age of
15 participated in the labor force. As is visible in Figure 1, this picture changed radically over
the course of the past century. In 2001, 47 percent of U.S. workers were women, and 61 percent
of women over the age of 15 were in the labor force. Despite these epochal changes in women’s
labor force participation, economists currently know relatively little about how female labor
force participation aﬀects the labor market.

   • Does it increase or decrease male wages?

   • Does it adversely aﬀect female wages?

   • Does it impact male wage inequality?

   The relative scarcity of convincing studies on this topic reflects the complexity of the phe-
nomenon: increased labor participation of women is driven both by supply and demand factors.
Women participate in the labor force more today than 100 years ago for a myriad of supply-
side reasons including changes in tastes, gender roles and technology of household production.
But women also participate more because there is greater demand for their labor services. To
advance our understanding of how rising female labor force participation impacts the labor
market, we require a source of “exogenous” variation in female labor supply.
   In this paper, we study female labor force participation before and after World War II
(WWII) as a source of plausibly exogenous variation in female labor supply. As evocatively
captured by the image of Rosie the Riveter, the War drew many women into the labor force as
16 million men mobilized to serve in the armed forces, with over 73 percent leaving for overseas.
As is depicted in Figure 2, only 28 percent of U.S. women over the age of 15 participated in

                                                1
the labor force in 1940. By 1945 this figure exceeded 34 percent.1 Although, as documented by
Goldin (1991), more than half of the women drawn into the labor force by the War left again
by the end of the decade, a substantial number also remained (see also Clark and Summers,
1982). In fact, the decade of the 1940s saw the largest proportional rise in female labor force
participation during the 20th century.
    Although this aggregate increase in female labor force participation is evident from Figures
1 and 2, it is not particularly useful for our purposes; the end of the War and other aggregate
factors make the early 1950s diﬃcult to compare to other decades. But, central to our research
strategy, the extent of mobilization for the War was not uniform across U.S. states. While
in some states, for example Massachusetts, Oregon, and Utah, almost 55 percent of males
between the ages of 18 and 44 left the labor market to serve in the War, in other states, such
as Georgia, the Dakotas and the Carolinas, this number was between 40 and 45 percent. These
diﬀerences in mobilization rates reflect a variety of factors, including exemptions for farmers,
diﬀerences in age, ethnic and occupational structures, as well as idiosyncratic diﬀerences in the
behavior of local draft boards. We exploit diﬀerences in state WWII mobilization rates, as
well as components of these mobilization rate diﬀerences that are plausibly exogenous to other
labor market outcomes, to study women’s labor supply.
    Panels A and B of Figure 3 show that women worked substantially more in 1950–but not
in 1940–in states with greater mobilization of men during the War (see below for the exact
definition of the mobilization variable). Our baseline estimates suggest that women worked
on average about 1 week more in a state that had a 10 percentage point higher mobilization
rate during WWII, corresponding to a 9 percentage point increase in female labor supply. This
diﬀerence is not accounted for by diﬀerences in age structure, racial structure, education or
the importance of farming across these states, nor is it explained by diﬀerences in occupational
structure, regional trends in labor supply, or contrasts between Southern and non-Southern
states. We interpret these cross-state changes in female employment as caused by the greater
participation of women during the War years, some of whom stayed in the labor market after
the War ended. Notably, we find in Panel C of Figure 3 that the sizable association between
WWII mobilization rates and growth in female labor supply over the 1940s did not recur in
the 1950s, lending support to the hypothesis that these shifts were caused by the War, and not
   1
     For convenience, we refer to Census years as 1940, 1950, etc. In reality, Census data provides labor supply
information for the prior calendar year.


                                                       2
by diﬀerential long-run trends in female employment.
   Panel A of Figure 4 shows an equally strong relationship between female wage growth over
the 1940s and WWII mobilization rates: in states with greater mobilization for war, female
wages grew much less. Panel B shows a negative relationship for male wages as well, but the
slope of the relationship is considerably less steep.
   We interpret the relationships shown in Figure 4 as the causal eﬀect of the WWII-induced
increase in female labor supply on female and male wages. As Figure 2 shows, the aggregate
demand shock that drew many women into the labor force during the mobilization years had
reversed itself by 1947. But women continued to work in greater numbers after 1947, presumably
because employment during the War changed their preferences, opportunities and information
about available work.
   Our interpretation of the relationship between mobilization, female labor supply, and wage
growth faces two major challenges:

  1. High- and low-mobilization states may be diﬀerent in other unobserved dimensions. In
      that case, Figure 3 and 4 may be capturing the eﬀect of these unobserved characteristics
      on labor market outcomes, and our identification strategy may be assigning the eﬀects of
      these unobserved state characteristics on labor market outcomes to female labor supply.

  2. Mobilization of men for war may have had a direct eﬀect on the labor market, distinct from
      its impact through female labor supply. For example, men who served in the War may
      have had diﬃculty reintegrating into the workforce, or may have entered school instead
      due to the opportunities oﬀered by the GI Bills (Bound and Turner, 1999; Stanley, 1999).
      If this were the case, our first-stage finding of a relationship between mobilization and
      female labor supply would remain valid, but our two-stage least square (2SLS) estimates
      would be biased: greater female labor force participation in high-mobilization states could
      reflect greater demand for female labor input rather than shifts in female labor supply.

   Although we cannot dismiss these two interpretations entirely, we provide evidence to sug-
gest that they are not the primary source of our findings. Our results are typically robust to
including a variety of aggregate characteristics of states, including fraction of farmers before
the War, racial, education, and occupational structures. We also obtain similar results when we
focus on the component of mobilization rate generated by cross-state diﬀerences in aggregate

                                                 3
age and ethnic structure, which were important determinants of state mobilization rates, but
should plausibly have no direct eﬀect on female labor supply growth once we condition on indi-
vidual age and ethnicity. These findings weigh against an interpretation along the lines of the
first objection above. Moreover, female labor force participation did not vary systematically
between high- and low-mobilization states prior to the War, suggesting that these states were
initially broadly comparable along this dimension. Finally, as Panel C of Figure 3 documents,
high-mobilization states did not experience faster growth in female employment between 1950
and 1960. Hence, there do not appear to be diﬀerential state employment trends correlated
with WWII mobilization rates.
   If, on the other hand, the second concern were important–that is, if returning veterans
had trouble reintegrating into the labor market–there should be lower labor force participa-
tion among men in 1950 in high-mobilization states. We find that this is generally not the
case. Men who were not mobilized appear to participate slightly more after the War in high-
mobilization states. And post-war labor supply of WWII veterans in 1950 is, for the most part,
comparable across high and low-mobilization states, though some specifications do show nega-
tive but insignificant eﬀects. Furthermore, if greater female participation in 1950 were driven
by demand rather than supply factors, we would expect relatively greater wage growth for both
women and men in high-mobilization states. Instead, consistent with our interpretation, Figure
4 shows that both men and women earned relatively less in high-mobilization states in 1950
than in 1940. Nor are our results driven by cross-state wage convergence between agricultural
and industrialized states during the 1940s (e.g., Wright, 1986); in specifications that control
for lagged state wage measures, we continue to find a significant impact of mobilization on the
structure of male and female earnings. Finally, Figure 5 shows no relationship between state
WWII mobilization rates and wage growth between 1950 and 1960. Hence, the cross-state
correlations that we exploit between WWII mobilization and female labor supply or relative
wage changes by gender appear unique to the WWII decade.
   Exploiting the diﬀerential growth in female employment between 1940 and 1950 related to
cross-state diﬀerences in WWII mobilization, we estimate the impact of female employment on
a range of labor market outcomes. Our main findings are:

  1. Greater female labor supply reduces female wages. A ten percent increase in relative
     female labor supply (that is, relative to males) lowers female wages by 6 to 7 percent,

                                              4
      implying a labor demand elasticity of -1.4 to -1.7.

   2. Greater female labor supply also reduces male wages. A 10 percent increase in the (log)
      ratio of female to male labor supply typically lowers male earnings by 3 to 5 percent.

   3. The finding that female labor supply lowers women’s wages by more than men’s indicates
      that male and female labor inputs are imperfect substitutes. We estimate that a 10 percent
      increase in relative supply reduces relative female/male earnings by about 3 percentage
      points. This implies a substitution elasticity of approximately 3, which is large but far
      from perfect substitutability.

   4. The impact of female labor supply on male earnings is not uniform throughout the male
      earnings distribution. A 10 percent increase in female relative labor supply raises earnings
      inequality between college and high school graduate males by about 1.5 percentage points
      and lowers earnings inequality between high school graduate and eight-grade males by
      about 2 percentage points. These findings indicate that the women drawn into the labor
      market by the War were closer substitutes to males at the middle of the skill distribution
      than those with either the lowest or highest education.

   5. Although female labor supply has countervailing eﬀects on educational diﬀerentials, its
      net impact on overall and residual earnings inequality among males is positive. A 10
      percent increase in female labor supply is estimated to increase the male 90-10 weekly
      earnings diﬀerential by 5.5 log points, which is a very sizable eﬀect.

   It is important to note that these estimates conceptually correspond to short-run elasticities
since we are looking at equilibria in state labor markets shortly after the War, that is, shortly
after the changes in female labor supply. Migration, changes in interstate trade patterns and
changes in technologies could make the long-run relationship between labor market outcomes
and female labor supply quite diﬀerent from the short-run relationship. Results exploiting
changes between 1940 and 1960 suggest that long-run elasticities are indeed larger than short-
run elasticities.
   The economics literatures on the eﬀect of WWII on female participation and the eﬀect of
female labor supply on the structure of wages contains a small number of well-known contribu-
tions. Goldin (1991) is most closely related to our work. She investigates the eﬀects of WWII

                                                5
on women’s labor force participation and finds that a little over half of the women who entered
the labor market during the War years exited by 1950. Our labor supply estimates appear
consistent with these findings, though diﬀerences in the sample frame make it diﬃcult to make
exact comparisons. Mulligan (1998) investigates the causes of the increase in labor supply
during the War, and concludes that non-pecuniary factors rather than market incentives drove
this growth. Neither Goldin nor Mulligan nor, to the best of our knowledge, any other author
investigates the relationship between cross-state mobilization rates and female labor supply,
nor the causal eﬀect of the induced change in female labor supply on labor market outcomes of
men.2
   Blau and Kahn (1999), Juhn and Kim (1999), Topel (1994 and 1997) and the short papers
by Fortin and Lemieux (2000) and Welch (2000) also investigate the eﬀect of female employment
growth on male wage inequality.3 Using Current Population Survey data from 1968-1990, Topel
(1994) finds a strong positive correlation between regional changes in female labor supply and
growth in male earnings inequality. By contrast, Juhn and Kim (1999) do not find a sizable
eﬀect of female labor supply on male wage inequality in a cross-state Census panel. Fortin
and Lemieux hypothesize that the increase in male wage inequality during the past several
decades may reflect the process of women substituting for males in the earnings distribution,
and provide time-series evidence on the correlations between percentiles of the male and female
wage distribution that are consistent with this hypothesis. Finally, Welch (2000) links both
the decline in the wages of low-skill men and the narrowing of the male-female wage gap over
the past three decades to the overall increase in the demand for skills. While each of these
analyses reaches provocative, albeit divergent, conclusions, the identification strategies used do
not provide a means to separate supply- and demand-induced changes in female employment.
What distinguishes our analysis is the use of plausibly exogenous variation in female labor
market participation induced by World War II mobilization.
   In the next section, we briefly discuss the predictions of a simple competitive model regarding
the eﬀect of increased female labor force participation on male labor market outcomes. Section
   2
     An unpublished dissertation by Dresser (1994) studies the relationship between federal war contracts and
labor market participation of women across metropolitan areas and finds that MSAs that had a relatively large
number of war contracts during the war experienced diﬀerential increases in female labor force participation
between 1940 and 1950.
   3
     Goldin and Margo (1992) provide the seminal work on changes in the overall structure of earnings during
the decade of the War. For excellent syntheses of the state of knowledge of the role of women in the labor
force, see Goldin (1990 and 1994), Blau, Ferber and Winkler (2002), Blau and Kahn (1994, 1997 and 2000),
and O’Neill and Polachek (1993).


                                                     6
3 describes our microdata and documents the correlation between female employment and a
range of female and male labor market outcomes. In Section 4, we provide a brief overview of
the draft and enlistment process for World War II, and explain the causes of the substantial
diﬀerences in mobilization rates across states. Section 5 documents the relationship between
WWII mobilization rates and female labor supply in 1950, and argues that mobilization rates
generate a plausible source of exogenous variation in female labor supply. Sections 6 and 7
contain our main results. They exploit cross-state diﬀerences in female labor supply induced
by mobilization rates to estimate the impact of increased female labor supply on female wages
and male wages, educational inequality, and overall earnings inequality among males. Section
8 concludes.

                               2   Some Simple Theoretical Ideas

To frame the key questions of this investigation, it is useful to briefly discuss the theoreti-
cal implications of increased female labor force participation. Consider a competitive labor
market consisting of four factors: high-skill males, Ht , low-skill males, Lt , females, Ft , and
capital, Kt , which stands for all nonlabor inputs.4 Imagine that all these factors are imper-
fectly substitutable in the production of a single final good. In particular, to fix ideas, consider
the following nested CES (constant elasticity of substitution) aggregate production function,
where, to simplify notation, we ignore the share parameters:
                                      h¡            ¢η       ¡¡            ¢ρ    ¡       ¢ρ ¢η/ρ iα/η
                      Yt = At Kt1−α        BtL Lt        +        BtF Ft        + BtH Ht              ,

where At is a neutral productivity term, and the Bt ’s are factor-augmenting productivity terms,
which are for now taken as exogenous. In particular, BtF is an index of female productivity,
which may reflect observed or unobserved components of female human capital as well as
technical change favoring women relative to men. This specification assumes that the elasticity
of substitution between the labor aggregate and nonlabor inputs is equal to 1, the elasticity
of substitution between female labor and high-skill male labor is 1/ (1 − ρ), and the elasticity
of substitution between low-skill male labor and the aggregate between female and high-skill
male labor is 1/ (1 − η). When η > ρ, female labor competes more with low-skill male labor
   4
    We do not distinguish between high- and low-skill females both to reduce the number of factors and because,
in the empirical work, we will only have a source of exogneous variation in the total number (or total eﬃciency
units) of females in the labor force.


                                                              7
than high-skill male labor, whereas when η < ρ, it competes more with high-skill male labor.
This nested CES is similar to the one used by Krusell et al. (2000) with high-skill and low-skill
labor, and equipment capital.
   In this model, the wage ratio of high-skill to low-skill male wages, corresponding to the skill
or education premium, is a natural index of male wage inequality. Since in competitive labor
markets, wages are equal to marginal products, this ratio will be
                               ¡       ¢ρ−1 ¡¡ F ¢ρ ¡ H ¢ρ ¢(η−ρ)/ρ
                        wth BtH BtH Ht        Bt Ft + Bt Ht
                    ωt ≡ l = L                           η−1
                        wlt Bt                 (BtL Lt )

It is then straightforward to show that
                                     ¿         À
                                        ∂ω t
                                Sign             = Sign hη − ρi ,
                                       ∂BtF Ft
that is, an increase in eﬀective female labor supply increases male wage inequality when women
compete more with low-skill males than with high-skill males, i.e., when η > ρ. If female
labor has traditionally been a closer substitute to low-skill male labor than high-skill male
labor as argued by Grant and Hamermesh (1981) and Topel (1994 and 1997) among others, we
may expect increased female labor force participation to act as a force towards greater wage
inequality among men. The empirical magnitude of this eﬀect is unclear, however.
   The eﬀect of increased female labor force participation on average wages of men, or on the
level of high-skill and low-skill wages, depends upon the elasticity of supply of nonlabor inputs.
It is straightforward to verify that if these nonlabor inputs are supplied elastically (or if α = 1),
increased female labor supply will always raise average male wages. If, on the other hand,
the supply of nonlabor inputs to the economy is upward sloping, the eﬀect is ambiguous, and
depends on the elasticity of substitution between male and female labor and on the response
of the rental price of these nonlabor inputs to the increase in female labor supply.
   More explicitly, low-skill male wages are
                             h¡            ¢η       ¡¡ F ¢ρ ¡ H ¢ρ ¢η/ρ i(α−η)/η ¡ L ¢η−1
           wtl = αAt Kt1−α        BtL Lt        +     Bt Ft + Bt Ht               Bt Lt   .

Holding the supply of nonlabor inputs fixed, we have that
                                   ¿         À
                                       ∂wtl
                              Sign             = Sign hα − ηi .                                  (1)
                                     ∂BtF Ft


                                                           8
In other words, when the elasticity of substitution parameter, η, is suﬃciently high relative
to the share of labor in production, α, an increase in female labor supply will reduce the
(conditional) demand for and the earnings of low-skill males. In what follows, we will loosely
refer to female and (a particular type of) male labor as “close substitutes” when greater female
employment reduces the wages of that type of male labor, since a greater level of η (i.e., a
greater elasticity of substitution) makes such negative wage eﬀects more likely.
   The same trade-oﬀs determine whether average male wages increase or decline in response
to increased female labor force participation. Substitution of female labor for male labor, by
reducing the ratio of nonlabor inputs to eﬀective labor, acts to depress earnings, while the
complementarity between female and male labor raises the earnings of men. The overall eﬀect
will be determined by which of these two forces is stronger.
   Can we use this framework to interpret the relationship between female labor supply and
wages at the state level in the aftermath of WWII? There are at least three caveats that apply:

  1. This interpretation requires U.S. states to approximate separate labor markets. This
     may be problematic if either migration makes the entire U.S. a single labor market,
     or if local labor markets are at the city or MSA level. Both problems would cause
     attenuation, which does not bias instrumental-variables estimates, but makes them less
     precise. For example, in the extreme case where migration is free and rapid, there would be
     no systematic relative employment and factor price diﬀerences across state labor markets.
     Many studies, however, find migration to be less than perfect in the short run (e.g.,
     Blanchard and Katz, 1992, Bound and Holzer, 2000, Card and DiNardo, 2000), while
     others document significant wage diﬀerences across state or city labor markets (e.g., Topel,
     1994, Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000, Moretti, 2000, Bernard, Jensen and Schott, 2001,
     Hanson and Slaughter, 2002, forthcoming).Our results also show substantial diﬀerences
     in relative employment and wages across states related to WWII mobilization.

  2. The single-good setup is an important simplification. When there are multiple goods
     with diﬀerent factor proportions, trade between diﬀerent labor markets can also serve
     to equalize factor prices (Samuelson, 1948). It is reasonable to presume that changes in
     interstate trade patterns required to achieve factor price equalization do not take place



                                               9
         in the short run.5

   3. Short-run and long-run elasticities may also vary significantly, either because there are
         factors, such as capital or entrepreneurial skills, that adjust only slowly (cf, the LeChater-
         lier principle in Samuelson, 1947), or because technology (organization of production) is
         endogenous and responds to the availability of factors (Acemoglu, 1998, 2002).

       In light of all these caveats, the elasticities we estimate in this paper should be interpreted as
short-run elasticities (except when we look at the two-decade change between 1940 and 1960).
The majority of the estimates exploit the diﬀerential increase in female labor supply at the end
of the War on labor market outcomes shortly after the War. Migration, changes in interstate
trade patterns and changes in technologies are likely to make the long-run relationship between
female labor supply and labor market outcomes quite diﬀerent from the short-run relationship.

                              3    Data Sources and OLS Estimates
3.1      Data

Our basic data come from the one-percent Integrated Public Use Microsamples (IPUMS) of the
decennial Censuses. Samples include males and females ages 14-64 in the year for which earnings
are reported who are not residing in institutional groups quarters (such as prisons or barracks),
are not employed in farming, and who reside in the continental United States. Throughout the
paper, we exclude Alaska, Hawaii, Washington D.C. and Nevada from the analysis. Alaska and
Hawaii were not states until the 1950s, while Nevada underwent substantial population changes
during the critical period of our analysis.6 The 1950 sample is further limited to the sample-line
subsample because educational attainment is not reported in the full sample. Sampling weights
are employed in all calculations. Earnings samples include all full-time, full-year workers in paid
non-farm employment excluding self-employed who earned the equivalent of $0.50 to $250 an
hour in 1990 dollars during the previous year (deflated by CPI All Urban Consumers series
CUUR0000SA0). Weekly earnings are computed as total wage and salary income earned in the
previous year divided by weeks worked in the previous year, and hourly earnings are computed
as wage/salary income divided by weeks worked in the previous year and hours worked in the
   5
     This is especially true at midcentury, since construction of the U.S. Interstate Highway System did not
begin until 1956 with the authorization of the Federal Aid-Highway Act.
   6
     Nevada had an extremely high mobilization rate, yet despite this, lies directly along the regression line for
most of our analyses. Inclusion of Nevada aﬀects none of our results

                                                       10
previous week.7 Top coded earnings values are imputed as 1.5 times the censored value. We
define full-time, full-year employment as working at least 35 hours in the survey week and 40
weeks in the previous year. Because weeks worked in 1940 are reported as full-time equivalent
weeks, we do not impose the hours restriction for the full-time 1940 sample and when making
hourly wage calculations, we count full-time equivalent weeks as 35 hours of labor input.
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the 1940, 1950 and 1960 Censuses, which are our
main samples. Statistics are given for all the 47 states in our sample, and also separately for
states with high, medium and low-mobilization rates, corresponding to below 45.4, between
45.4 and 49.0, and above 49.0 percent mobilization. This distinction will be useful below since
diﬀerences in mobilization rates will be our instrument for female labor supply. Details on the
construction of mobilization rates are given in Section 4.
       As is visible in Table 1, high-mobilization states have higher average education, higher wage
levels, and slightly older populations than low-mobilization states in 1940. Farm employment
and nonwhite population shares are considerably lower in these states. However, female labor
supply, measured by average weeks worked per woman, does not diﬀer among high-, medium-
and low-mobilization states in 1940.

3.2      Female Employment and the Level and Distribution of Earnings

In this section, we document the cross-state correlations between female labor supply and their
range of labor market outcomes over the five decades between 1940-1990. Table 2 presents the
relationship between female employment and a variety of aggregate state labor market outcomes
including female and male wages, male earnings inequality, and the male college/high school
earnings diﬀerential. In all these models, our measure of female labor supply is average weeks
worked by female state residents aged 14 to 64 (with other sample restrictions as above).
       In Panels A and B, we measure wages as log weekly earnings of full-time, full-year workers,
and control for year main eﬀects, state of residence and state or country of birth dummies, a full
set of education dummies, a quartic in (potential) experience, and dummies for nonwhite and
marital status. As in all wage models we report in this paper, all covariates other than the state
dummies are interacted with time to allow returns to education, experience and demographics
   7
    The 1940 Census does not distinguish between wage/salary and self-employment income and hence both
sources are implicitly used in earnings calculations. Restricting the sample to non-farm employed likely sub-
stantially reduces the importance of self-employment income in the 1940 sample.



                                                     11
to diﬀer by decade.8 The results show no consistent relationship between female employment
on the one hand and female earnings and male earnings on the other. For example, column 1,
which uses data from 1940 and 1990, indicates that greater female employment is associated
with an increase in female wages, and a slight decline in male wages. Other columns report
results for diﬀerent subsamples.
      Panel C reports the relationship between female labor supply and the male college/high
school wage premium. To perform this calculation, we regressed log weekly full-time earnings
of males with exactly a college and those exactly a high school degree on year main eﬀects, state
of birth and state of residence dummies, and the same set of covariates and their interactions
with time, and the measure of average weeks worked by females in their state of residence. Each
variable (and the constant) is interacted with a college-graduate dummy and the coeﬃcient
reported is the interaction between the female labor supply measure and the college graduate
dummy. This coeﬃcient measures the relationship between female labor supply and the earnings
of college graduates relative to high school graduates (see equation (7) below). Panel C shows
a weak negative relationship between female labor supply and the male college/high school
wage diﬀerential: in the full sample and in 1970-90, a 1 week increase in female employment is
associated with a 1 percent decline in the college/high school diﬀerential.
      Finally, Panel D reports results from regressions of within-state changes in overall male
earnings inequality on changes in female weeks worked. The measure of inequality used here
is the log diﬀerence between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the male earnings distribution.
The results show no relationship between overall male wage inequality and female labor supply
between 1940 and 1990 or between 1970 and 1990, but during earlier decades, there is a positive
association between female employment and male wage inequality, and this relationship is
significant in the 1940s.
      If the results in Table 2 corresponded to the causal eﬀect of female employment on female
and male wages, we would conclude the demand for female labor was highly elastic (eﬀectively
flat), and that male and female workers were not particularly close substitutes.
      These conclusions would be premature, however, since variations in female employment
reflect both supply and demand forces.9 To the extent that female labor supply responds
  8
    Results without such interactions are similar, and are available upon request.
  9
    An additional problem is composition bias: women who participated at the margin may have been diﬀerent
(say less productive) than the average woman, creating a spurious negative relationship between female em-



                                                   12
elastically to labor demand, the OLS estimate of the eﬀect of female employment on female
wages will be biased upward by simultaneity; that is, female labor supply will be positively
correlated with the level of labor demand and hence positively correlated with wages. Similarly,
to the extent that demand for male and female labor move together, the OLS estimate of the
eﬀect of female employment on male wages will also be biased upward. On the other hand,
the OLS estimates of the eﬀect of female labor supply on male wage inequality may be biased
upward or downward depending on whether greater labor demand increases wages more at the
top or the bottom of the residual earnings distribution.
    To obtain unbiased estimates of the eﬀect of female employment on these labor market
outcomes, we require a source of variation in female labor supply that is uncorrelated with
demand for female labor. In the next section, we explore whether variation in state mobilization
rates for WWII may serve as such a source of variation.

                               4   Mobilization for World War II

Following the outbreak of the War, the Selective Service Act, also known as the Burke-
Wadsworth Bill, was introduced in the Senate in June 1940 to correct flawed conscription
policies from the World War I era. The Burke-Wadsworth Bill initiated a mandatory national
registration in October 1940 for a draft lottery for all males ages of 21-35 to gather relevant
data on potential draftees. By the time the draft ended in 1947, there had been a total of six
separate registrations with the age range expanded to include 18-64 year olds. Only 18-44 year
olds were liable for military service, however, and many of these either enlisted or were drafted
for the War. Men aged 45-64 were registered as part of a civilian workforce management eﬀort
by the Selective Service.
    Following each of the registrations, there were a series of lotteries determining the order
that a registrant would be called to active duty. Local draft boards then classified all of the
registrants into qualification categories. The Selective Service’s guidance for deferred exemp-
tion was based on marital status, fatherhood, essential skills for civilian war production, and
temporary medical disabilities, but left considerable discretion to the local boards.
ployment and female wages. Our instrumental-variables estimates will also be subject to a variant of this bias:
IV estimates will identify the market eﬀects of the labor supply of women whose behavior is aﬀected by our
instrument; these women may diﬀer from the “average” female labor force participant (see Angrist and Imbens,
1995, for an interpretation of IV estimates along these lines).



                                                      13
    Due to the need to maintain an adequate food supply to support the War eﬀort, one of
the main considerations for deferment was farm status. We show below that states with a
higher percentage of farmers had substantially lower mobilization rates, and this explains a
considerable share of the variation in state mobilization rates. Also, most military units were
still segregated in the 1940s and there were relatively few black units. Consequently, blacks
were separated from whites for classification purposes. This resulted in proportionally fewer
blacks serving in the military than whites and hence states with higher percentages of blacks
also had lower shares of draftees. In addition, individuals of German, Italian and Asian origin
may have been less likely to be drafted due to concerns about sending them to battle against
their countries of origin.
    Our measure of the mobilization rate is the fraction of registered males between the ages
of 18 and 44 who were drafted or enlisted for war. It is calculated from the published tables
of the Selective Service System (1956). Since eﬀectively all men in the relevant age range were
registered, our mobilization rate variable is the fraction of men in this age range who have
served. We use this variable as a proxy for the decline in the domestic supply of male labor
induced by the War. Volunteers were not accepted into the military after 1942 and hence the
great majority of those who served, 67 percent, were drafted.10 Therefore, the main source of
variation in mobilization rates is cross-state diﬀerences in draft rates.
    Table 3 shows the cross-state relationship between the mobilization rate and a variety of
potential determinants. These right-hand side variables, calculated from the 1940 Census,
measure the percent of males ages 13-44 in each state who were farmers, nonwhite, married,
fathers, German-born or born in other Axis nations (Italy or Japan), or fell in the age brackets
of 13-24 and 24-34. We also calculate average years of completed schooling among males in
this age bracket since, as Table 1 shows, this variable diﬀers significantly among high- and
low-mobilization states. We focus on the age bracket 13-44 because men aged 13 in 1940 would
be 18 in 1945, and thus part of the target (“at-risk”) group.11 Finally, we calculate the number
of draft registration boards per 1,000 males ages 13-44 using Selective Service (1956) paired to
  10
     According to data from Selective Service System (1956), 4,987,144 men were enlisted and 10,022,367 men
were drafted during the War years. 458,297 males were already serving in the military in 1940 prior to declaration
of hostilities. Since it is probably misleading to count these peacetime enlistees as wartime volunteers, a more
precise estimate of the share of draftees is 70 percent.
  11
     The fathers variable refers to the fraction of women aged 13-44 who had children. Though ideally we would
have this fraction for men, this information is not directly available from Census and hence we use the percent
of women with children, which is presumably highly correlated with the desired variable.



                                                       14
Census population counts. Draft board prevalence might aﬀect the mobilization rate if states
with greater mobilization infrastructure were able to conduct the draft more rapidly.
   Column 1 of Table 3, which includes all of these variables in a regression model simultane-
ously, shows that the farm, schooling and German-born variables are significant, while the other
variables are not. The significant negative coeﬃcient on the farm variable implies that a state
with 10 percentage points higher farm penetration is predicted to have a 1.7 percentage point
lower mobilization rate. The coeﬃcient on the German-born variable implies that 1 percentage
point higher fraction of population born in Germany translates into over 3 percentage points
lower mobilization. This is a very large eﬀect, though not entirely implausible if our measure
of foreign-born Germans also captures the presence of larger ethnic German enclaves (also note
that the point estimate is significantly smaller in later columns). Interestingly, the percent
Italian/Japanese variable has the wrong sign in this regression, but this seems to be because
it is correlated with percent German-born, and when entered individually, it is insignificant.
Column 2 displays a specification that includes only the farm and nonwhite variables, while
column 3 shows a specification only with the farm and education variables. Column 4 com-
bines the farm, nonwhite and schooling variables. Due to collinearity, neither the nonwhite nor
schooling variable is individually significant.
   To explore robustness, column 5 drops the 15 Southern states from the analysis. Their omis-
sion has little impact on the farm or schooling variables, though it does cause the coeﬃcient and
standard error of the nonwhite population share measure to rise substantially. The subsequent
columns add the age structure, ethnic mix, married, father and local draft board variables one
by one to the model in column 4. The only variables that have additional explanatory power
are the age structure and percent German-born variables.
   Finally, columns 12 and 13 show specifications that control for the farm, nonwhite, schooling,
age composition and the German-born variables simultaneously. These specifications explain
a significant part of the variation in state mobilization rates (the R2 ’s of these two regressions
are, respectively, 0.62 and 0.70). We think of the farm, nonwhite and schooling variables as
capturing potentially “economic” determinants of mobilization rates, and the age composition
and the German-born variables as capturing systematic “non-economic” components, while
the residual 30 percent corresponds to idiosyncratic or non-systematic variation. Below we
present estimates of the eﬀect of mobilization on female labor supply growth that exploit


                                                  15
various combinations of these sources of variation.

                     5    WWII Mobilization and Female Labor Supply
5.1     Cross-State Relationships

Figure 2 in the Introduction showed male and female labor force participation and the fraction
of males ages 14-65 who were in active military duty in each year during the years 1940-
1952.12 The rise of women’s labor force participation between 1940 and 1945 closely tracks the
mobilization of males. During these five years, male labor force participation declined by 16.5
percentage points while female labor force participation rose by 6.0 percentage points. Hence,
the rapid increase in female employment during 1940-1945 appears to be a response to the labor
demand shock caused by WWII mobilization.
       By 1949, the size of the military was at peacetime levels, male labor force participation
slightly exceeded pre-War levels, and the demand shock that had induced the increase in female
employment had arguably subsided. Despite the resumption of peacetime conditions, however,
female labor force participation was 5.1 percentage points higher in 1950 than in 1940 (though
0.9 percentage points lower than at the War’s peak).13 If female employment was higher in
1950 than it would have been absent WWII mobilization, this can be thought as the result
of a change in female labor supply behavior induced by the War. Women who worked during
wartime may have potentially increased their earnings capacity or their information about
available jobs, thereby inducing additional labor supply.14 Alternatively, the preferences of
women who worked—or even those who did not—may have been altered by widespread female
labor force participation during the War. Our empirical strategy is to exploit these changes in
female labor supply.
  12
      Numerators for labor force participation and military active duty numbers in Figure 2 are from the Sta-
tistical Abstract of the United States (1944/45, 1951, and 1954), which relies on estimates from Census of
Populations data for years 1940-1942 and Current Population Reports, Series P-50 and P-57, for years 1943-
1952. Denominators are population estimates of U.S. residents ages 14-65 by gender from 1940 and 1950 Census
of Populations. Population estimates are interpolated for years 1940-1948 and 1950-52 assuming a constant ex-
ponential growth rate over 1939-1952. Due to use of the detailed annual labor force series for 1939-1952 in
Figure 2 (which are not available for earlier years), our female labor force participation numbers in this figure
diﬀer slightly from the series provided by Goldin (1994) and Blau, Ferber and Winkler (2002) displayed in
Figure 1.
   13
      As noted earlier, our data sources do not agree on the exact magnitude of the aggregate rise in female labor
force participation during the decade. The Figure 1 data place the rise at 6.0 percentage points rather than 5.1
as in Figure 2.
   14
      In this case, the actual increase in eﬃciency units supplied by female labor may be understated by our
labor supply calculations (which are normally expressed in weeks worked), leading to an underestimate of the
negative eﬀect of female labor supply on female wages.



                                                       16
   Mobilization for WWII was not uniform across states. In low-mobilization states, less than
44 percent of men between the ages of 18-44 served in the War, in contrast to 51.5 percent
of males in high-mobilization states (with a range of 9.2 percentage points between the 10th
and 90th percentile states). Figure 3 showed that female employment did not systematically
vary between high- and low-mobilization states in 1940 (see also Table 1). By 1950, however,
women worked significantly more in high-mobilization states. In fact, as shown in the second
panel of the figure, there is a striking positive relationship between state mobilization rates
and the change in average weeks worked by women from 1940 to 1950. Our hypothesis is that
this change in the cross-state pattern of female employment between 1940 and 1950 reflects
the eﬀects of WWII mobilization on female labor supply. Notably, this positive relationship
is unique to the decade of the War. The bottom panel of Figure 3 indicates that there is no
additional relative growth in female labor supply during 1950-1960 in high-mobilization states
(in fact, there is a slight mean reversion).
   To investigate the hypothesis more formally, Table 4 reports results from regressions of
female labor supply, measured in weeks worked, on state mobilization rates. These models,
which pool data from 1940 and 1950, have the following structure:

                                               0
                        yist = δ s + γ 1950 + Xist · β t + α · γ 1950 · ms + εist .          (2)

Here the left-hand side variable, yist , is weeks worked by woman i residing in state s, in year
t (1940 or 1950). δ s denotes a full set of state of residence dummies, and γ 1950 is a dummy
for 1950. Xist denotes other covariates including state of birth or country of birth, age, race,
and share of farmers and nonwhites and average schooling in the state in 1940 interacted with
the 1950 dummy, which are included in some of the specifications. The time subscript on β
indicates that the eﬀects of the X 0 s on labor supply may diﬀer by decade. The coeﬃcient
of interest is α, which corresponds to the interaction term between the 1950 dummy and the
mobilization rate, ms . To save on terminology, we refer to this interaction term simply as the
“mobilization rate”. This variable measures whether states with higher rates of mobilization
for WWII experienced a greater increase in female employment from 1940 to 1950. Since our
key right-hand side variable, the mobilization rate, varies only by state and year, all standard
errors reported in this paper are corrected for clustering at the state times year level (using
STATA robust standard errors).


                                                    17
      Column 1 is our most parsimonious specification, including only state dummies, year main
eﬀects, and the mobilization rate measure. This model indicates that there was a large and
highly significant increase in female employment between 1940 and 1950 in high-mobilization
states. The point estimate of 13.9 (standard error 1.8) implies that a 10 percentage point
higher mobilization translated into a 1.4 week increase in female employment between the start
and end of the decade. While suggestive, this specification is not entirely appropriate since it
does not control for any individual or state characteristics that might explain the rise in female
labor supply in high-mobilization states. Subsequent columns add a variety of covariates to
this specification.
      The addition of a full set of age and marital status dummies interacted with year dummies in
column 2 reduces the mobilization rate coeﬃcient by about one-third to 9.6. The diﬀerence in
the point estimate between the first two columns indicates that age groups with greater increases
in labor force participation were more populous in high-mobilization states. Column 3 adds
state of birth dummies as a control for cross-state migration (and country of birth dummies
for immigrants). These dummies have little impact. As an additional method of controlling
for the possible endogeneity of women’s location decisions, Appendix Table 1 displays a set of
specifications comparable to Table 4 (columns 3 and 5) in which WWII mobilization rates are
assigned to women by their state of birth rather than current state of residence as in our main
models. The point estimates and standard errors are very similar to the models in Table 4.
As a final check for migration, Panel B of Appendix Table 1 reports results from specifications
that use (log) total supply of women, measured in aggregate weeks or aggregate eﬃciency units,
as the dependent variable (see below for definition of aggregate eﬃciency units). Consistent
with the finding that women worked more on average in 1950 in high-mobilization states, total
female labor supply also grew more in these states.

5.2    Correlation or Mobilization?

The correlations documented above between state mobilization rates and measures of agri-
cultural employment, nonwhite population, and educational attainment raise a concern as to
whether we are simply capturing diﬀerential trends in female employment in non-agricultural,
better-educated, and low-minority states. In that case, the estimated eﬀect of the mobilization
rate on female labor supply growth will reflect, at least in part, this correlation. To state


                                                 18
the concern more concretely, we can think of the variation in cross-state mobilization rates as
arising from three components:
                                          ms = mes + mne
                                                      s + es .                                           (3)

The first of these, mes , is the component of state mobilization rates that is correlated with
observable economic factors such as agricultural and educational distributions. The second
component, mne
            s , is correlated with non-economic factors that we can potentially measure such

as age and ethnicity. Finally, es is a source of other idiosyncratic variation that we cannot proxy
with our existing data. Our estimates so far exploit all three sources of variation in ms . Among
these, mes is the most problematic since economic factors that cause diﬀerences in mobilization
rate could also potentially impact female labor supply and earnings growth directly between
1940 and 1950.
   Our first strategy to purge the mobilization measure of potentially problematic variation
is to control directly for several measures of mes in estimating (2), thus only exploiting the
variation in mobilization rates coming from mne
                                             s and es . To implement this approach, columns

4 and 5 of Table 4 add controls for the interaction between the 1950 dummy and the fractions
of men who were farmers and who were nonwhite and average schooling among men in 1940.15
The nonwhite and farm interaction terms are typically only marginally significant while the
schooling variable is positively related to growth in female labor force participation. But these
variables have little impact on the coeﬃcient on the mobilization rate, which remains between 8
and 10 week and is highly significant. Overall, these estimates also imply that a 10 percentage
point higher mobilization rate is associated with an approximately 1 week increase in female
employment.
   As an alternative check on the influence of racial composition on male employment growth,
Panel B of Table 4 limits the sample to white females (recall that we have already limited the
sample to non-farmers). The results in this subsample are comparable to those reported in
Panel A. The baseline estimate is again approximately 9 to 10 weeks, and is similarly robust
in magnitude and significance to the inclusion of various covariates.16
   Another concern is that there may be significant cross-state diﬀerences in the importance of
  15
     Although the component of mobilization rate correlated with fraction nonwhite may be thought to be “non-
economic,” given the changes in the economic status of blacks over this time period, we are more comfortable
classifying this as an “economic” complement.
  16
     We also estimated models with interactions between individual education dummies and year dummies. The
results are very similar to those in Table 4. Tables of these results are available from the authors.


                                                     19
occupations or industries with a greater demand for women, explaining the diﬀerential growth
in female employment between 1940 and 1950. Table 5 allows for female labor supply growth
to diﬀer by states’ initial occupational and industrial structure. In particular, we control (in
separate regressions) for the interaction between the 1950 dummy and the fraction of males in
1940 in each of 10 one-digit occupations as well as the fraction of men in defense-related in-
dustries.17 These estimates provide little evidence of diﬀerential female labor supply growth by
occupational and industrial structure. The occupation and industry variables are insignificant
in all but one specification, and their inclusion aﬀects neither the magnitude nor the significance
of the relationship between WWII mobilization and female labor supply growth.
    In terms of the notation of equation (3), the estimates in Tables 4 and 5 exploit two sources
of variation in state mobilization rates: the “non-economic” component, mne
                                                                         s , and the “idio-

syncratic” component, es . An alternative strategy to explore whether these results may be
interpreted as a causal eﬀect of WWII mobilization on female labor supply growth is to at-
tempt to isolate the non-economic component of the mobilization rate, mne
                                                                       s . To implement this

approach, we focus on the variation in mobilization rates accounted for by diﬀerences in the
age structure and German heritage of the population of males at risk for mobilization by state
(recall that the fraction of those who were Italian and Japanese did not have a significant eﬀect
on mobilization rates in Table 3). Conditioning on individual characteristics, in particular, age
and ethnicity (country of birth), it is plausible that these variables should have no direct eﬀect
on female labor supply growth.
    Motivated by this reasoning, we report results from 2SLS estimation of equation (2) in Panel
A of Table 6, using the 1940 age or ethnic structure (or both) as instruments for the mobilization
rate (in these models we also control for percent farmer and male’s average education in 1940).
Though not as precisely estimated, the results of these 2SLS models are similar to the previous
estimates using all components of the variation in mobilization rates and to those that control
for the economic component of the mobilization rate, mes , directly. Therefore, it appears that all
sources of variation in mobilization rates exert a similar eﬀect on female labor supply during the
decade of the War. It is also encouraging to note that the 2SLS models for male labor supply
in Panel B of Table 6 find insignificant and inconsistently signed eﬀects of mobilization on male
  17
     We define defense-related industries as those contributing to War Stock material directly related to combat
missions. Examples of defense industries are: aircraft and ship building, motor vehicles and electronic machinery,
metal industries, steel and iron industries, and blast furnaces and rolling mills. A complete list is available from
the authors.


                                                        20
labor supply during this decade (see Table 8 for a more detailed analysis of the relationship
between male labor supply growth and WWII mobilization).18
    We provide a number of further robustness checks on our main estimates in Table 7. Specif-
ically, we present results for a second outcome measure (positive weeks worked), explore the
importance of regional variation to the main findings, and compare the 1940-1950 results to
estimates for the subsequent decade when there was no mobilization for war. We focus on
specifications 3 and 5 from Table 4, which are our richest models; the latter includes all state
‘economic’ controls (i.e., farm, nonwhite, and average years of completed schooling, all inter-
acted with the 1950 dummy).
    The first row of the table indicates that our results are not primarily driven by regional
trends in female labor supply. Adding region dummies (interacted with the 1950 dummy)
corresponding to the 4 Census regions increases the estimated relationship between the mobi-
lization rate and female employment growth, but does not change the overall pattern. Dropping
Southern states, on the other hand, reduces the size of the coeﬃcient. In all cases, the rela-
tionship remains economically and statistically significant.
    The second row of Table 7 presents identical models where the dependent variable is an
indicator variable equal to 1 if a woman worked positive weeks in the previous year (and zero
otherwise). In all but the first specification, these models indicate a sizable impact of the
mobilization rate on the share of women participating in the labor force. A ten percent higher
mobilization rate is associated with 1 to 3 percentage points additional growth in female labor
force participation over this decade.19
    Panel B of Table 7 presents comparable estimates for the years 1950 to 1960, in this case
interacting the mobilization fraction with a 1960 dummy. These results provide a useful specifi-
cation test since a large increase in female employment in high-mobilization states between 1950
and 1960 would indicate that our mobilization rate variable is likely capturing other secular
  18
     We have also performed a “falsification” exercise for this IV approach in which we regress the change in
female (or male) labor supply during 1950-1960 on lagged state age and ethnic variables from the 1950 decade
interacted with a 1960 dummy. F-tests of these “false instruments” are never significant in models that use
the state ethnic structure as the instrument. In models that include the age structure age alone or the age
and ethnic structures together, p-values range from 0.01 to 0.03, though age variables have the opposite sign to
those in Table 6.
  19
     We do not investigate the eﬀect of the mobilization rate on the Census variable that is coded as in-the-
labor-force, since in the 1940 census this is equivalent to having an occupation, and women who worked during
the War may still have an occupation even if they are not currently in the labor force. Closely related, however,
we show in Appendix Table 1 that there is a strong positive relationship between WWII mobilization and the
logarithm of total female labor supply to a state.



                                                       21
cross-state trends in female employment. In no case do we find a significant positive relationship
between the mobilization variable and the growth of female labor supply measured as average
weeks worked or any weeks worked over the 1950-60 decade. The cross-state growth in women’s
labor force participation was significantly correlated with WWII mobilization rates only during
the decade of the War.
    To supplement these aggregate patterns, Appendix Tables 2 and 3 present evidence on the
impact of the mobilization rate on female weeks worked by age, education and birth cohort.
We generally find that WWII mobilization had the greatest impact on the labor supply of high
school graduate women, women between the ages of 14-44 and the cohorts that were 15-24 or
35-44 in 1940. Point estimates for the impact of mobilization on the labor supply of women
above 54 and those for the cohorts that were 25-34 or 45-54 in 1940 (Appendix Table 3) are
sensitive to the inclusion of the aggregate state variables.20
    Finally, it would be useful to complement these results with evidence on whether women
worked relatively more in high-mobilization states during the War years (as well as afterwards).
Unfortunately, we are not aware of a data source with information on state labor force partici-
pation rates by gender during the intra-Census years. Nevertheless, we can partially complete
the picture given by the Census data by investigating whether women worked more in the im-
mediate aftermath of the War (between 1947 and 1950) in high-mobilization states. To do so,
we use the CPS Social Security Earnings Records Exact Match file which reports information
from Social Security earnings records on quarters worked in covered employment (i.e., private
sector, non-self-employed) for adults interviewed for the CPS in March 1978. These data are
naturally only available for those who survived to 1978 and report valid Social Security num-
bers. Because the quarterly employment data do not start until 1947 and contain only the sum
of quarters worked for the first three years of the sample (1947 to 1950), we cannot investi-
gate whether women worked more in high-mobilization states during the War.21 These data
  20
     In 1940, the educational distribution of non-elderly, non-farm females was: less than 8th grade, 27 percent;
exactly 8th grade, 23 percent; 9-11 years, 22 percent; exactly 12 years, 19 percent; 1 or more additional years
beyond high school, 9 percent (3 percentage points of which was accounted for by college graduates). In 1950,
the corresponding numbers were 22, 17, 23, 26, 12 and 5.
  21
     Because we do not have information on respondents’ state of birth, we use state of residence as an imperfect
proxy. Social Security Numbers (SSNs) are essentially only available for women with positive work history and
hence we treat missing SSNs as indicating no work history (except in cases where respondents refused to provide
a SSN or where the SSN failed to match Social Security data). To attempt to isolate farm workers (who are
typically not in covered employment), we variously dropped women in farming occupations, women with farm
income, and women residing on farms (and all three). These exclusions had little impact on the results. Note
that although the CPS Exact Match file reports annual quarters worked for 1937-1946, these data are imputed


                                                       22
nonetheless provide a rare glimpse at women’s employment in the immediate post-war years.
      Figure 6 depicts the (standardized) relationship between state mobilization rates and female
employment during 1947 and 1950, and separately in each of the years from 1951 to 1977. For
women who were ages 16-55 in 1945, we run a regression of total quarters of work in a given
period divided by mean quarters of work by women in that period on individual characteristics
(age, education, marital status, and a dummy for nonwhite) and the state mobilization rate.
The figure plots the coeﬃcients on the mobilization rate measure and the 90 percent confidence
interval for each estimate (using STATA robust standard errors clustered by state). The re-
sults confirm the patterns detected in the Census data: there is a strong relationship between
mobilization rates and female labor employment in 1951, and a weaker but still substantial
relationship in 1959 and 1960. Reassuringly, there appears to have been an even more positive
relationship between the mobilization rate and female labor supply in the years immediately
following the war (1947-1950). Consistent with Goldin’s (1991) findings, the impact of the
War on female labor supply fades substantially with time, but greater female labor supply in
high-mobilization states appears to persist for at least 15 years after the War’s end.

5.3    Supply Shifts or Demand Shifts?

We have so far interpreted the robust cross-state correlation between mobilization rates and
growth in female employment between 1940 and 1950 as indicative of a shift in female labor
supply. As Figure 2 shows, the aggregate demand shock, the mobilization for war, that had
drawn women into the labor market had almost entirely reversed itself by 1947. There may
still have been post-war diﬀerences in the demand for female labor across states correlated with
WWII mobilization rates, however. For example, men who served in the War may have had
diﬃculty reintegrating into the workforce, or may have taken advantage of the WWII GI Bill
by attaining further education rather than working. If this were the case, greater female labor
force participation in high-mobilization states could reflect demand for female labor rather than
diﬀerences in female labor supply.
      To explore these possibilities, Table 8 and Appendix Table 1 also provide estimates of labor
supply specifications for males comparable to those estimated for women in Table 4. These
models find no significant correlation between WWII mobilization rates and the growth of male
from aggregate income data for these years and hence are not useful for our analysis.



                                                     23
labor supply between 1940 and 1950. Depending on covariates, estimates for male labor supply
range from weakly positive to weakly negative and are never significant. As noted above, Panel
B of Table 6 also shows no relationship between male labor supply growth and the component
of WWII mobilization correlated with non-economic factors (age structure and ethnic mix).
Hence, it appears that the net growth in male labor supply between 1940 - 1950 was not
systematically lower in high-mobilization states.22
       To probe the relationship between mobilization and men’s employment in 1950 further, the
final four columns of Table 8 provide separate labor supply estimates for males who did and
did not serve in the War.23 These models detect a weak positive relationship between state
mobilization and the growth in male labor supply for non-veterans during this decade, but
this relationship is insignificant and is only visible in specifications that exclude the interaction
between the 1950 dummy and state aggregate measures (farm share, nonwhite population, and
educational attainment). For models limited to WWII veterans, there is an insignificant positive
eﬀect of mobilization rates on labor supply when we do not control for the state aggregate
measures, and an insignificant negative relationship when the state aggregate measures are
included. In net, these models do not provide reason to believe that by the 1950s, male labor
supply was systematically aﬀected by state mobilization rates.
       As a final piece of evidence, note that Table 9 (discussed below) documents that relative
earnings fell for both genders in high- relative to low-mobilization states. If, contrary to our
presumption, state-level labor demand shifts induced by WWII mobilization persisted to 1950,
we would expect female wages to have risen in high-mobilization states. Similarly, if cross-state
variation in female employment were driven by diﬀerences in the overall demand for labor in
1950, we would expect both male and female wages to have been higher in high-mobilization
states. These wage results therefore suggest that as of 1950, the enduring eﬀects of WWII
mobilization were realized primarily through additional female labor supply rather than greater
labor demand for either gender (though this last piece of evidence does not imply that there
were no demand-side diﬀerences across states).
  22
     See Stanley (1999) and Bound and Turner (1999) on the eﬀects of GI Bills. As noted by Goldin and Margo
(1992, footnote 24), college attendance under the WWII GI Bill peaked in 1947 and declined sharply after 1949.
  23
     In these specifciations, the 1940 subsample contains all males from the previous columns, while the 1950
subsample is limited to males who report themselves as WWII veterans (columns 6 and 7) and non-veterans
(columns 8 and 9).




                                                     24
                 6   The Impact of Female Labor Supply On Earnings

The previous section developed the argument that cross-state diﬀerences in WWII mobilization
rates are a plausible source of variation in female labor supply in 1950. This section exploits
this source of variation in female employment to estimate the eﬀect of female supply on a range
of labor market outcomes.

6.1    Initial Evidence

Figure 4 showed the negative relationship between state WWII mobilization rates and the
change in average weekly (log) female and male wages during 1940 and 1950 at the state level.
We now investigate these relationships formally.
      Table 9 presents our first set of regression estimates for the impact of female labor supply
on wages. For the sake of transparency, we initially take the approach of regressing female and
male log weekly earnings on our measure of weeks worked by women from the previous section.
We present both OLS models and instrumental-variables (IV) estimates in which the female
labor supply measure is instrumented by state mobilization rates. Figure 4 above corresponds
to the reduced form for the IV estimates (without covariates). More formally, the estimating
equation is:
                                                     0
                           ln wist = δ s + γ 1950 + Xist · β t + φ · Yst + uist .                (4)

The left-hand side variable is log weekly earnings, ln wist , while the endogenous regressor is
average weeks worked by women in the state of residence of individual i, Yst . In all specifications,
we include state of residence dummies, a dummy for 1950, a complete set of education dummies,
a quartic in experience, and a dummy for marital status. Models that include nonwhites also
include a nonwhite dummy. The coeﬃcient of interest, φ, measures the eﬀect of female labor
supply on earnings. As indicated by the time subscript on the coeﬃcient vector, β t , we allow the
wage diﬀerential associated with each individual level covariate to diﬀer by decade (similarly
to the OLS models of Table 2). Standard errors are again clustered to account for the fact that
the labor supply measure operates at the state by year level.
      We estimate equation (4) using both OLS and IV/2SLS models. In the IV models, the
first-stage equation is analogous to equation (2) above, except that the endogenous variable
in this case is not women’s individual weeks of work, but average weeks worked per woman


                                                    25
in each state. This first-stage relationship is tabulated directly below the point estimate in
each column. The excluded instrument is the interaction between the 1950 dummy and the
mobilization rate. The exclusion restriction implied by this instrumental-variables strategy is
that diﬀerential mobilization rates aﬀect women’s wages across states only through their impact
on female labor supply. Based upon the evidence presented in the previous section, we believe
that this exclusion restriction is plausible.
    It is important to bear in mind that estimates of φ do not have a direct structural inter-
pretation in terms of our model in Section 2. As the theory underscores, the impact of female
labor supply on total male and female earnings should depend upon the (log) ratio of female
to male labor supply (as well as the supply of other nonlabor factors). Hence, unless female
labor supply (in OLS or instrumented form) is uncorrelated with male labor supply, we cannot
directly recover the relevant demand and substitution elasticities from estimates of (4). We
therefore view these results as descriptive and adopt a more structural approach in subsequent
tables.
    In column 1, we begin with a parsimonious specification which indicates that a 1 week
increase in female labor supply is associated with a 10.7 percent decline in female weekly earn-
ings. Given that women’s labor supply averaged 10.7 weeks in 1940 (Table 1), and assuming
no correlation between (instrumented) female labor supply and male labor supply, this point
estimate would correspond to a female labor demand elasticity of -1.14. In the next column,
we add aggregate measures of female age structure by state to the regression model. These
measures control for the correlation between state mobilization rates and female age struc-
ture.24 Inclusion of age controls reduces the estimated wage impact of female labor supply by
approximately 25 percent to -7.0 percentage points for a 1-week increase, which remains highly
significant. Column 4 adds the interaction between the 1950 dummy and the 1940 aggregate
state measures—share farm, share nonwhite, and average education—thus allowing diﬀerential
wage growth in farming, high-minority and low-education states. These interactions reduce
the magnitude of the estimate by one-third and increase the standard error. The lower panel
repeats the results for the white sample with similar results but slightly greater precision. The
negative estimated impact of female labor supply on mean female earnings is in all cases signif-
icant (in the final specifications, at the 10 percent level) and, as suggested by theory, indicates
  24
     Female age structure variables measure the share of female state residents ages 14-64 in each of the following
age categories (with one omitted): 14-17, 18-24, 25-34, 45-54, 55-64.


                                                        26
that the demand curve for female labor is downward sloping (at least in the short run).
   Comparing these IV estimates to the corresponding OLS estimates in the table, which are
typically weakly negative and never significant, suggests that the OLS estimates are likely
biased upward (i.e., towards zero). It appears, not surprisingly, that cross-state variation in
female labor supply during this decade was jointly determined by a combination of demand and
supply shifts. By isolating the component of female employment that is plausibly orthogonal
to demand, our IV estimates show a substantially larger eﬀect of female labor supply on female
earnings.
   The subsequent columns of Table 9 present corresponding estimates for male earnings, both
for the full sample and for the white subsample. Contrary to the case of female earnings,
theory does not make strong predictions for male earnings: they should decline if male and
female labor inputs are close substitutes and nonlabor inputs are supplied inelastically to state
labor markets in the short run. In the data, we detect negative eﬀects of female labor supply on
male earnings. All point estimates are highly significant except those in the final specifications
where we control for the interaction between the 1950 dummy and several state aggregate
measures. Interestingly, the estimated eﬀects of female labor supply on male earnings are
consistently 30 to 40 percent smaller in absolute magnitude than the corresponding estimates
for female earnings. This result suggests that female labor supply is an imperfect substitute
for male labor supply, a point which we explore in greater detail below. Once again, the IV
estimates are more negative than the corresponding OLS estimates, consistent with the view
that OLS estimates are biased towards zero due to simultaneity, and that demand for male and
female labor are positively correlated.25
   The final columns of Table 9 present wage results estimated separately for male WWII
veterans and non-veterans. These columns provide an important specification test. If aggregate
wage eﬀects for males were driven exclusively by lower wages for veterans, we would be worried
about having primarily detected the adverse eﬀects of war reintegration on veterans’ earnings.26
   25
      Also notice that the negative eﬀects on female wages are unlikely to be accounted by the labor force
participation of women with lower earnings capacity (cf. Smith and Ward, 1984). First, as Appendix Table
2 shows, marginal labor market participants were relatively highly educated, so there is no compelling reason
to expect that they will be adversely selected on unobserved skills. Second, to rationalize the wage eﬀect we
estimate, i.e., over 10 percent decline in wages in response to a 10 percent increase in employment, with the
participation of less skilled women, we would need the marginal participants to earn negative wages!
   26
      Angrist and Krueger (1994) present evidence that WWII veterans were positively selected, and Angrist
(1990) presents evidence that Vietnam Era veterans experienced earnings losses due to foregone civilian expe-
rience.



                                                     27
The estimates in Table 9 indicate significant negative wage eﬀects of female labor supply for
both non-veterans and veterans. Interestingly, the point estimates for veterans are somewhat
more negative than those of non-veterans. This pattern is consistent with Richard Freeman’s
“Active Labor Market” hypothesis: veterans, as recent labor market (re-)entrants, may have
borne a greater brunt of the wage eﬀects of rising female labor supply.
    Appendix Tables 4 estimates models similar to those in Table 9, while controlling for inter-
actions between the 4 Census regions and year, or dropping all Southern state. These results
are quite similar to our baseline estimates, indicating that the negative relationship between
the mobilization-induced changes in female labor supply and changes in earnings is not driven
primarily by Southern states or regional trends.
    Given the substantial convergence in regional wage levels that took place among U.S. states
during the 1940s (Wright, 1986), we were also concerned that wage patterns detected in Table
9 might reflect a process of “catching up” whereby agricultural states, which generally had
low-mobilization rates, gained ground on the rest of the nation during this decade. To check
this possibility, we augmented the Table 9 models to control for the 1940 level of wages for
the relevant demographic group (interacted with a 1950 dummy). Appendix Table 5 reports
the results of this exercise. This lagged wage variable is negative and generally significant
indicating that states with initially higher wage levels experienced smaller wage gains during
the decade. The important finding however is that the inclusion of the lagged measure does not
aﬀect our general conclusions. In models without state aggregate measures, point estimates of
the eﬀect of mobilization on wages are lower than the models without lagged wages, but they
are higher when the state aggregate measures are included. In all specifications, the eﬀect of
mobilization-induced changes in female employment on female wages is statistically significant,
and the eﬀect on male wages is always negative, and is significant in all specifications except for
those that control for the interactions between the 1950 dummy and aggregate state measures.27
   27
      The results are also unlikely to be driven by institutional changes taking place in the U.S. labor market
during this time period. The two major institutional changes of this era are increases in unionization and the
imposition, and then removal, of the National War Labor Board (NWLB), which was responsible for approving,
and limiting, wage increases.
   The NWLB and other price controls are unlikely to be responsible for our results. The NWLB, which was
established in January 1942, was dissolved in December 1945, and eﬀectively all wartime price controls were
lifted in November 1946 (see Rockoﬀ, 1984), three years before our post-war observations.
   We have also estimated the key labor supply and wage models in Tables 4 and 9 while controlling for diﬀerential
trends in unionization across states during these years (using data from Troy and Sheflin, 1985). Controlling
for unionization has little impact on the findings, and a supplemental table of estimates is available on request.




                                                       28
6.2    Using Mobilization Rates to Estimate Elasticities of Demand and Substitution

The wage estimates in Table 9 employ average female weeks as the endogenous regressor.
This approach will lead to correct estimates of the elasticity of demand or substitution only
if (instrumented) female labor supply is uncorrelated with male labor supply. Although this
condition may be satisfied, it would be preferable to exploit exogenous variation in male and
female labor supply simultaneously. Using a single instrument, we cannot separately identify
both sources of variation. We can, however, use the mobilization rate to instrument the (log)
ratio of female to male labor supply in a state. This approach surmounts the problem of treating
male labor supply as exogenous and thereby brings us closer to the specification suggested by
the theoretical model. The equation that we estimate is:
                                                           µ     ¶               µ     ¶
                                        0       g            Fst                   Fst
         ln wist = δ s + γ 1950 + fi + Xist · β t + χ · ln         + η · fi · ln         + uist ,           (5)
                                                             Mst                   Mst

where the sample now includes all individuals (male and female), fi is a dummy for female,
Fst is total labor supplied by women and Mst is total labor supplied by men in the state of
residence of individual i. As indicated by the super- and subscripts on β gt , each of the individual
and state aggregate control measures included in the model (contained in Xist ) is permitted to
impact male and female earnings diﬀerentially by gender and decade.
      In this equation, there are two coeﬃcients of interest, χ and η. The coeﬃcient χ measures
the direct impact of increases in (relative) female labor supply on male and female earnings,
and η measures the diﬀerential eﬀect of female labor supply on female wages. Hence, η is
an estimate of the inverse elasticity of substitution between male and female labor, and the
quantity χ + η is an estimate of the inverse elasticity of demand for female labor.
      In the first four columns of Table 10, we present estimates of equation (5) where the labor
supply measure is constructed as the log ratio of total female to male weeks supplied in each
state and the control variables correspond to those used in the four specifications in Table 9.
First-stage estimates, tabulated in each column, indicate that WWII mobilization substantially
aﬀected relative gender labor supplies. A 10 percent higher mobilization rate is estimated to
have induced a 10 to 20 percent increase in the log ratio of female to male labor supply, an
impact which is always precisely estimated and highly significant.28
  28
     This is a sensible magnitude. For example, an increase in the female to male ratio of labor input from 0.30
to 0.35 percent correponds to a 15 log point increase in the this ratio.


                                                      29
      We next turn to elasticity estimates. The point estimates in the first two rows of Table
10, corresponding to χ and η in equation (5), are consistently negative, economically sizable,
and with few exceptions, highly significant. This set of results confirms the findings above that
the demand curve for female labor is downward sloping and that women are relatively close
substitutes for men.
      Summing χ and η to obtain an estimate of the (inverse) elasticity of demand for female labor,
σ F , we find that a 10 percent increase in relative female labor supply reduced female wages by
6 to 7 percentage points. These wage eﬀects correspond to an own-labor demand elasticity of
between -1.4 and -1.7 and are therefore slightly larger in magnitude than the “naive” estimates
above. The lower panel of the table presents analogous wage estimates for the subsample of
white female wage earners, for whom we find comparable demand elasticities.
      The impact of female labor supply on wages is not uniform between the two genders, how-
ever. As is visible in the second row of Table 10 (and as was suggested by Table 9), the wage
eﬀects of (relative) increases in female labor supply are uniformly more negative for women
than they are for men. A 10 percent increase in female labor supply lowers female wages
relative to male wages by about 3 percentage points. By implication, female and male labor
inputs are highly, but not perfectly, substitutable. In particular, the point estimates for η,
corresponding to the inverse elasticity of substitution σ M F , imply a substitution elasticity in
the range of -3, with slightly smaller implied elasticities in the models that include aggregate
state controls. Again, elasticities are similar in Panel B, where estimates are limited to white
males and females.

6.3     Measuring labor supply in efficiency units

As a check on the above results, we also estimate models that replace the aggregate weeks of
labor supply measure with a measure of labor supply calculated in eﬃciency units following
the approach of Welch (1969). Conceptually, eﬃciency unit calculations aggregate various
demographic subgroups according to their estimated relative productivities to obtain total labor
supply by gender. To implement this approach, we use the 1940 Census sample to calculate
average weekly earnings for full-time, full-year workers in the following education by race by
gender categories within each state: 5 age categories (13-23, 24-33, 34-43, 44-53, and 54-63); 5
education categories for whites (<8 years, exactly 8 year, between 8 and 12 years, exactly 12


                                                 30
years, and greater than 12 years of schooling); and 3 education categories for nonwhites (<5
years, exactly 5 years to exactly 8 years, and greater than 8 years of completed schooling).29
Under the assumption that wages are proportional to marginal productivity, this approach
allows us to “quality adjust” aggregate labor input, thereby relaxing the assumption that there
is perfect substitutability of labor input within each gender.
   Using this matrix of 3,760 eﬃciency unit weights (47 states by 80 cells), we assign each male
and female in our labor supply sample the eﬃciency weight corresponding to her demographic
characteristics and state of residence, αgaers , where g denotes genders, a indexes age bracket,
e indexes education categories, r indexes race, and s indexes states. We calculate aggregate
quality-adjusted relative labor supply to a state as
                                µ f¶        ÃP                       !
                                                        f
                                  Ls             a,e,r αaers · Faers
                             ln        = ln P                          ,                                  (6)
                                 Lms
                                                        m
                                                a,e,r αaers · Maers


where Faers is the weeks of labor supplied by females in the state with the relevant demographic
characteristics and Maers is the corresponding quantity for males (and, as always, all calculations
use Census sampling weights).
   Estimates of equation (5) that use labor supply measured in eﬃciency units are shown in
columns 5-8 of Table 10. The first-stage coeﬃcients from these estimates are slightly smaller
in magnitude than the corresponding weeks-based estimates, which may imply that marginal
female labor force entrants drawn into the labor market by mobilization had lower average
productivity than incumbent participants. We find that the elasticities of demand and sub-
stitution calculated from these eﬃciency-unit based estimates are not systematically diﬀerent
from those estimated using the weeks-worked measure. Hence, these results appear to confirm
our previous findings. In the subsequent tables, we employ the weeks-worked measure since it
is more transparent.
  29
     Because non-whites had substantially less schooling than whites in 1940, it was necessary to use fewer
education categories with diﬀerent cutpoints in calculating non-white eﬃciency units. We normalize each cell
by the wages of white, male high school graduates, ages 24-33 in each state in 1940, so each worker’s labor
input is expressed relative to the weekly full-time labor input of a prime-age white male high school graduate
in his or her state. Where cells are empty for given states, we impute them as the population weighted average
(normalized) eﬃciency units of the corresponding cells from other states. Note that the normalization of wages
by a given demographic group is for convenience only and does not impact the ratios computed.




                                                     31
6.4     Differences between Short-Run and Long-Run Elasticities

As noted in the Introduction and Section 2, the estimates reported in this paper are likely to
correspond to short-run elasticities. In general, it is of great interest to know whether short-
and long-run elasticities diﬀer substantially. Since, as shown in Figure 3, there was only a small
amount of mean reversion in female employment during the 1950s, states with greater WWII
mobilization also had greater female employment in 1960. By exploiting the 20-year changes
between 1940 and 1960, we can investigate whether the short-run impact of increased female
employment is diﬀerent from its long-run impact. We perform this exercise in Appendix Table
6, by estimating models identical to those in Table 10 except that the two decades we now
cover are 1940 and 1960.
      Comparing the first-stage coeﬃcients on the mobilization rate interaction between Table 10
and Appendix Table 7, we see that mobilization had a large eﬀect on the growth of relative
female labor supply not only between 1940 and 1950, but also between 1940 and 1960. For
example, in column 1 of Appendix Table 6, the first-stage coeﬃcient is 2.1, compared to 2.05
in Table 10. However, the standard error is much larger. Thus, not surprisingly, some of the
2SLS estimates will be less precise. Moreover, in models that control for interactions between
the 1960 dummy and share of farmers, nonwhites, and average education in 1940, there is no
first-stage relationship between mobilization and female employment growth between 1940 and
1960.
      The models in Appendix Table 6 that do not control for the state aggregates show that the
eﬀect of relative female employment on male wages is broadly comparable between 1940-50 and
1940-60 (columns 1-3 and 5-7). However, the eﬀect of relative female labor supply on male-
female diﬀerentials is much weaker for the 20-year state level changes. In fact, the estimates are
essentially zero and the standard error bands easily exclude the short-run elasticity estimate
from Table 10 (though the main eﬀect, which captures the impact on the level of male and
female earnings, is sometimes as large as those in Table 10). This is consistent with the notion
that the long-run relative demand curve for women’s labor is considerably more elastic than
the short-run relative demand curve, or even perhaps perfectly elastic. This could be due to
adjustment of nonlabor inputs that are fixed in the short-run (LeChatelier principle), changes
in technology or in the organization of production favoring women in areas with greater female
employment (Acemoglu, 1998, 2002), or changes in trade patterns that require suﬃcient time

                                                32
to equilibrate.

           7   Does Female Labor Supply Raise Male Earnings Inequality?

The results above establish that female labor supply lowers male earnings. But this impact
need not be uniform throughout the male wage distribution. Indeed, several of the authors
cited in the Introduction have argued that rising female labor supply over recent decades is
in part responsible for growing male earnings inequality in the U.S. labor market.30 Greater
female labor supply will generally raise male earnings inequality if women are closer substitutes
to low earnings males than high earnings males.
      We take three angles of attack to investigate the relationship between female labor supply
and male earnings inequality, in all cases exploiting the WWII-induced increase in female
employment. First, we ask whether female labor supply aﬀects earnings diﬀerentials between
males at high, medium and low levels of education–specifically college graduates, high school
graduates and those with 8th grade or lower education.31 Next, we explore how rising female
labor supply changes the level of inequality between various quantiles of the male earnings
distribution, for example the 90-50 and 50-10 log earnings ratios. Finally, we ask whether female
labor supply also aﬀects residual earnings inequality–that is, the inequality that remains after
accounting for observable individual characteristics.

7.1    The Impact of Female Labor Supply on Male Educational Differentials

We begin with educational diﬀerentials. Consider a variant of equation (5) in which the de-
pendent variable is log weekly earnings of males of two education groups—initially, college and
high school graduates, later high school and 8th grade graduates:
                                                 µ     ¶               µ     ¶        µ m¶
      m                         0     e            Fst                   Fst           Cst
  ln wist = δs + γ 1950 + ci + Xist β t + χ · ln         + η · ci · ln         + γ ln   m
                                                                                           + uist . (7)
                                                   Mst                   Mst           Hst
  30
     On rising male earnings inequality see, among many others: Katz and Murphy (1992) and Bound and
Johnson (1992) on supply and demand factors; Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) on the role of changing skill
premia in the increase in residual inequality; DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1995) and Lee (1999) on the role
of labor market institutions; and Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994), Machin and Van Reenan (1998), and
Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) on the role of computerization. Levy and Murnane (1992), Bound and Johnson
(1995), Katz and Autor (1999), and Acemoglu (2002) provide surveys of this literature. See the Introduction
for cites to studies of the relationship between female labor supply and male earnings inequality.
  31
     In 1940, 28 percent of males had less than an 8th grade education, 24 percent had exactly 8th grade, 22
percent had more than 8th grade but less than high school, 15 percent exactly a high school degree, and the
remaining 10 percent had more than high school education (5 percent with college or above). In 1950, the
corresponding numbers were 24, 18, 22, 20, and 15 (7 percent with college or above).


                                                    33
In this equation, ci is a dummy for whether individual i is a college graduate (the omitted group
being high school graduates), Fst /Mst is relative female labor supply measured in aggregate
                            m    m
weeks worked as above, and Cst /Hst is the relative supply of college versus high school male
labor input.32 All covariates are allowed to have diﬀerent eﬀects on earnings of college and
non-college males and to diﬀer by decade.
   The coeﬃcients of interest in this equation are χ and η. The coeﬃcient χ measures the
impact of female labor supply on the earnings of high school graduates, and η gives the eﬀect
of female labor supply on the relative wages of college versus high school graduates. Therefore,
keeping the employment levels of college and high school graduate males constant, we can think
of σ f h = 1/χ as the cross-elasticity of demand between female labor and high school gradu-
ates and σ f c = 1/ (χ + η) as the cross-elasticity of demand between female labor and college
graduates. The ratio of cross-elasticities of females for high school versus college graduates,
σ fhc ≡ σ f h /σ f c , is therefore (χ + η) /χ . If σ fhc is less than 1, this implies that female labor has
a more (negative) wage impact on high school graduates, so females are closer substitutes to
high school than to college males, and vice versa if σ fhc > 1.
   Consistent with our previous results, we anticipate that the main eﬀect of female labor
supply on both college and high school wages, χ, is negative. Since relative supplies of male
                                       m    m
college versus high school graduates, Cst /Hst , should also directly impact the male college/high
school premium, we must either control for this measure or assume that instrumented female
labor supply measure is uncorrelated with it. We implement both approaches below and find
that the choice is not consequential for our results.
   While the college/high school wage diﬀerential is of great contemporary interest, the vast
majority of males in our 1950 sample (85 percent) had high school or less education, with
the two modes of the distribution found at exactly high school completers (20.3 percent) and
exactly 8th grade completers (18.2 percent). Therefore, it is of interest to ask whether female
labor supply raised or lowered earnings inequality between these groups of males as well. After
estimating equation (7) for the college/high school diﬀerential, we perform analogous estimates
  32
     In models that use the male college/high school relative supply, college labor supply is the sum of total
weeks worked supplied by college-plus graduates plus half of those supplied by those with some college; high
school labor supply is the sum of weeks worked supplied by high school graduates or less plus half of those
supplied by those with some college. In models that use the male high school/8th grade relative supply, high
school labor input is the sum of weeks worked supplied by those with high school or more plus half of that
supplied by those with more than 8th grade and less than high school education; 8th grade is the sum of weeks
worked supplied by those those with 8th grade or less, plus half of that supplied by those with more than 8th
grade and less than high school.


                                                     34
for the high school/8th grade diﬀerential.
   Estimates of equation (7) for college and high school graduates, shown in panel A of Table
11, reveal that growth in female labor supply exerts a small positive eﬀect on male college/high
school earnings inequality. A 10 percent increase in female labor supply is predicted to lower
male high school wages by 2.5 to 4 log points while reducing college wages by only 1 to 2.5
percentage points. These point estimates imply a relative cross-elasticity of demand σ fhc of 0.4
to 0.6, but this elasticity is imprecisely estimated. This evidence is consistent with the view
that females drawn into the labor force by WWII mobilization were more substitutable for
high school than college educated men (consistent with the characteristics of female labor force
entrants documented in Appendix Table 2). But we cannot reject the hypothesis that women’s
labor supply reduced college and high school wages by equivalent amounts.
   This ambiguity does not carry over to the corresponding results for the impact of female
labor supply on the male 8th grade/high school diﬀerential. These estimates, found in Panel
B of Table 11, have the opposite sign to and are somewhat larger than those for the male
college/high school wage premium. They are also more precisely estimated. A 10 percent
increase in female labor supply is estimated to reduce male high school relative to 8th grade
earnings by 1.5 to 2.5 percentage points. This relative wage impact is highly significant in
specifications that do not control for state aggregate measures. In models that include these
aggregates, the estimate is of similar magnitude but is less precise. Interestingly, we cannot
reject the hypothesis that female labor supply had no impact on the wages of 8th grade males.
   In net, the primary impact of increased female labor supply on male educational inequality
during the 1940s was to lower the wages of male high school graduates relative to more-educated
males, and particularly relative to less-educated males. This suggests that during the WWII
era, females were closer substitutes to males at the middle of the skill distribution than to
males in either of the tails. Given that low-educated males in 1950 were reasonably likely to be
employed in manual occupations, it is plausible that women would indeed be worse substitutes
for them than for their high school graduate brethren. This result stands in some contrast
to Grant and Hamermesh’s (1981) and Topel’s (1994) OLS findings that high-skill women are
strong substitutes for low-skill males. Of course, our findings are from another era and these
substitution parameters need not be fixed over long intervals.




                                               35
7.2     The Impact of Female Labor Supply on the Distribution of Male Earnings

Because women’s labor force entry during the 1940s appears to have raised earnings inequality
between college and high school males while lowering it for high school versus 8th grade educated
males, the net impact on male inequality is–at this point–ambiguous. Educational inequality
is however only one component of earnings diﬀerentials, and the total impact of female labor
supply on male inequality could in principle be quite diﬀerent than its impact on educational
inequality.
      To provide a more complete picture of these potential eﬀects, we adopt a less structural
approach. Using observed male earnings distributions and estimated residual male earnings
distributions by state, we define state level inequality metrics as the log diﬀerence between
various quantiles of the earnings or residual earnings distribution, such as the 90-50 or 50-10
diﬀerential. We then explore whether WWII-induced increases in female labor supply raised
or lowered these inequality measures. To implement this approach, we first estimate standard
wage regressions of the form:

                                                          0
                                ln wist = δ s + γ 1950 + Xist · β t + vist ,                   (8)

where wit is weekly earnings for male i residing in state s in year t. In the “overall inequality”
specification, we include only state dummies and a year main eﬀect. In the “residual inequality”
model, the vector Xist includes a full set of education dummies, a quartic in potential experience,
nonwhite, state of residence, state or country of birth, veteran status, and marital status
dummies, as well as controls for state female age structure by year. A third set of models add
state-level macro controls (share farmer and nonwhite, and average education in 1940). The
fact that β t is indexed by t indicates that returns to these observed characteristics are allowed
to vary by decade. We also briefly look at measures of wage inequality that combine workers
from both genders.
      The measures of overall or residual inequality are calculated separately in each state and
year as the diﬀerence between the 90th and the 10th (or 50th and 10th, etc.) percentile values
                                                                       90−10
of the corresponding residual distribution, vist , and are denoted by vst    etc. Observe that
the residual distribution in the “overall” inequality model is simply the demeaned log earnings
distribution in each state.
      We then use these inequality measures as the left-hand side variable in Table 12. The typical

                                                    36
regression takes the form:
                                                                  µ         ¶
                                90−10                                 Fst
                               vst      = δ s + γ 1950 + φ · ln                 + uist ,
                                                                      Mst
       90−10
where vst    is the 90-10 diﬀerential, the endogenous regressor, Fst /Mst is again relative female
labor supply (in weeks), and the instrument is the state mobilization rate, ms , interacted with
the 1950 dummy. To move from micro- to macro-data (i.e., from individual Census observations
to state level aggregates) without losing the information provided by the micro-level controls,
we orthogonalize both the instrumental variable and the endogenous regressor with respect
to all of the covariates in Xist to form the state level measures used in the second stage of
estimation.
    The first column in Table 12 labeled Mean ∆ provides estimates of mean state-level change
in earnings inequality from 1940 to 1950. The sizable decline in earnings inequality visible in
the table reflects the well-known “Great Compression” studied by Goldin and Margo (1992).
Over the decade of the War, male 90-50 and 50-10 diﬀerentials each declined by close to 17 log
points.
    The first set of regression estimates in specification 1 examines the state-level relationship
between growth in the log relative supply of female labor input (instrumented with the mobi-
lization rate) and the contemporaneous change in overall state level earnings inequality. The
net impact of female labor supply on male earnings inequality is positive and sizable. A 10
percent increase in female labor input is estimated to widen the 90-10 earnings diﬀerential by
5.5 log points, which is highly significant. It is noteworthy that this entire impact occurs in
the upper half of the male earnings distribution. Consistent with our findings for the impact
of female labor supply on the wage gap between middle- and low-education males, increases in
female labor supply appear to cause some compression below the median of the distribution,
though this impact is not significant. An interesting implication of these estimates is that with-
out the WWII-induced increase in female labor force participation the “Great Compression”
would have been even “greater” in the sense that wage inequality among males would have
declined even further between 1940 and 1950.33
  33
     Interestingly and consistent with our findings, Goldin and Margo (1992, p. 27) notice a similar pattern of
widening inequality in industries with high female employment: “Industries that were female-intensive (cigars,
men’s neckwear, woolen and worsted mills) comprise an obvious exception [to the trend of wage compression]...
Rather than experiencing a narrowing of the wage structure from the prewar to the wartime or postwar periods,
their distributions actually widened.”


                                                      37
   When we look at the impact of female labor force participation on wage inequality among all
workers (male and female) in Panel C, we find much larger eﬀects. Now a 10 percent increase
in female labor supply widens the 90-10 earnings diﬀerential by 1.4 log points. This much
larger eﬀect is not surprising; greater female participation both increases male wage inequality
directly, as we have already established, and also adds more women to the distribution who, at
this time, were paid considerably less than men.
   Panel B of the table presents comparable estimates for the white subsample. In this case
the impact of female labor supply on inequality above the median is somewhat less positive
while the impact on inequality below the median is somewhat more negative. This estimate
suggests that female labor supply primarily reduces male earnings at a lower point in the white
male earnings distribution than in the overall earnings distribution, which appears plausible
given the substantial racial disparities in education and earnings in this period.
   The subsequent two columns of Panels A and B present estimates of the impact of female
labor supply on residual male inequality. The impact of female labor supply on residual in-
equality is about half as large as the impact on overall inequality, but still sizable. A 10 percent
increase in female labor supply is estimated to raise the male 90-10 earnings diﬀerential by
1.5 to 2 log points. The columns numbered (2) present residual estimates in which state level
macro controls (share nonwhite and farm, and average education) are included in the first stage
models. The point estimates are typically less precise than previous estimates.
   Overall, the results reported in this section show a substantial eﬀect of female employment
growth on overall and residual inequality among men at midcentury. These results therefore
provide some support to the hypotheses advanced in Fortin and Lemieux (2000) and Topel (1994
and 1997), linking female labor supply to rising male inequality–though distinct from the hy-
potheses of these authors, female labor appears to increase male inequality not by competing
with low-skill males, but by increasing dispersion at the top of the male wage distribution.
Interestingly, the eﬀects we find are large enough to “explain” a large fraction of the recent
increase in male wage inequality as resulting from the concurrent sizable rise in female employ-
ment. This conclusion may be premature, however, for two reasons: first, the education levels
and characteristics of women who increased their labor supply during the decade diﬀer substan-
tially from those of the marginal female labor market participants of today. The structure of
production has also changed substantially since midcentury. Accordingly, substitution elastici-


                                                38
ties we estimate from midcentury may not be directly comparable to the elasticities today. And
second, as noted before, our estimates correspond to short-run elasticities, which may be quite
diﬀerent from long-run elasticities as the results in Appendix Table 6 suggest.34 To understand
the eﬀect of female employment on the increase in male wage inequality over the past three
decades, the relevant elasticities are long-run elasticities. Work exploiting additional sources of
variation in recent female employment growth is necessary to make progress on uncovering the
links between rising female labor supply and recent changes in the structure of earnings.

                                            8   Conclusion

The epochal rise in female labor force participation is one of the most profound labor market
transformations of the past century. And yet, the economics profession knows relatively little
about the labor market consequences of increased female labor force participation. An empirical
investigation of this issue requires a source of variation in female employment that is orthogonal
to demand for female (and also male) labor.
       In this paper, we developed the argument that the diﬀerential extent of mobilization for
WWII across U.S. states provides a useful source of variation to identify the eﬀects of women’s
labor force participation on a range of labor market outcomes. We documented that in 1950
women participated more in states where a larger fraction of working-age males served in the
military during the mid-1940s. This diﬀerential female labor supply behavior does not seem to
be accounted for by other cross-state diﬀerences or possible demand factors, and is not present
in the 1940 data. We interpret this as a shift in female labor supply induced by the mobilization
for the War.
       Using this source of variation, we estimate the eﬀect of greater female participation on
female and male wages, returns to education, and wage inequality among men. Our results
indicate more downward sloping demand curves for female labor, and a closer degree of sub-
stitutability between males and females than suggested by OLS estimates, presumably because
OLS regressions are biased towards-zero by simultaneous demand-induced variation in female
employment. We also find that, contrary to a common hypothesis in the literature, women are
not the closest substitutes to the lowest education males, but to high school graduate males (at
  34
     In addition, as noted by, among others, Blau and Kahn (1994, 1997), the gender wage gap closed substan-
tially during the 1980s as female employment was rising, suggesting that demand shifts favoring women may
be an important component of the rise in female labor supply.



                                                    39
least at midcentury). Nevertheless, because greater female participation increases inequality
in the top half of the male wage distribution, our estimates suggest sizable eﬀects of female
labor force participation on male wage inequality. This finding indicates that a more detailed
investigation of the relationship between the increase in female labor supply and the recent
widening inequality among males would be fruitful.

                                       9   References

Acemoglu, Daron (1998)„ “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical
Change and Wage Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), November, 1055-1090.
   Acemoglu, Daron. (2002), “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market.” Journal
of Economic Literature, 40, March, 7 — 72.
   Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist (2000) “How Large Are Human Capital External-
ities? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws” NBER Macro Annual 2000, pp. 9-71.
   Angrist, Joshua D. (1990), “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence
from Social Security Earnings Records.” American Economic Review, 80(3), June, 313 — 336.
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Guido W. Imbens. (1995), “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of
Average Causal Eﬀects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 90(430), June, 431 — 442.
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1994), “Why Do World War II Veterans Earn
More than non-Veterans?” Journal of Labor Economics, 12(1), January, 74 — 97.
   Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger (1998), “Computing Inequal-
ity: Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4),
November, 1169 — 1214.
   Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2001), “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” NBER Working Paper No. 8337, June.
   Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches (1994), “Changes in the Demand for Skilled La-
bor within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109(2), May, 367-397.
   Bernard, Andew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter Schott (2001), “Factor Price Equality
and The Economies of the United States.” NBER Working Paper # 8068.
   Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz (1992), “Regional Evolutions” Brookings


                                               40
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1 - 75.
   Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn (1994), “Rising Wage Inequality and the U.S. Gender
Gap.” American Economic Review, v84, n2, 23-28.
   Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn (1997), “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender
Wage Diﬀerential in 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics, v15, n1, 1-42.
   Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn (2000), “Gender Diﬀerences in Pay.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives, v14, n4, 75-99.
   Blau, Francine, Marianne Ferber and Anne Winkler (2002), The Economics of Women,
Men and Work. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
   Bound, John and Harry Holzer (2000, “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor
Market Outcomes during the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1), 20 - 54.
   Bound, John and George Johnson (1992), “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980’s:
An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review, v82, n3, 371-92.
   Bound, John and George Johnson (1995), “What Are the Causes of Rising Wage Inequality
in the United States?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, v1, n1,
9-17.
   Bound, John and Sarah E. Turner (1999), “Going to War and Going to College: Did World
War II and the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?” NBER
Working Paper #7452, December.
   Card, David and John DiNardo (2000, “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 90(2), 360 - 367.
   Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence H. Summers, (1982) “Labour Force Participation: Timing and
Persistence” Review of Economic Studies, 49(5), 825-844.
   DiNardo, John, Nicole Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (1996), “Labor Market Institutions and
the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica, v64, n5,
1001-44.
   Dresser, Laura (1994), “Changing Labor Market Opportunities of White and African-
American Women in the 1940s and the 1980s.” unpublished dissertation, University of Michi-
gan.
   Goldin, Claudia (1990), Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
Women. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                            41
   Goldin, Claudia (1991), “The Role of World War II in the Rise of Women’s Work.” American
Economic Review, 81(4), September, 741 — 756.
   Goldin, Claudia (1994), “Labor Markets in the Twentieth Century.” NBER Working Paper,
Series on Historical Factors in Long Term Growth #58, June.
   Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo (1992), “The Great Compression: The Wage Struc-
ture in the United States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1-34.
   Grant, James H. and Daniel S. Hamermesh (1981), “Labor Market Competition among
Youths, White Women and Others” Review of Economics and Statistics, 63, pp. 354-360.
   Hanson, Gordon and Matthew Slaughter, (2002 forthcoming) “Labor Market Adjustment
in Open Economies: Evidence From U.S. States.” Journal of International Economics.
   Jaeger, David A. (1997), “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Ques-
tions: Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 15(3),
July, 300-309.
   Juhn, Chinhui and Dae Il Kim (1999), “The Eﬀects of Rising Female Labor Supply on Male
Wages.” Journal of Labor Economics, v17, n1, 23-48.
   Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy and Brooks Pierce (1993), “Wage Inequality and the Rise in
Returns to Skill.” Journal of Political Economy, v101, 410-42.
   Katz, Lawrence and David Autor (1999), “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality.” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume
3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 1463-1555.
   Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy (1992), “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,107 (1), 35-78.
   Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José Víctor Ríos-Rull, Gionvanni L. Violante (2000), “Capital-
skill Complimentarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Econometrica, 68(5), 1029
— 1053.
   Levy, Frank and Richard Murnane (1992), “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality:
A Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations.” Journal of Economic Literature, v30,
n3, 1333-81.
   Machin, Stephen and John Van Reenen (1998), “Technology and Changes in Skill Structure:
Evidence from Seven OECD Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (4), November,
1215 — 1244.


                                              42
   Moretti, Enrico (2000), “Estimating the Social Return to Education: Evidence From Lon-
gitudinal and Cross-Sectional Data,” Center for Labor Economics, University of California,
Berkeley, Working Paper No. 22.
   O’Neill, June and Solomon Polachek (1993), “Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in
the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics, v11, n1, 205-28.
   Samuelson, Paul (1947) The Foundations of Economic Analysis, Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press.
   Samuelson, Paul (1948) “International Trade and Equalization of Factor Prices” Economics
Journal, 58, 163-84.
   Selective Service System (1956), “Special Monographs #1-18.” Washington D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Oﬃce.
   James P. Smith and Michael P. Ward (1984), “Women’s Wages and Work in the Twentieth
Century.” Rand, R-3119-NICHD, October.
   Stanley, Marcus (1999), “The Mid-Century GI Bills and Higher Education,” Working Paper,
Case Western Reserve University.
   Topel, Robert H. (1994), “Wage Inequality and Regional Labour Market Peformance in the
U.S.” in Toshiaki Tachibanaki, ed., Labour Market and Economic Performance: Europe, Japan
and the USA, New York : St. Martin’s Press, 93 — 127.
   Topel, Robert H. (1997), “Factor Proportions and Relative Wages: The Supply-Side Deter-
minants of Wage Inequality.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2), Spring, 55 — 74.
   Troy, Leo and Neil Sheflin (1985), U.S. Union Sourcebook: Membership, Finances, Struc-
ture, Directory, New Jersey: IRDIS, Industrial Relations and Information Services.
   U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), “Historical Statistics of the United States.” Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce.
   Welch, Finis (1969), “Linear Synthesis of Skill Definition.” Journal of Human Resources,
4(3), 311 — 327.
   Welch, Finis (2000), “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality among Men:
One Phenomenon or Two?” American Economic Review, v90, n2, 444-49.
   Williams, Constance (1949) “The Status of Women Workers,” in Colston E. Warne et al.,
eds. Labor in Postwar America (New York: Remsen Press, 1949).
   Wright, Gavin (1986) Old South, New South (New York: Basic Books).


                                             43
    Table 1: Characteristics of U.S. State Residents in Low, Medium and High Mobilization Rate
                                     States 1940, 1950, and 1960
                                1940                            1950                            1960
                       All    Low Med.        High     All    Low Med.        High     All    Low Med.        High
                                                 A. Non-Farm Females Ages 14 - 64
                      11.2    10.9    11.3    11.4    13.7    12.8    13.9    14.4    16.6    15.8    16.8    17.2
 Weeks Worked
                      (1.7)   (1.6)   (1.8)   (1.8)   (1.7)   (1.6)   (1.6)   (1.6)   (1.5)   (1.4)   (1.6)   (1.4)
  Log Weekly          2.61 2.33 2.67 2.76 3.60 3.45 3.64 3.66                 4.06 3.92 4.08 4.15
   Earnings          (0.27) (0.29) (0.20) (0.14) (0.16) (0.19) (0.10) (0.11) (0.16) (0.18) (0.12) (0.11)
                      35.8    34.9    36.0    36.5    37.3    36.4    37.7    37.8    38.0    37.4    38.3    38.3
    Mean Age
                      (1.1)   (1.2)   (0.9)   (0.7)   (1.0)   (1.0)   (1.0)   (0.5)   (0.8)   (0.6)   (0.9)   (0.6)
  Mean Year of         9.0     8.5     9.1     9.4     9.7     9.2     9.8    10.1    10.4    10.0    10.4    10.7
   Schooling          (0.7)   (0.9)   (0.4)   (0.6)   (0.7)   (0.8)   (0.3)   (0.5)   (0.5)   (0.6)   (0.3)   (0.4)
                                                  B. Non-Farm Males Ages 14 - 64
                      34.3    34.2    34.6    34.1    38.7    38.3    39.1    38.5    40.1    38.8    40.3    40.8
 Weeks Worked
                      (1.7)   (1.4)   (1.6)   (2.0)   (1.6)   (2.0)   (1.7)   (1.1)   (1.6)   (1.7)   (1.5)   (1.2)
  Log Weekly          3.23 3.07 3.27 3.32 4.07 3.96 4.09 4.13                 4.60 4.49 4.62 4.67
   Earnings          (0.18) (0.24) (0.12) (0.08) (0.13) (0.18) (0.08) (0.08) (0.14) (0.19) (0.09) (0.08)
                      35.8    34.7    36.2    36.4    37.4    36.4    37.7    37.8    37.7    36.8    38.1    38.1
    Mean Age
                      (1.2)   (1.4)   (1.0)   (0.7)   (1.1)   (1.2)   (0.9)   (0.6)   (1.1)   (1.1)   (1.0)   (0.8)
  Mean Year of         9.1     8.6     9.2     9.4     9.7     9.1     9.8    10.1    10.4     9.8    10.4    10.8
   Schooling          (0.6)   (0.8)   (0.3)   (0.5)   (0.7)   (0.8)   (0.4)   (0.5)   (0.6)   (0.6)   (0.3)   (0.4)
                                          C. State Aggregates: Males Ages 13-44 in 1940
                     Percent Mobilized 1940-47          Share Farmers 1940             Share Non-White 1940
                      All   Low Med. High              All  Low Med. High              All  Low Med. High
    Percent           47.8    44.0    47.6    51.5     13.4 23.9 11.4          6.9      8.6   16.8   6.9       3.6
   Mobilization       (3.2)   (1.4)   (1.0)   (1.9)   (10.8) (10.2) (8.8)     (6.4)   (10.1) (15.2) (5.8)     (2.1)

Cross-state standard deviations in parenthesis. Data are from Selective Service (1956) monographs and Census
PUMS one percent samples for 1940, 1950 (sample line subsample), and 1960. State mobilization rate is the
number of males serving in WWII divided by the number registered ages 18-44 during the draft years. The Census
PUMS sample includes those ages 14-64 (in earnings year), not living in institutional groups quarters, not employed
in farming, and residing in the continental United States excluding D.C. and Nevada. There are 16 states in the low
mobilization category (mobilization rate < 45%: GA, ND, NC, SD, SC, WI, LA, AL, AR, MS, VA, TN, KY, IN, MI, IA,),
15 states in the medium category (mobilization rate ≥45% and < 49%: MO, TX, NE, MN, MD, DE, VT, IL, FL, NM,
OH, WV, NY, WY, OK), and 16 states in the high category (mobilization rate ≥ 49%: KS, MT, CT, AZ, CO, NJ, ID,
CA, ME, WA, PA, UT, NH, OR, RI, MA.) Earnings samples include workers in paid employment excluding self-
employed who earned between $0.50 and $250 an hour in 1990 dollars during the previous year (deflated by CPI All
Urban Consumers series CUUR0000SA0) and worked at least 35 hours in the survey reference week and 40 weeks
in the previous year. Top coded values are imputed as 1.5 times the censored value. Average years of schooling is
calculated using highest grade completed. Share non-white and farm are the fraction males in each state ages 13-
44 in 1940 with these characteristics (including farm population).
                 Table 2. OLS Estimates of Impact of Female Labor Supply on Earnings
                                 1940 - 1990 at Various Time Intervals
                    Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings of Full-Time Workers

                                                     Sample: All Full Time Workers

                            A. Female Weekly Earnings                              B. Male Weekly Earnings

                   1940 - 90 1970 - 90 1940 - 60 1940 - 50              1940 - 90 1970 - 90 1940 - 60 1940 - 50
                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)

Weeks Worked         0.008        -0.004       0.016        -0.006        -0.008       -0.011      -0.001        -0.008
 per Woman          (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.006)       (0.006)
     R2               0.88         0.70         0.74         0.64          0.89         0.67        0.74          0.58

        n           338,322     417,019      152,428       78,094       545,483      694,219      413,793     213,966

                     C. Male College/High School Differential                      D. Male 90-10 Differential

                   1940 - 90 1970 - 90 1940 - 60 1940 - 50              1940 - 90 1970 - 90 1940 - 60 1940 - 50
                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)

Weeks Worked         -0.010       -0.010       -0.004       -0.003        0.016        -0.017      0.033         0.037
 per Woman          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.016)      (0.013)     (0.048)       (0.012)
     R2               0.83         0.65         0.71         0.55          0.64         0.92        0.63          0.98

        n           274,238     376,878      143,031       60,445          94           94           94           94
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Each coefficient in Panels A -
C is from a pooled microdata regression of the independent variable of interest from the two relevant decades
regressed on average female weeks worked by state. Additional controls include a quartic in potential experience, a
year main effect, a constant, and dummies for: non-white, age, marital status, state/country of birth, state of
residence, and years of completed education. All individual demographic variables, aside from state of
residence/birth, are also interacted with a year dummy. Birthplace dummies correspond to state of birth (if U.S. born)
or German, Italian, Japanese, Other European, Other Asian, African, Latin American, and Other. Models in Panel C
are analogous to those in Panels A and B, but are limited to those with exactly a college or high school degree and all
individual level covariates are additionally interacted with a college graduate dummy. In these specifications, female
weeks worked is both entered directly and interacted with a college graduate dummy, with the coefficient on the
interaction reported above. Panel D tabulates separate regressions of estimated state level log 90-10 earnings ratio of
male full-time weekly earners on weeks worked per female state resident, state dummies, a year dummy, and a
constant. All education values for years 1940-1970 are coded as highest grade completed. Following the
recommendations of Jaeger (1997), we define high school graduates in 1990 as those with twelve years of completed
schooling, a GED, or a high school diploma and we define high school graduates in 1970 as those with exactly 12
years of completed schooling and no additional uncompleted schooling. Data are drawn from Census PUMS one
percent samples (1950 sample line subsample) for years 1940-1970 and 1990. 1980 data is drawn from Census 5
percent sample using a randomly drawn 20 percent subsample. Samples include those ages 14 - 64 in earnings year,
not living in institutional group quarters, residing in mainland U.S. state excluding Nevada and the District of Columbia
with non-farm paid employment in survey reference week (excluding self-employed) and positive earnings in previous
calendar year who earned between $0.50 and $250 an hour in 1990 dollars during the previous year (deflated by CPI
All Urban Consumers series CUUR0000SA0) and worked at least 35 hours in the survey week and 40 weeks in the
previous year. Top coded earnings values are imputed as 1.5 times the censored value.
                                  Table 3. Determinant of State Level WWII Mobilization Rates
                                             Dependent Variable: Mobilization Rate
                 Mean
                 (sd)       (1)       (2)    (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)     (11)     (12)    (13)

                  0.15    -0.17 -0.16 -0.17 -0.17 -0.23 -0.26 -0.22 -0.17 -0.16 -0.17 -0.20 -0.23 -0.25
Share Farm
                 (0.11)   (0.05) (0.04) (0.03) (0.04) (0.06) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)

 Share Non-       0.10     0.00 -0.07              -0.03 -0.38 0.04 -0.03 -0.03 0.02 -0.03 -0.01                                  0.02
   white         (0.11)   (0.05) (0.04)            (0.06) (0.27) (0.05) (0.05) (0.06) (0.06) (0.06) (0.06)                       (0.05)

   Avg            8.89     0.02              0.01 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01                                         0.02
 Completed       (0.71)   (0.01)            (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)                       (0.01)

Share Ages        0.42     0.22                                      0.73                                                 -0.36 0.38
  13-24          (0.03)   (0.34)                                    (0.24)                                                (0.24) (0.33)

Share Ages        0.31     0.09                                      0.38                                                 -0.84 -0.03
  25-34          (0.01)   (0.49)                                    (0.48)                                                (0.53) (0.54)

   Share         0.007    -3.15                                              -1.88                                        -2.19 -1.16
  German        (0.006)   (0.90)                                             (0.55)                                       (0.74) (0.76)

               0.010       1.67                                                        0.00
Share Italian
              (0.012)     (0.52)                                                      (0.42)
or Japanese
   Share          0.50    -0.09                                                                -0.22
   Married       (0.03)   (0.18)                                                               (0.13)

    Share         0.47     0.07                                                                          0.00
   Fathers       (0.03)   (0.13)                                                                        (0.12)

               0.19        0.06                                                                                   0.13
Draft Boards/
              (0.05)      (0.07)                                                                                 (0.09)
Pop (1000/s)
                           0.20 0.51 0.40 0.42 0.46 -0.19 0.42 0.42 0.49 0.42 0.42 0.94 0.15
  Intercept
                          (0.34) (0.01) (0.05) (0.08) (0.12) (0.27) (0.07) (0.08) (0.08) (0.09) (0.07) (0.25) (0.34)

          2
      R                    0.78      0.57   0.58    0.58     0.39    0.68    0.67     0.58     0.61     0.58     0.60     0.62    0.70
  Southern                 Yes       Yes    Yes      Yes     No      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes     Yes     Yes
   States
Standard errors are in parenthesis for regression models. Standard deviations are in parentheses for column of means. Columns 1 - 13
contain regression estimates of state WWII mobilization rates (mean 0.475, standard deviation 0.032) on listed variables. Sample
includes observations for 47 U.S. states excluding Hawaii, Alaska, Nevada, and the District of Columbia. Regressions are weighted by
male population ages 13 - 44 in each state from the 1940 Census PUMS. State mobilization rate is the number of males who served in
WWII divided by the number registered males ages 18-44 during 1940 to 1945 from Selective Service (1956) monographs. The Percent
Farm, Non-white, Married, and Average Education variables are state averages for these variables for males ages 13 - 44 calculated
from the 1940 Census PUMS. Percent German, Italian, and Japanese are the fraction of male state residents ages 13-44 born in these
countries. Percent Fathers is the fraction of women ages 14 - 44 with any children in 1940 (a proxy for paternity). Draft Boards per
Population is the number of state local draft boards divided by the number of men registered in each state (in thousands) ages 18 - 44
during 1940 to 1945. Southern states excluded from column 5 include VA, AL, AR, FL, GA, LA, MS, NC, SC, TX,KY, MD, OK, TN, WV.
    Table 4. Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates on Female Labor Supply 1940 - 1950
                         Dependent Variable: Annual Weeks Worked

                                         A. All Females                           B. White Females
                                (1)     (2)     (3)   (4)      (5)        (1)     (2)    (3)   (4)        (5)

 Mobilization Rate x 1950     13.89 9.59 9.06 10.22 8.28                 11.17 10.42 9.85 10.64 8.51
                              (1.78) (2.38) (2.35) (2.61) (2.39)         (1.89) (2.02) (2.05) (2.65) (2.37)

    1940 Male Fraction                                  2.04 1.45                                 1.74 1.04
     Farmers x 1950                                   (1.13) (1.13)                             (1.08) (1.05)

 1940 Male Fraction Non-                               -2.04 0.70                                -1.96 -0.72
      white x 1950                                    (1.24) (1.86)                             (1.15) (1.37)

1940 Male Average Years                                        0.51                                       0.52
  of Education x 1950                                        (0.18)                                     (0.16)

             R2                 0.01    0.17 0.17 0.17         0.17       0.01    0.18 0.18 0.18          0.18
             n                              585,745                                   530,026
   Age & Marital Status         No     Yes     Yes     Yes    Yes         No      Yes    Yes     Yes     Yes
       State of Birth           No     No      Yes     Yes    Yes         No      No     Yes     Yes     Yes
Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and year of observation. Each
column is from a separate pooled 1940 and 1950 microdata regression of weeks worked by female state of
residence on WWII state mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, state of residence dummies, a non-
white dummy (where relevant), a year main effect, and a constant. Specifications in columns 2 - 5 also include
dummies for marital status and years of age. Specifications in columns 3 - 5 contain state/country of birth
dummies. All individual demographic variables, aside from state of residence/birth, are also interacted with a
1950 dummy for columns 2-5. As indicated, models also control for state fraction farmers, non-white, and
average years of completed schooling among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in women's state of residence (each
interacted with a 1950 dummy). Data are from Census PUMS one percent samples for 1940 and 1950 (sample
line sub-sample) and include females ages 14 - 64, not living in institutional group quarters, not in farm
employment, and residing in mainland U.S. states excluding Nevada and District of Columbia. State
mobilization rate is assigned by female state of residence.
          Table 5. Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates on Female Labor Supply 1940 - 1950
                        Controlling for the Fraction Males in Occupations in 1940
                       Dependent Variable: Female Annual Weeks Worked by State

                         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)    (6)       (7)           (8)        (9)     (10)
 1940 Occupation        Prof/                                           Oper-      Svcs/                   Labor- Defense
                                  Mngrs     Clerks     Sales    Craft                            Svcs
 Share Controlled       Tech                                            atives Private                      ers    Indust.
                                                             A. Main specification

Mobilization Rate x        8.44      8.24     10.90       9.90       8.77    10.61       7.88     10.87       9.06      8.86
       1950              (2.35)    (2.12)     (2.31)    (2.43)     (2.50)    (2.52)    (2.41)     (2.46)    (2.33)    (2.29)

 1940 Male Occ.            2.86      5.82      -5.57     -3.56       0.60     -2.45 -51.81       -12.66      -5.27      0.45
  Share x 1950           (7.23)    (6.92)     (3.86)    (6.42)     (3.89)    (2.09) (61.05)       (5.71)    (4.12)    (1.24)

         R2                0.17      0.17      0.17       0.17      0.17       0.17      0.17      0.17       0.17      0.17

                          B. Controlling for 1940 Share Farm and Non-White, and Average Years of Education

Mobilization Rate x        8.11      7.79       5.97      7.78       8.48      8.45      8.30       7.11      8.42    10.56
       1950              (2.44)    (2.59)     (2.47)    (2.32)     (2.63)    (2.30)    (2.35)     (2.46)    (2.62)    (2.48)

 1940 Male Occ.           -2.87     -7.25    -10.26     -15.74       1.14      3.88 -19.08       -13.84      -0.57      2.29
  Share x 1950           (8.68)    (8.49)     (5.20)     (6.80)    (8.02)    (2.60) (73.70)       (7.52)    (3.69)    (1.19)

         R2                0.17      0.17      0.17       0.17      0.17       0.17      0.17      0.17       0.17      0.17

          n                                                          585,745

Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and year of observation. Each column is from a
separate pooled 1940 and 1950 microdata regression of weeks worked by female state of residence on WWII state
mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, the fraction of males in the listed occupational (industry) category in 1940
interacted with a 1950 dummy, a year main effect, a constant, and dummies for: non-white (where relevant), age, marital
status, state of residence, and state/country of birth. All individual demographic variables, aside from state of
residence/birth, are also interacted with a 1950 dummy. Models in panel B also control for state fraction farmers, non-white,
and average years of completed schooling among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in women's state of residence (each
interacted with a 1950 dummy.) Data are from Census PUMS one percent samples for 1940 and 1950 (sample line sub-
sample) and include females ages 14 - 64 not living in institutional group quarters, not in farm employment, and residing in
mainland U.S. states excluding Nevada and District of Columbia. State mobilization rate is assigned by female state of
residence. Occupation and Industry codes correspond to major (1-digit) occupational and industry categories. The defense
industries correspond to IPUMS 1950 industry codes 326 - 388.
            Table 6: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates
                                       on Female Labor Supply 1940 - 1950
                                   Dependent Variable: Annual Weeks Worked

                                   A. Females                                                B. Males
                             All                White                              All                    White
                     (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)                (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)    (5)     (6)
Mobilization Rate x 16.65 13.73 11.38 15.78 13.19 11.42                    14.60 -17.47     1.48   10.93 -17.00    -0.04
       1950         (6.15) (6.11) (4.42) (5.38) (5.49) (3.97)            (13.17) (15.03) (12.82) (12.23) (13.98) (11.94)

1940 Male Fraction 3.11 2.61 2.20                2.65 2.19 1.87             3.27     -2.50      0.91     2.66      -2.45     0.65
 Farmers x 1950 (1.39) (1.21) (1.07)           (1.30) (1.11) (1.01)       (1.82)    (2.53)    (1.66)   (1.75)     (2.45)   (1.65)
 1940 Male Avg.        0.34 0.38 0.40            0.36 0.39 0.41             0.66      1.01      0.80     0.65       0.96     0.77
Education x 1950     (0.14) (0.17) (0.14)      (0.14) (0.15) (0.13)       (0.38)    (0.37)    (0.37)   (0.37)     (0.36)   (0.36)

                                    1st Stage Results                                        1st Stage Results
1940 Male Fraction 0.49                 0.21   0.56               0.27      0.69                 0.41     0.73               0.44
  13-24 x 1950    (0.14)              (0.15) (0.14)             (0.15)    (0.15)               (0.15)   (0.14)             (0.15)
1940 Male Fraction -0.04               -0.30     0.04            -0.22     -0.04               -0.23    -0.01               -0.20
  25-34 x 1950     (0.23)             (0.25)   (0.22)           (0.25)    (0.21)              (0.22)   (0.21)              (0.21)
1940 Male Fraction            -1.73 -1.36                -1.83 -1.33                 -1.96     -1.30               -2.03    -1.30
  German x 1950              (0.39) (0.46)              (0.39) (0.46)               (0.38)    (0.41)              (0.38)   (0.41)
P-value: 1st Stage   0.00    0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00
        n                   585,745                   530,026                      479,867                       441,343

Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and year of observation. Each column is
from a separate pooled 1940 and 1950 microdata 2SLS regression of weeks worked by female state of residence on
instrumented WWII state mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, a year main effect, a constant, and
dummies for: non-white (where relevant), age, marital status, state of residence, and state/country of birth. All
individual demographic variables, aside from state of residence/birth, are also interacted with a 1950 dummy.
Instruments used in the first stage of these models are the fraction of males ages 13-44 in 1940 who are of German
birth or who are in the listed age categories (each interacted with a 1950 dummy). Models also control for state
fraction farmers and average years of completed schooling among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in women's state of
residence (interacted with a 1950 dummy). Data are from Census PUMS one percent samples for 1940 and 1950
(sample line sub-sample) and include those ages 14 - 64, not living in institutional group quarters, not in farm
employment, and residing in mainland U.S. states excluding Nevada and District of Columbia. State mobilization rate
is assigned by state of residence.
                 Table 7. Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates on Female Labor Supply
                                         1940 - 1950 and 1950 - 1960
                                 Dependent Variable: Female Weeks Worked
                                                Coefficient on Mobilization Rate Variable x 1950
                                                                A. 1940 - 1950
                                             All                                                White
                          (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)

  Weeks Worked               9.06        8.28        12.21         6.54         9.85         8.51        11.28        6.34
                           (2.35)      (2.39)        (2.98)      (2.31)       (2.05)       (2.37)        (2.97)     (2.40)
         R2                  0.17        0.17          0.17        0.19         0.18         0.18          0.18       0.20

    Any Weeks              0.019        0.184         0.282      0.148         0.063        0.174         0.253      0.130
     Worked              (0.076)      (0.072)       (0.079)    (0.080)       (0.069)      (0.071)       (0.080)    (0.081)
        R2                  0.17         0.17          0.17       0.19          0.18         0.18          0.18       0.20

         n              585,745      585,745       585,745    410,794       530,026      530,026     530,026      393,820

                                                Coefficient on Mobilization Rate Variable x 1960
                                                                B. 1950 - 1960
                                             All                                                White
                          (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)

  Weeks Worked              -3.85        2.70          0.09        3.66        -7.25         2.15          0.39       3.56
                           (1.95)      (2.15)        (2.43)      (2.11)       (1.81)       (1.95)        (2.23)     (1.86)
         R2                  0.14        0.14          0.14        0.16         0.15         0.15          0.15       0.17

    Any Weeks              0.044       -0.009        -0.017      0.032        -0.057       -0.006         0.002      0.035
     Worked              (0.054)      (0.069)       (0.071)    (0.073)       (0.049)      (0.067)       (0.064)    (0.069)
        R2                  0.13         0.13          0.13       0.14          0.14         0.14          0.14       0.15

         n              683,976      683,976       683,976    480,545       615,590      615,590     615,590      449,275

 Fraction Farm /
                          No          Yes           Yes        Yes            No          Yes           Yes        Yes
Non-white/ Avg Ed

  Region x 1950           No           No           Yes         No            No          No            Yes        No

 Excluding South          No           No           No         Yes            No          No            No         Yes
Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and year of observation. Each column is from a
separate pooled 1940 - 1950 or 1950 - 1960 microdata regression of individual weeks worked on WWII state mobilization
rate interacted with a 1950 or 1960 dummy (in Panels A and B respectively), a year main effect, a constant, and dummies
for: non-white (where relevant), marital status, age, state of residence, and state/country of birth. All individual
demographic variables, aside from state of residence/birth, are also interacted with a 1950 or 1960 dummy. As indicated,
models also control for state fraction farmers, non-white, and average education among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in
women's state of residence (each interacted with a 1950 dummy.) State mobilization rate is assigned by female state of
residence. Data are from Census PUMS one percent samples for 1940, 1950 (sample line sub-sample) and 1960, and
include females ages 14 - 64, not living in institutional group quarters, not in farm employment, and residing in mainland
U.S. state excluding Nevada and District of Columbia. Weeks worked for 1960 is calculated using the midpoint of the
intervalled weeks worked. Any weeks worked is defined as weeks worked greater than zero. Region x 1950 dummies refer
to 4 main Census geographic regions. Southern states excluded from columns 4 and 8 are VA, AL, AR, FL, MS, NC, SC,
TX, KY, MD, OK, TN, and WV.
   Table 8. Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates on Male Labor Supply 1940 - 1950
                       Dependent Variable: Annual Weeks Worked

                                                              A. All Males
                                                All                           Non-Vets             Vets
                               (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)          (6)   (7)       (8)       (9)
Mobilization Rate x 1950       4.09 5.33 5.09 -5.50 -5.41                   7.79    -2.82 0.53 -10.63
                             (5.96) (5.63) (5.69) (7.56) (8.01)           (6.51)   (9.27) (5.40) (7.35)
   1940 Male Fraction                                   2.30   2.33                  2.50               2.40
    Farmers x 1950                                    (1.34) (1.47)                (1.88)             (1.35)
1940 Male Fraction Non-                                -9.15 -9.32                 -10.59              -7.52
     white x 1950                                     (1.24) (2.66)                 (3.51)            (1.40)
 1940 Male Avg Years of                                         -0.03               -0.21               0.29
    Schooling x 1950                                           (0.47)              (0.59)             (0.27)

            R2                 0.02    0.35     0.35  0.35      0.36         0.36   0.36     0.34   0.34
            n                                 479,867                         442,606         397,338
                                                             B. White Males
                                                All                           Non-Vets             Vets
                               (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)          (6)   (7)       (8)       (9)
Mobilization Rate x 1950       0.46 4.09 3.60 -6.56 -6.56                   7.37    -4.15 -4.03 -10.84
                             (5.98) (5.34) (5.43) (7.12) (7.59)           (6.46)   (9.02) (4.71) (6.64)
   1940 Male Fraction                                   1.97   1.97                  1.97               2.74
    Farmers x 1950                                    (1.27) (1.41)                (1.86)             (1.39)
1940 Male Fraction Non-                                -9.11 -9.11                 -10.56              -6.50
     white x 1950                                     (1.21) (1.46)                 (2.04)            (0.85)
 1940 Male Avg Years of                                          0.00               -0.19               0.36
    Schooling x 1950                                           (0.44)              (0.57)             (0.23)

            R2                 0.02    0.36     0.36  0.36      0.36         0.37   0.37     0.35   0.35
            n                                 441,343                         406,591         366,737
   Age & Marital Status        No     Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes           Yes   Yes       Yes      Yes
       State of Birth          No      No      Yes    Yes      Yes           No    Yes       No       Yes
Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and year of observation. Each
column is from a separate pooled 1940 - 1950 microdata regression of individual weeks worked on WWII
state mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, a year main effect, a constant, and dummies for non-
white (where relevant) and state of residence. Specifications in columns 2 - 5 add dummies for married and
age. Specifications in columns 3 - 5 add state/country of birth dummies. Columns 6 - 9 include all 1940
males and only WWII Veterans or Non-Veterans in 1950 as noted. All individual demographic variables,
aside from state of residence/birth, are also interacted with a 1950 dummy for columns 2-9. As indicated,
models also control for state fraction farmers, non-white, and average education among males ages 13 -
44 in 1940 in male's state of residence (each interacted with a 1950 dummy). State mobilization rate is
assigned by male state of residence.
                   Table 9. IV Specifications: Impact of Female Labor Supply on Female and Male Earnings 1940 - 1950
                                                 Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings
                                                                                A. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: All
                                                     Females                                 Males                Male Non-Vets              Male Veterans
                                          (1)       (2)    (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)     (7)    (8)       (9)    (10)                (11)   (12)
 IV - Weeks Worked per Woman             -0.107 -0.103 -0.103 -0.068            -0.062 -0.060 -0.061 -0.023             -0.046 -0.025        -0.087 -0.014
                                        (0.024) (0.024) (0.023) (0.041)        (0.012) (0.013) (0.014) (0.019)         (0.011) (0.018)      (0.020) (0.022)
       1st Stage Coefficient             13.21     13.03    13.02      9.35      13.36    13.11    13.10       9.76      13.08      9.72      13.45    10.16
     (Mobilization Rate x 1950)          (1.61)    (2.39)   (2.39)   (2.70)      (1.80)   (2.37)   (2.37)    (2.67)      (2.36)   (2.65)      (2.52)   (2.81)
OLS -Weeks Worked per Woman              -0.006 -0.006 -0.007 0.007             -0.009 -0.008 -0.008 0.004              -0.004 0.004         -0.015 0.005
                                        (0.011) (0.010) (0.010) (0.006)        (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.003)         (0.005) (0.003)      (0.008) (0.006)
                  n                                 78,094                                 213,966                         192,256              174,494
                                                                              B. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: Whites
                                                     Females                                 Males               Male Non-Vets               Male Veterans
                                          (1)       (2)    (3)        (4)         (5)     (6)     (7)    (8)       (9)   (10)                 (11)   (12)
 IV - Weeks Worked per Woman             -0.124 -0.108 -0.108 -0.072            -0.080 -0.070 -0.071 -0.021             -0.052 -0.024        -0.102 -0.014
                                        (0.029) (0.025) (0.025) (0.038)        (0.018) (0.015) (0.015) (0.017)         (0.012) (0.016)      (0.024) (0.020)
       1st Stage Coefficient             10.22     11.70    11.68    11.20       10.23    11.66    11.65     11.44       11.70    11.42       11.82    11.74
     (Mobilization Rate x 1950)          (1.81)    (2.15)   (2.14)   (2.72)      (1.90)   (2.17)   (2.16)    (2.73)      (2.17)   (2.72)      (2.26)   (2.82)
OLS -Weeks Worked per Woman              -0.004 -0.012 -0.012 -0.001            -0.006 -0.009 -0.009 0.000              -0.005 0.000         -0.016 0.001
                                        (0.011) (0.010) (0.010) (0.007)        (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.003)         (0.005) (0.003)      (0.009) (0.005)
                n                                   69,335                                 198,385                         178,163              162,484
       Female Age Structure               No      Yes     Yes     Yes            No      Yes     Yes     Yes             Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes
            State of Birth                No        No      Yes       Yes         No       No       Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes
 Fraction Farm/Non-white/Avg Ed           No        No       No       Yes         No       No       No       Yes         No       Yes          No       Yes
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Each column is from a separate pooled 1940 - 1950 microdata
regression of log weekly earnings on weeks worked per female by state of residence. All regressions control for state of residence, a year main effect,
education, a quartic in potential experience, a constant, and dummies for non-white (where relevant), marital status, and WWII Veteran (for males). All
individual demographic variables, aside from state of residence/birth, are interacted with a 1950 dummy. All columns except 1 and 5 control for female age
structure (the first two age categories in five year increments, the remaining four in ten year increments over age range 14 - 64). As indicated, models
control for state/country of birth and fraction farmers, non-whites, and average education of males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 by state of residence (each
interacted with a 1950 dummy). Columns 9 - 12 contain all males in 1940 and only WWII Veterans or WWII non-Veterans in 1950 as noted. Weeks worked
per woman is calculated for all non-farm female state residents ages 14 - 64. In OLS regressions, this variable is treated as exogenous. In IV regressions, it
is instrumented by state WWII mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy variable. All individual and aggregate controls are included in first stage
models. The first stage coefficient and standard error on the mobilization rate variable are given below the regression. Data are from Census PUMS one
percent samples (1950 limited to sample line observations) and include those ages 14 - 64, in paid non-farm employment in survey reference week
(excluding self-employed), with positive earnings in previous calendar year, who earned between $0.50 and $250 an hour in 1990 dollars (deflated by CPI All
Urban Consumers series CUUR0000SA0), who worked at least 35 hours in the survey week and 40 weeks in the previous year, did not live in institutional
group quarters, and resided in mainland U.S. states excluding Nevada and the District of Columbia.
        Table 10. Impact of Female Labor Supply on Female/Male Earnings Differential 1940 - 1950
                               Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings
                                                       A. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: All
                                        Labor Supply Measured                   Labor Supply Measured
                                               in Weeks                           in Efficiency Units
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)   (8)
      ln(LSFemale/LSMale)           -0.390     -0.386     -0.391     -0.226       -0.471     -0.440     -0.446      -0.197
                                   (0.075)    (0.074)    (0.076)    (0.190)      (0.098)    (0.092)    (0.095)     (0.165)
      ln(LSFemale/LSMale)           -0.328     -0.278     -0.272     -0.354       -0.432     -0.332     -0.324      -0.309
          x Female                 (0.115)    (0.105)    (0.099)    (0.182)      (0.157)    (0.126)    (0.119)     (0.161)
   1st Stage Coefficient              2.05       2.03       2.03       1.09          1.67       1.77       1.77       1.24
 (Mobilization Rate x 1950)         (0.19)     (0.25)     (0.25)     (0.25)        (0.19)     (0.24)     (0.24)     (0.29)
Implied Female Demand σF             -1.39      -1.51      -1.51      -1.73         -1.11      -1.30      -1.30      -1.98
 Implied M/F Substition σM/F         -3.05      -3.60      -3.68      -2.83         -2.32      -3.02      -3.08      -3.24

   p-value of H0: (σF)-1 = 0          0.00       0.00       0.00       0.08          0.00       0.00       0.00       0.08
              n                                                          292,060
                                                     B. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: White
                                        Labor Supply Measured                  Labor Supply Measured
                                               in Weeks                            in Efficiency Units
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)   (8)
      ln(LSFemale/LSMale)           -0.513     -0.463     -0.469     -0.254       -0.527     -0.473     -0.480      -0.237
                                   (0.107)    (0.089)    (0.092)    (0.200)      (0.113)    (0.096)    (0.099)     (0.185)
      ln(LSFemale/LSMale)          -0.315     -0.264     -0.254      -0.421        -0.331    -0.277     -0.266     -0.380
          x Female                 (0.126)    (0.117)    (0.116)    (0.191)      (0.139)    (0.124)    (0.122)     (0.170)
   1st Stage Coefficient              1.56       1.75       1.75       1.14          1.51       1.70       1.70       1.22
 (Mobilization Rate x 1950)         (0.19)     (0.22)     (0.22)     (0.30)        (0.20)     (0.24)     (0.24)     (0.34)
Implied Female Demand σF             -1.21      -1.38      -1.38      -1.48         -1.17      -1.33      -1.34      -1.62

 Implied M/F Substition σM/F         -3.18      -3.78      -3.94      -2.37         -3.02      -3.61      -3.76      -2.63

   p-value of H0: (σF)-1 = 0          0.00       0.00       0.00       0.06          0.00       0.00       0.00       0.06
              n                                                          267,720
   Female Age Structure             No        Yes        Yes         Yes           No        Yes        Yes        Yes
        State of Birth              No         No        Yes         Yes           No         No        Yes        Yes
  Farm/Non-white/Avg Ed             No         No         No         Yes           No         No         No        Yes
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Each column is from a separate
pooled 1940 - 1950 microdata regression of log weekly male and female earnings on the log ratio of female to male non-
farm labor supply measured in weeks (columns 1-4) or efficiency units (columns 5 - 8). All models include controls for
veteran status, nonwhite, marital status, education, a quartic in potential experience, (each interacted with a female
dummy and a 1950 dummy), state of residence, and a year main effect. As indicated, models control for state female age
structure and state/country of birth, and state fraction farmers, non-whites, and average education among males ages 13 -
44 in 1940 (each interacted with a 1950 dummy.) All variables are interacted with a female dummy. Log of (female/male)
labor supply measure is calculated for all non-farm state residents ages 14 - 64. This measure and its interaction with a
female dummy are instrumented by state WWII mobilization rate and its interaction with a female dummy. The first stage
coefficient on the mobilization rate main effect is tabulated below each regression. All individual and aggregate controls
are included in first stage models. See text for details of the efficiency unit measure used in columns 5 - 8.
      Table 11. Impact of Female Labor Supply on Male Educational Earnings Differentials 1940 - 1950
                                Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings

                                      A. Male College / High School Graduate Log Weekly Earnings Differential
                                               All Males                                White Males
                                  (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)    (5)         (1)   (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)

     ln(LSFemale/LSMale)         -0.382 -0.424 -0.267 -0.401 -0.265                  -0.471 -0.466 -0.269 -0.428 -0.270
                                (0.096) (0.101) (0.225) (0.115) (0.229)             (0.126) (0.118) (0.228) (0.141) (0.228)
 ln(LSFemale/Male) x College      0.139 0.154 0.162 0.189 0.175                       0.206 0.261 0.233 0.283 0.231
                                (0.097) (0.114) (0.222) (0.119) (0.215)             (0.126) (0.117) (0.210) (0.131) (0.210)
      ln(LSCollege-Male/                                       -0.098 -0.069                                       -0.042 -0.004
    LSHS-Male) x College                                      (0.094) (0.086)                                     (0.087) (0.080)

  1st Stage Coefficient            2.06      2.04      1.12      1.94     1.11         1.62      1.79      1.18      1.64     1.19
(Mobilization Rate x 1950)       (0.21)    (0.27)    (0.25)    (0.28)   (0.25)       (0.20)    (0.23)    (0.30)    (0.24)   (0.30)
     Implied relative              0.64     0.64      0.39      0.53     0.34          0.56      0.44     0.14      0.34     0.15
  cross-elasticity σHS/CLG
            n                                       60,445                                              58,885

                                          B. High School Graduate/8th Grade Log Weekly Earnings Differential
                                                 All Males                                White Males
                                  (1)       (2)      (3)    (4)     (5)       (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)                   (5)

     ln(LSFemale/LSMale)         -0.170 -0.205 -0.074 -0.162 -0.098                  -0.192 -0.220 -0.115 -0.173 -0.129
                                (0.088) (0.088) (0.194) (0.139) (0.196)             (0.109) (0.107) (0.205) (0.149) (0.203)
  ln(LSFemale/Male) x High       -0.212 -0.219 -0.194 -0.181 -0.161                  -0.279 -0.246 -0.154 -0.153 -0.140
         School                 (0.070) (0.086) (0.184) (0.119) (0.179)             (0.097) (0.095) (0.178) (0.117) (0.173)
   ln(LSHigh-School-Male/                                      -0.036 -0.104                                       -0.070 -0.145
 LS8th-Male) x High School                                    (0.064) (0.065)                                     (0.057) (0.072)

  1st Stage Coefficient            1.99      2.01      1.14      1.54     1.13         1.64      1.80      1.20      1.56     1.20
(Mobilization Rate x 1950)       (0.21)    (0.27)    (0.26)    (0.26)   (0.25)       (0.20)    (0.24)    (0.30)    (0.26)   (0.30)
  Implied relative cross-          2.24     2.07      3.63      2.12     2.63          2.45      2.12     2.34      1.89     2.09
    elasticity σ8th-Grade/Hs
              n                                     96,797                                              93,244

 p-value of H0: ∆W HS = 0        0.00      0.00      0.24      0.02     0.00         0.00      0.00      0.24      0.04     0.24

        Female Age                No       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes           No       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
   Birth State, Married,          No       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes           No       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
 Farm/Non-white/ Avg Ed           No        No       Yes       No       Yes           No        No       Yes       No       Yes
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Samples and specifications are
analogous to Table 10 except: sample in Panel A is restricted to males with exactly a college or high school degree; sample
in Panel B is restricted to males with exactly a high school degree or 8th grade completion; in addition to time interactions on
all individual level controls, all variables are interacted with college graduate dummy in Panel A and high school graduate
dummy in Panel B. Log (female/male) labor supply measured in weeks and its interaction with college or high school dummy
and a 1950 dummy are instrumented by state mobilization rate and its interaction with college or high school dummy. All
individual and aggregate controls are included in first stage of IV models.
         Table 12. IV Estimates: Impact of Female Labor Supply on Overall and Residual Earnings Inequality 1940 - 1950
                         Dependent Variable: Change in State Level Estimated Log Earnings Differentials

                                                                  Coefficient on ln(LSFemale/LSMale)

                        A. Overall Inequality: Males                B. Residual Inequality: Males          C. Overall Inequality: Males & Females
                        All                  Whites                      All              Whites                     All                Whites
                  Mean ∆        (1)       Mean ∆    (1)            (1)         (2)      (1)     (2)         Mean ∆          (1)      Mean ∆   (1)

    ∆ 90-10          -0.336 0.548            -0.316 0.359          0.311 0.502          0.456 0.470            -0.399        1.398    -0.335 0.456
                    (0.011) (0.156)         (0.008) (0.171)      (0.103) (0.278)      (0.123) (0.282)         (0.020)      (0.225)   (0.011) (0.234)

    ∆ 90-50          -0.170 0.596            -0.156 0.455          0.230 0.259          0.346 0.205            -0.188        0.489    -0.182 0.251
                    (0.010) (0.122)         (0.007) (0.147)      (0.081) (0.220)      (0.098) (0.220)         (0.010)      (0.112)   (0.008) (0.155)

    ∆ 50-10          -0.166 -0.048           -0.160 -0.096         0.081 0.243          0.109 0.265            -0.210        0.910    -0.152 0.205
                    (0.009) (0.129)         (0.008) (0.178)      (0.086) (0.211)      (0.096) (0.204)         (0.015)      (0.202)   (0.013) (0.274)

    ∆ 80-20          -0.222 0.447            -0.216 0.550          0.250 0.295          0.378 0.210            -0.262        0.648    -0.227 0.180
                    (0.010) (0.123)         (0.008) (0.147)      (0.071) (0.194)      (0.094) (0.219)         (0.012)      (0.141)   (0.007) (0.130)

    ∆ 80-50          -0.117 0.425            -0.106 0.340          0.171 0.125          0.256 0.054            -0.137        0.195    -0.134 0.114
                    (0.009) (0.104)         (0.007) (0.138)      (0.057) (0.158)      (0.075) (0.174)         (0.008)      (0.104)   (0.007) (0.148)

    ∆ 50-20          -0.105 0.022            -0.110 0.210          0.079 0.170          0.122 0.156            -0.125        0.454    -0.093 0.066
                    (0.008) (0.120)         (0.006) (0.115)      (0.055) (0.132)      (0.070) (0.147)         (0.009)      (0.119)   (0.008) (0.167)
  Fraction
 Farm/ Non-         n/a         No          n/a         No         No          Yes      No        Yes         n/a           No         n/a       No
white/ Avg Ed
n = 94 in each model: 47 states x two years. Standard errors in parentheses. Each coefficient is from a separate 2SLS regression of the state level
1940 - 1950 change in the log ratio of overall or residual male weekly full time earnings at the specified percentiles on contemporaneous state level
change in log(female/male) labor supply measured in weeks instrumented by the state mobilization rate (interacted with a 1950 dummy). All models
include state of residence dummies, a 1950 dummy, and a constant. Overall inequality in column 1 is calculated using samples in Table 9 from a
regression of male log weekly full-time earnings on year and state of residence dummies. Regression used to calculate residuals for column 2
additionally controls fo: a quartic in potential experience, education, non-white, state of residence, state/country of birth, veteran status, marital
status, and state female age structure by year. All individual level controls in residualizing regressions, except for state of birth/residence, are
interacted with a 1950 dummy. The regression for column 2 of Panel B adds fraction farmers, non-white, and average years of completed schooling
for male state residents 13 - 44 in 1940 (each interacted with a 1950 dummy.) Both the endogenous and instrumental variables in the above
regressions are orthogonalized with respect to the microdata variables.
Appendix Table 1. Alternative Estimates of Impact of World War II Mobilization
      Rates on Decadal Changes in State Labor Supply, 1940 - 1950.

      Coefficient on Mobilization Rate x 1950 Variable Tabulated in Each Panel

A. Dependent Variable: Weeks Worked Per Woman: Mobilization Rate Assigned by
                                State of Birth
                                           All                   White
                                     (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)

  Weeks worked in previous year                8.72      11.24                9.25     10.82
                                             (2.29)      (3.02)             (1.83)     (3.16)

  Positive weeks in previous year             0.002     0.274               0.033     0.251
                                            (0.065) (0.078)               (0.053) (0.082)
                   n                            524,634                       470,326

   B. Dependent Variable: Total (Log) Female Labor Supply by State, 1940 - 1950
                                             All                      White
                                        (1)      (2)              (1)       (2)

          Aggregate Weeks                      1.77        1.14               0.96       1.64
                                             (0.64)      (0.88)             (0.71)     (0.94)

     Aggregate Efficiency Units                1.35        1.33               1.04       1.70
                                             (0.62)      (0.88)             (0.67)     (0.91)
                   n                                              94

    C. Dependent Variable: Total (Log) Male Labor Supply by State, 1940 - 1950
                                             All                      White
                                        (1)      (2)              (1)       (2)

          Aggregate Weeks                     -0.54        0.11              -0.73       0.42
                                             (0.59)      (0.72)             (0.62)     (0.72)

     Aggregate Efficiency Units               -0.49        0.21              -0.57       0.41
                                             (0.57)      (0.71)             (0.59)     (0.70)
                   n                                              94

 Fraction Farmer/Non-white/Avg Ed
                                             No         Yes                No         Yes

Notes for Panel A. Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of
residence and year of observation. Each column is from a separate pooled 1940 - 1950
microdata regression of weeks worked by female state residents on WWII state
mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, a year main effect, a constant, and
dummies for: non-white (where relevant), age, marital status, state of residence, and
state/country of birth. All individual demographic variables, aside from state of
residence/birth, are also interacted with a 1950 dummy. State mobilization rate is assigned
by female state of birth. As indicated, models also control for state fraction farmers, non-
white, and average education among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in state of birth (each
interacted with a 1950 dummy.)

Notes for Panels B and C. Each coefficient is from a separate regression of log total state
labor supply in weeks or efficiency units by gender and year on the state mobilization rate
(interacted with a 1950 dummy), state dummies, a year main effect, and a constant.
Regressions are weighted by state-gender population ages 18-64 in each year. As
indicated, models also control for state fraction farmers, non-white, and average education
among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in state of residence (each interacted with a 1950
dummy.)
 Appendix Table 2. Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates on Female
           Labor Supply by Age and Education: 1940 - 1950.
             Dependent Variable: Annual Weeks Worked

                               Coefficient on Mobilization Rate Variable x 1950
                                   All Females                 White Females
                                         A. Weeks Worked by Age Group
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)      (4)
       All 14 - 64               9.06        8.28              9.85        8.73
                                (2.35)      (2.39)            (2.05)      (2.39)
     Ages 14 - 17                1.38        1.20              1.41        0.88
                                (0.35)      (0.42)            (0.32)      (0.39)
     Ages 18 - 24                2.35        4.85              2.24        5.06
                                (0.94)      (1.19)            (0.99)      (1.32)
     Ages 25 - 34                1.26        2.16              0.57        2.00
                                (0.95)      (1.55)            (0.88)      (1.58)
     Ages 35 - 44                1.89        2.32              2.41        2.31
                                (0.72)      (0.93)            (0.73)      (0.93)
     Ages 45 - 54                1.54        -2.10             2.23        -1.44
                                (1.10)      (1.56)            (1.05)      (1.55)
     Ages 55 - 64                0.65        -0.15             1.00        -0.08
                                (0.99)      (1.08)            (0.96)      (1.05)
                                    B. Weeks Worked by Education Group
 8th Grade and Below             -2.27       -0.79             -1.05       -0.82
                                (1.97)      (1.78)            (1.47)      (1.76)
   9th Grade to 11th             -2.44       1.93              -2.75       1.75
        Grade                   (1.53)      (1.56)            (1.51)      (1.49)
12th Grade and Above            13.78      7.13               13.65      7.81
                                (1.77)    (1.79)              (1.85)    (2.02)
           n                        585,745                       530,026
 Fraction Farm, Non-
                                 No          Yes               No          Yes
    white, Avg Ed
Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and
year of observation. Each entry is from a separate pooled microdata
regression for the relevant demographic subgroup of female weeks worked by
state of residence on state mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, a
year main effect, a constant, and dummies for non-white (where relevant),
age, marital status, state of residence, and state/country of birth. All individual
demographic variables, aside from state of residence/birth, are also interacted
with a 1950 dummy. As indicated, models also control for state fraction
farmers, non-white, and average education among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940
in women's state of residence (each interacted with a 1950 dummy).
Education categories reflect the highest grade completed.
    Appendix Table 3. Impact of World War II Mobilization Rates on
            Female Labor Supply by Cohort: 1940 - 1950.
             Dependent Variable: Annual Weeks Worked

                             Coefficient on Mobilization Rate Variable x 1950
       Cohorts                       All                         White
Ages 14 - 24 (1940)            6.11     19.02                  4.16     18.14
Ages 24 - 34 (1950)           (5.24)    (5.48)                (5.25)    (5.71)
         n                        155,272                         138,870
Ages 25 - 34 (1940)            -3.52     16.84                 -2.33     16.21
Ages 35 - 44 (1950)           (4.04)     (6.14)               (3.55)     (6.53)
         n                         135,893                         122,083
Ages 35 - 44 (1940)           21.16     15.19                 23.42     17.76
Ages 45 - 54 (1950)           (5.39)    (7.38)                (5.40)    (7.23)
         n                        115,025                         103,918
Ages 45 - 54 (1940)           11.56      -8.19                13.91      -6.45
Ages 55 - 64 (1950)           (5.82)    (5.22)                (5.46)    (4.75)
         n                        100,125                          92,550
Fraction Farm, Non-
                                No         Yes                  No         Yes
   white, Avg Ed
Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering on state of residence and
year of observation. Each entry is from a separate pooled 1940 - 1950 microdata
regression of individual weeks worked by females from the listed cohort on state
mobilization rate interacted with a 1950 dummy, a year main effect, a constant,
and dummies for: non-white (where relevant), age, marital status, state of
residence, and state/country of birth. All individual demographic variables, aside
from state of residence/birth, are also interacted with a 1950 dummy. As indicated,
models also control for state fraction farmers, non-white, and average education
among males ages 13 - 44 in 1940 in female's state of residence (each interacted
with a 1950 dummy). Mobilization rate is assigned by female state of residence.
          Appendix Table 4. IV Specifications: Impact of Female Labor Supply on Female and Male Earnings 1940 - 1950:
                                   Dropping the South and Adding 4 Region x 1950 Dummies
                                            Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings
                                                                             A. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: All
                                                             Females                                                    Males
                                         (1)       (2)      (3)    (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)    (10)      (11)     (12)
 IV - Weeks Worked per Woman            -0.103 -0.068 -0.041 0.018 -0.158 -0.145                 -0.061 -0.023 -0.030 0.012 -0.064 -0.032
                                       (0.023) (0.041) (0.021) (0.022) (0.035) (0.075)          (0.014) (0.019) (0.015) (0.013) (0.020) (0.023)
       1st Stage Coefficient            13.02       9.35   14.70    14.05     11.22      7.21    13.10       9.76   15.34    14.07    11.19      7.65
     (Mobilization Rate x 1950)         (2.39)    (2.70)   (4.15)   (3.76)    (1.96)   (3.00)    (2.37)    (2.67)   (4.01)   (3.97)   (1.93)   (2.80)
OLS -Weeks Worked per Woman             -0.007 0.007 0.000 0.010 -0.035 0.005                    -0.008 0.004 -0.005 0.004 -0.014 0.006
                                       (0.010) (0.006) (0.007) (0.006) (0.015) (0.008)          (0.006) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.008) (0.007)
                  n                                  78,094                     58,727                       213,966                    161,683
                                                                          B. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: Whites
                                                             Females                                                    Males
                                         (1)       (2)      (3)    (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)    (10)      (11)     (12)
 IV - Weeks Worked per Woman            -0.108 -0.072 -0.018 0.001 -0.155 -0.135                 -0.071 -0.021 -0.024 0.014 -0.063 -0.031
                                       (0.025) (0.038) (0.028) (0.022) (0.033) (0.071)          (0.015) (0.017) (0.017) (0.013) (0.018) (0.022)
       1st Stage Coefficient            11.68     11.20    11.84    15.05     11.64      8.04    11.65     11.44    11.76    14.46    11.41      8.28
     (Mobilization Rate x 1950)         (2.14)    (2.72)   (3.80)   (4.03)    (1.99)   (3.08)    (2.16)    (2.73)   (3.81)   (4.08)   (1.99)   (2.86)
OLS -Weeks Worked per Woman             -0.012 -0.001 0.008 0.008 -0.033 0.002                   -0.009 0.000 0.001 0.003 -0.016 0.002
                                       (0.010) (0.007) (0.008) (0.006) (0.016) (0.007)          (0.006) (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.008) (0.006)
                  n                                  69,335                     55,847                       198,385                    155,743
 Fraction Farm/Non-white/Avg Ed          No       Yes       No      Yes       No       Yes        No       Yes       No      Yes       No       Yes
     Region x 1950 Dummies               No        No      Yes      Yes       No       No         No       No       Yes      Yes       No       No
          Excluding South                No        No       No       No       Yes      Yes        No       No        No       No      Yes       Yes
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Samples and specifications are identical to Table 9 columns 3
and 4 (females) and columns 7 and 8 (males) except as noted for addition of 4 Census main geographic dummies (interacted with a 1950 dummy) and
dropping of the Southern region in columns 5, 6, 11 and 12 (VA, AL, AR, FL, MS, NC, SC, TX, KY, MD, OK, TN, and WV).
 Appendix Table 5. Lagged Dependent Variable IV Specifications: Impact of Female Labor Supply on
                             Female and Male Earnings 1940 - 1950
                           Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings
                                                            A. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: All
                                                        Females                           Males
                                              (1)      (2)    (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)              (8)
    IV - Weeks Worked per Woman              -0.095 -0.078 -0.078 -0.131           -0.068 -0.051 -0.052 -0.029
                                            (0.038) (0.030) (0.030) (0.049)       (0.022) (0.017) (0.018) (0.018)

     Lagged Dependent Variable               -0.033 -0.085 -0.084 -0.402            0.025 -0.048 -0.046 -0.062
 (1940 State Mean Log Wage x 1950)          (0.084) (0.063) (0.062) (0.153)       (0.073) (0.059) (0.060) (0.071)

         1st Stage Coefficient                 9.40   10.24     10.23      8.87       7.82     9.38     9.37   11.85
       (Mobilization Rate x 1950)            (2.07)   (2.59)    (2.59)   (2.74)     (2.08)   (2.29)   (2.29)   (3.19)
                    n                                    78,094                                213,966
                                                           B. Full-Time Weekly Earnings: Whites
                                                        Females                             Males
                                              (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)            (8)
    IV - Weeks Worked per Woman              -0.070 -0.057 -0.057 -0.097           -0.060 -0.047 -0.049 -0.029
                                            (0.028) (0.023) (0.024) (0.034)       (0.018) (0.015) (0.016) (0.017)
     Lagged Dependent Variable               -0.284 -0.275 -0.277 -0.360           -0.102 -0.148 -0.143 -0.093
 (1940 State Mean Log Wage x 1950)          (0.074) (0.052) (0.053) (0.113)       (0.063) (0.048) (0.051) (0.077)
         1st Stage Coefficient               10.22    11.73 11.71        11.10        8.90   10.78 10.77       12.88
       (Mobilization Rate x 1950)            (1.64)   (2.49) (2.49)      (2.60)     (1.84)   (2.21) (2.21)     (3.22)
                    n                                    69,335                                198,385
         Female Age Structure                 No      Yes     Yes        Yes         No      Yes     Yes        Yes
              State of Birth                  No       No       Yes      Yes         No       No      Yes       Yes
   Fraction Farm/Non-white/Avg Ed             No       No       No       Yes         No       No       No       Yes
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Each column is from a separate
pooled 1940 - 1950 microdata regression of log weekly earnings on weeks worked per female by state of residence
instrumented by state mobilization rate (interacted with 1950 dummy). The lagged dependent variable is equal to the
1940 state mean log weekly full-time wage for the relevant gender/race group interacted with a 1950 dummy.
Specifications and control variables are otherwise identical to Table 9.
 Appendix Table 6. IV Estimated Impact of Female Labor Supply on Female/Male Earnings
                                 Differential 1940 - 1960
                   Dependent Variable: Full-Time Log Weekly Earnings
                                                  A. All                               B. Whites
                                   (1)      (2)            (3)     (4)        (1)     (2)     (3)       (4)
      ln(LSFemale/LSMale)         -0.385 -0.579 -0.583      20.1             -0.707 -0.837 -0.845 -1.410
                                 (0.089) (0.168) (0.171) (311.8)            (0.194) (0.259) (0.267) (1.265)
      ln(LSFemale/LSMale)         -0.039 -0.028 -0.014      13.0              0.094 0.138 0.156 -1.733
          x Female               (0.105) (0.122) (0.114) (291.5)            (0.171) (0.200) (0.191) (4.184)
   1st Stage Coefficient            2.10     1.77        1.77       -0.03      1.17     1.06     1.06     0.24
 (Mobilization Rate x 1960)       (0.39)   (0.47)      (0.47)      (0.42)    (0.32)   (0.35)   (0.35)   (0.40)
Implied Female Demand σF           -2.36    -1.65          -1.68    0.03     -1.63    -1.43    -1.45    -0.32
 Implied M/F Substition σM/F      -25.48 -36.36 -69.99               n/a        n/a     n/a       n/a   -0.58

   p-value of H0: (σF)-1 = 0        0.02     0.03          0.03     0.96      0.07     0.10     0.10     0.55

               n                              566,221                                   517,458
   Female Age Structure            No       Yes        Yes         Yes       No       Yes      Yes      Yes
        State of Birth             No       No         Yes         Yes       No       No       Yes      Yes
  Farm/Non-white/Avg Ed            No       No             No      Yes       No       No       No       Yes
Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering on state and year of observation. Each column is
from a separate pooled 1940 and 1960 microdata regression of log weekly male and female earnings on
the log ratio of female to male non-farm labor supply in weeks instrumented by the state mobilization rate
interacted with a 1960 dummy. Sample definition and specifications are identical to Table 10 columns 1 - 4
except that 1960 Census data is used in place of 1950 Census data.
          100


          90 84.3    85.7    85.2     84.6
                                                                 86.4
                                               82.1     82.5              83.3
                                                                                   79.9
                                                                                            77.4   76.4
          80


          70

                                                                                                   57.5
          60
Percent




                                                                                            51.5
          50
                                                                                   43.3
                                                                          37.7
          40
                                                                 33.9
                                                        27.9
          30
                                      22.7     23.6
                18.2 20.0    21.4
          20


          10
           1890      1900    1910     1920     1930     1940     1950     1960     1970     1980        1990

                                          Males                                     Females

           Figure 1. Labor Force Participation by Gender of U.S. Residents Ages 16 - 65, 1890 - 1990.
                              Source: Blau, Ferber and Winkler (2000), Table 4.1
                    100                                                                                        60

                    90 84.2                                              84.3                84.6
                                      81.5
                                                                                                               50
                    80
                                                           67.7
                    70
                                                                                                               40




                                                                                                                    Percentage Points
Percentage points




                    60                                     33.8                              32.9
                                      29.0                               30.1
                          27.8
                    50                                                                                         30
                                                           25.4
                    40
                                                                                                               20
                    30

                    20                8.3
                                                                                                               10
                    10 1.0                                               3.3                    2.9

                     0                                                                                        0
                     1940            1942           1944          1946          1948         1950          1952

                          Male LF/Pop ages 14-64 (left axis)                Female LF/Pop ages 14-64 (right axis)
                          Males % Active Duty ages 14-64 (right axis)

                                         Figure 2. Male and Female Labor Force Participation
                                          and Military Active Service Personnel, 1940 - 1952.
     Coef = 5.23 se = 7.65 t = 0.68
18    A. 1940 Cross section

16

14                                                                    CT                    RI
                                                                                             MA
           GA    N C SC                             MD
                                                    DE                 NJ              NH
                                                          FL N Y
12                            MS                          IL
                                                        VT                 C ME
                                                                             A
                                       MO
                                       IA          MN
                              AL
                             WI    VA
                N DSD               TN                    OH
10                            LA      MI
                                      IN                            CO             PA OR
                                                                 KSMT             WA
                                              TX                WY AZ
                                               NE                OK
 8                            AR        KY                                         UT
                                                          N M WV     ID

 6

 4

 2

 0
     .4                     .45                .5                  .55
          Mobilization Rate and Mean Female W eeks W orked in 1940
     Coef = 15.41 se = 3.34 t = 4.62
 6    B. 1940 - 1950 Change

 5
                                                                                  WA
                                                                        CO
                                                                                    OR
 4                                                              WY                 UT
                                                                        ID                   MA
                                               NE                                           RI
                             WI                     DE
                                              TX         OH    OK    CA            PA
 3                                      IN         MN
                                                        IL
                                                         NM NY
                        SC    AR        MI                       CT
                                                                  AZ
                                                      VT       KS                      NH
                                   VA
 2               NC                      MO                 WV     N J ME
                              AL
           GA
                                   TN
                                    KY                                MT
                             LA       IA
 1                SD
                              MS
                ND                                  MD   FL

 0

-1
     .4                   .45                 .5                  .55
      Mobilization Rate and Change in Female W eeks W orked 1940-50
     Coef = -4.75 se = 2.42 t = -1.97
 6    C. 1950 - 1960 Change

 5                                                                                     NH


 4                                         NE
                              AR    TN        MD                      MT
                              MS        MO                          KS
                                       IN                FL
           GA N D                  VA KY TX                            AZID
 3                                                       NM                 ME     PA
                                        IA         MN               OKC T C A
                              AL                               NY                   UT
                 SD          WI
                              LA        MI              IL
                 NC                                      OH
 2                                                    VT                CO        WA OR      MA
                        SC                                              NJ
                                                    DE          WY
                                                                                            RI
                                                               WV
 1

 0

-1
     .4                   .45                 .5                  .55
      Mobilization Rate and Change in Female W eeks W orked 1950-60
 Figure 3. State WWII Mobilization Rates and Female Labor Supply, 1940 - 1960
                   Delta log weekly wages                          Fitted values
 1.5        A. Females

                          SC   AL
                               AR
                                MS
1.25                           LA                        FL
              GA                                TX
                                                        VT
                                          VA                          ID
                                                                 KS
                                                                 OK
                    SD
                   ND
                    N C                    TNKYIA
                                                     MD N M WV
                                               MO N EMN
                                              MI
                                              IN                     CO
  1                            WI
                                                          IL
                                                           OH
                                                                   MT
                                                                                    NOR
                                                                                      H
                                                                 WY AZ ME        WA
                                                                                  PA
                                                              N Y C TN J           UT
                                                                       CA
                                                                                          R MA
                                                                                            I
                                                      DE
 .75


  .5


 .25
       .4                      .45                 .5                                         .55
              Mobilization Rate and Log Female W age Change 1940-50

                    Delta log weekly wages                             Fitted values
 1.5        B. Males



1.25

                           SC
   1           GA                   LMS
                                      A                       FL
                      NC             AR
                                    AL
                      SD                     TNKY TX          NM    KS AZ                OR
                                            VA   IA
                                                IN       MD IL
                                                  MO                     ID ME       WAU T
                                                MI   N E    VT      OK
                                                         D E OH WV C T  COCA          PAN H
                                WI                               N YWY N J
                    ND                                  MN            MT                          MA
 .75                                                                                             RI




  .5


 .25
       .4                         .45                  .5                                           .55
                   Mobilization Rate and Log Male W age Change 1940-50
 Figure 4. State WWII Mobilization Rates and Changes in Male and Female Mean Log Weekly
                                     Wages, 1940 - 1950
                  Delta log weekly wages                         Fitted values
 1.5     A. Females



1.25


   1


 .75
                                                 DE
                                                      NM
                         MS                                   CT
  .5         GA N C     AL
                       WI                IN   N E MD OH N Y     NOJ ME        PA        MA
                                     VA KY
                                      TN IA           IL   WY
                                                            OK  C
                                                               AZ CA
               N DSD SC LAR
                          A              MI                 KS               WAU TOR   RI
                                          MO TX MN
                                                      FL WV                     NH
                                                    VT        MT
                                                                 ID
 .25
       .4                    .45                  .5                                     .55
             Mobilization Rate and Log Female W age Change 1950-60

                  Delta log weekly wages                         Fitted values
 1.5     B. Males



1.25


   1


 .75

                              WI
                               AL    VA           MD
                                                 MN
                                                  D E OH          CT
             GA                 MS       IN                    WY C NOJ                 MA
                                      TNKYIA
                                         MIMO N E      IL
                                                        N
                                                       FL M WV  KS
                                                            N Y OK    CA       UN
                                                                              PA TH
                  ND
                   NC          LA            TX      VT                                RI
  .5                     SC                                        AZ ME     WA OR
                                                                     ID
                               AR                                 MT
                    SD


 .25
       .4                    .45                  .5                                     .55
              Mobilization Rate and Log Male W age Change 1950-60

 Figure 5. State WWII Mobilization Rates and Changes in Male and Female Mean Log Weekly
                                     Wages, 1940 - 1950
  5


  4


  3


  2


  1


  0
  1947         1951          1955         1959          1963       1967         1971            1975

  -1


  -2


  -3

                      Coefficient on Mobilization Measure      90 Percent Confidence Interval

Figure 6. Estimated Impact of State WWII Mobilization Rate on Standardized Quarters Worked Annually by
                          Women Who Were Ages 16 - 55 in 1945: 1947 - 1977.
