                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     LABOR SUPPLY EFFECTS OF SOCIAL INSURANCE


                                            Alan B. Krueger
                                            Bruce D. Meyer


                                          Working Paper 9014
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9014


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




This paper was prepared for the Handbook of Public Economics, Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein,
editors. We thank Melissa Clark, Kenneth Fortson, Jeegar Kakkad and Bradley Heim for helpful research
assistance and David Autor, Bertil Holmlund and Peter Orszag for helpful comments. We also thank Alan
Auerbach for his patience and persistence in waiting for this chapter, and helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Alan B. Krueger and Bruce D. Meyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance
Alan B. Krueger and Bruce D. Meyer
NBER Working Paper No. 9014
June 2002
JEL No. H55, J22, J28, J65



                                              ABSTRACT

         This chapter examines the labor supply effects of social insurance programs. We argue that this
topic deserves separate treatment from the rest of the labor supply literature because individuals may be
imperfectly informed as to the rules of the programs and because key parameters are likely to differ for
those who are eligible for social insurance programs, such as the disabled. Furthermore, differences in
social insurance programs often provide natural experiments with exogenous changes in wages or
incomes that can be used to estimate labor supply responses. Finally, social insurance often affects
different margins of labor supply. For example, the labor supply literature deals mostly with adjustments
in the number of hours worked, whereas the incentives of social insurance programs frequently affect the
decision of whether to work at all.
         The empirical work on unemployment insurance (UI) and workers’ compensation (WC)
insurance finds that the programs tend to increase the length of time employees spend out of work. Most
of the estimates of the elasticities of lost work time that incorporate both the incidence and duration of
claims are close to 1.0 for unemployment insurance and between 0.5 and 1.0 for workers’ compensation.
These elasticities are substantially larger than the labor supply elasticities typically found for men in
studies of the effects of wages or taxes on hours of work. The evidence on disability insurance and
(especially) social security retirement suggests much smaller and less conclusively established labor
supply effects. Part of the explanation for this difference probably lies in the fact that UI and WC lead
to short-run variation in wages with mostly a substitution effect. Our review suggest that it would be
misleading to apply a universal set of labor supply elasticities to these diverse problems and populations.




Alan B. Krueger                                                  Bruce D. Meyer
Economics Department                                             Department of Economics and
Princeton University                                             Institute for Policy Research
Princeton, NJ 08544                                              Northwestern University
and NBER                                                         2003 Sheridan Road
609-258-4046                                                     Evanston, IL 60208
akrueger@princeton.edu                                           and NBER
                                                                 bmeyer@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

       This chapter summarizes evidence on the labor supply effects of social insurance

programs. One may ask, “Why is a separate chapter necessary on the labor supply effects of

social insurance? Why can't the labor supply parameters estimated in the voluminous labor

economics literature just be plugged into the social insurance formulas?” In our view, a separate

consideration of the labor supply effects of social insurance is justified for at least three reasons.

       First, the generic labor supply parameters estimated in the public finance and labor

economics literatures may not apply to social insurance programs because people are imperfectly

informed as to the rules of the programs, or because the parameters may differ for those who are

eligible for social insurance programs (i.e., heterogeneous parameters) than for the population at

large. For example, a severe disability may change the way an individual perceives the trade off

between labor and leisure time. More generally, the people who are on the margin of going on a

social insurance program are likely to have different preferences than the wider population.

       Second, the labor supply elasticities estimated in the labor economics literature span a

huge range. Literature surveys such as Pencavel (1986) and Killingsworth (1983) find wide

diserpsion in estimates of income and substitution effects. Fuchs, Krueger and Poterba (1998)

also find that there is little agreement among economists on the magnitude of labor supply

elasticities. A major shortcoming in the broader labor supply literature is that it is difficult to

identify exogenous changes in wages or income that can be used to estimate labor supply

responses. The variations in social insurance programs may provide natural experiments with

which to estimate labor supply parameters and test the relevance of labor supply models.

       Third, the design of social insurance raises several theoretical labor supply issues that are
                                                  2

not often dealt with in the standard labor supply literature. For example, the prospect of

receiving Social Security benefits in the future may induce some young people to enter the work

force, while the provision of benefits may induce older workers to leave the work force.

Moreover, much of the labor supply literature deals with adjustments in the number of hours

worked per week or number of weeks worked per year, whereas the incentives of social

insurance programs often affect the decision of whether to participate at all in the labor force.

And programs such as Unemployment Insurance (UI) influence job search intensity, which does

not figure into standard labor supply models.

       To summarize the impact of social insurance on labor supply, it is necessary to have a

working definition of what is meant by "social insurance." There is no official definition. For

our purposes, social insurance programs are defined as compulsory, contributory government

programs that provide benefits to individuals if certain conditions are met. For example, upon

turning age 62 eligible individuals may receive Social Security benefits in the United States. In

general, social insurance programs are funded by dedicated taxes or premiums, and have

compulsory coverage. Benefits are generally restricted to those who contributed to the program's

financing. Under this definition, for example, Medicare is social insurance but Medicaid is not

because Medicare receipt is limited to qualified individuals who contributed to the program

while Medicaid receipt is available to all individuals with sufficiently low income. Other

programs that are considered social insurance include: Social Security retirement benefits,

Disability Insurance (DI), Unemployment Insurance, and Workers' Compensation (WC)
                                                 3

Insurance. These programs form the basis for this chapter.1 Although other programs could be

classified as social insurance, such as the Railroad Employee Retirement program, these four

programs are the four largest social insurance programs in the U.S., and illustrate many of the

lessons that can be learned of the effect of social insurance on labor supply.

       In practice, social insurance programs are the way society typically pools risks for events

that have catastrophic consequences (e.g., severe work-related injuries), or events that individuals

may not plan for adequately on their own (e.g., retirement). More generous benefits will provide

greater protection against risk, but would likely generate larger distortionary effects. For

example, generous Unemployment Insurance benefits insure workers against the earnings losses

that accompany job loss, but also induce some workers to search less intensively for a new job.

A great deal of research has focused on identifying and quantifying the intended and unintended

consequences of social insurance. Because the receipt of social insurance is often triggered by

withdrawing from work, and because the programs are typically funded by taxes on labor, a

major avenue in which social insurance has its intended and unintended consequences is through

altering labor supply. Another realm in which social insurance can be have an unintended effect

is on savings: individuals may not save as much to offset the adverse consequences of negative

events if they are insured against those risks by social insurance. See the chapter by Feldstein

and Liebman in this volume for evidence on the impact of Social Security on savings behavior.

       Ideally, one would like to balance the intended consequences against the unintended

consequences of social insurance to design the optimal benefit level. Determining the optimal



       1
        For the most part, the review focuses on U.S. social insurance programs, but we draw
on programs in other countries when the evidence is particularly strong and germane.
                                                 4

balance requires knowledge of the distortionary effects of social insurance as well as the

beneficial insurance effect. The labor supply response to benefits is an important input into this

calculation. Gruber (1997), for example, provides an exemplary evaluation of the tradeoff

between the consumption smoothing benefit of the UI program against the undesired distortion to

job search intensity caused by the provision of benefits. Knowledge of the labor supply effects

of social insurance is required for governments to optimally design the programs.

       The provision of social insurance is a major government function. Figure 1.1 displays the

percent of the U.S. federal government budget devoted to social insurance expenditures each year

since 1967.2 In 1967, 15 percent of government expenditures consisted of social insurance

outlays. By 1996, social insurance expenditures rose to one third of total government spending,

and in 2007 social insurance benefits are predicted to top 44 percent of government spending.

The growth in social insurance spending is primarily a result of demographic shifts (e.g., an

aging population), increases in program generosity, rising health care costs, and behavioral

responses to program changes. Paul Krugman (2001) did not exaggerate when he observed,

“loosely speaking, the post-cold-war government is a big pension fund that also happens to have

an army.”

       The U.S. is not unique in devoting a great deal of the government budget to social

insurance. The first column of Table 1.1 reports the percent of social insurance spending as a

percent of GDP in eight countries, which were selected because they span a wide range of

economic development and had available data. The next two columns report social insurance



       2
       Here social insurance includes Old Age Survivors and Disability Insurance, Medicare,
Workers’ Compensation Insurance and Unemployment Insurance benefits.
                                                 5

expenditures as a percent of the central government’s budget and as a percent of the budget in all

levels of government. The social insurance expenditure data are from the International Labour

Organization, and cover a broader range of activities than the measure used in Figure 1.1. In

social democratic countries like Sweden and Germany, social insurance expenditures represent a

much greater share of government and economic activity than they do in the U.S. In developing

countries, social insurance expenditures are a smaller share. Transitioning countries, such as the

Czech Republic, appear to be an intermediate case. Social insurance expenditures are

surprisingly low in Japan, reflecting in part that country’s meager public pension system.

Overall, the table gives the impression that social insurance is a normal good, representing a

higher share of the government’s budget and economic activity in wealthier countries.3 Not

surprisingly, social insurance expenditures have risen over time in many countries as well.

       It is natural to question whether the increase in expenditures on social insurance programs

has influenced the declining trend in labor force participation. Figure 1.2 illustrates long-term

trends in labor force participation of older men in the U.S. using a series developed by Moen

(1987) and Costa (1998).4 The figure shows the percent of men age 55-64 or 65 and older who

are gainfully employed each Census year. Employment has declined considerably for older men

since the beginning of 20th century. Similar -- and in some cases sharper -- downward trends



       3
        Looking across countries, Rodrik (1997) and Agell (1999) find a positive relationship
between the generosity of a variety of social welfare benefits and the openness of the economy,
suggesting that social insurance is demanded, in part, to dampen the risk associated with trade
shocks.
       4
        Quinn (1999) finds that the downward trend in labor force particpation of older workers
has levelled off or reversed since the mid 1980s. Although this is a very interesting
development, our interest here is in the longer term pattern.
                                                 6

have occurred in other industrialized countries. The declining employment of older men raises

three issues of concern for public economics: first, a smaller proportion of the workforce is

available to contribute support for social insurance and other government programs; second,

more individuals receive Social Security retirement benefits, raising the need for tax revenues;

and third, social insurance may distort the economy by inducing some individuals to exit the

labor force prematurely.5 An earlier wave of studies (e.g., Parsons, 1980 and Hurd and Boskin,

1984) attempted to explain the fall in aggregate labor force participation by rising social

insurance benefits.

       As social insurance consumes an even larger share of government budgets, and as the size

of the working-age population declines relative to the nonworking-age population, understanding

labor supply responses to social insurance will take on even greater importance.

       The organization of the remainder of this Chapter is as follows. We first discuss

Unemployment Insurance in Section 2, beginning by describing the main program features and

how they differ across the states. We also provide some brief information on programs in

Canada and other countries. We then discuss the main effects of UI on labor supply, first from a

theoretical perspective and then by reviewing the empirical evidence. Section 3 follows the same

pattern for Workers’ Compensation. We begin by describing the main characteristics of state

programs, and then lay out the theoretical predictions and empirical evidence on labor supply

responses. In Section 4 we examines Social Security. We describe the theoretical predictions

and empirical evidence on labor supply effects. We end this section with a discussion of the

timing of retirement and the effects of the earnings test. In Section 5 we examine Disability


       5
        For a more benign interpretation, see Burtless and Munnell (1991).
                                                 7

Insurance. We describe the operation of the program and then analyze the evidence on its role in

explaining trends in labor force participation and self-reported disability rates. Section 6

provides our conclusions.



2. Unemployment Insurance

       Unemployment insurance is one of the most extensively studied government programs in

the U.S. and elsewhere. Before describing the main features of UI programs and their labor

supply effects, we should note that there are several excellent prior surveys of UI.6 Though many

of the surveys cover a wide range of issues, they generally emphasize the labor supply effects of

UI.



2.1 Main Features of U.S. Unemployment Insurance Programs



       UI programs differ sharply across states due to the provisions of the Social Security Act

of 1935 which created the current system and gave states great latitude in designing their

programs. State UI programs differ in the earnings required for eligibility, the level of benefits

(the replacement rate, the minimum and maximum benefit), the potential duration of benefits,

and other parameters. Table 2.1 reports key features of twelve state programs in 2000. It is

apparent from this table that there are large differences in program parameters across states.

These cross-state differences and their frequent changes over time have been a fundamental


       6
        See Hamermesh (1977), Welch (1977) , Danziger, Haveman, and Plotnick (1981),
Gustman (1983), Atkinson (1987), Atkinson and Micklewright (1990), Devine and Kiefer
(1991), Anderson and Meyer (1993), and Holmlund (1998) for surveys of the UI literature.
                                                  8

source of the identifying variation used to estimate the effects of these programs.

       Approximately 97 percent of all wage and salary workers are in jobs that are covered by

unemployment insurance. The main categories of workers not covered are the self-employed,

employees of small farms, and household employees whose earnings are below the threshold

amount. Despite this near universal coverage, less than forty percent of the unemployed received

UI in many recent years.7 The cause of this low rate of receipt is largely that individuals who are

new entrants or reentrants to the labor force, who have irregular work histories, and individuals

who quit or are fired from their last job are typically not eligible for benefits. Such individuals

are frequently excluded by minimum earnings requirements for eligibility ranging from $130 in

Hawaii to $3,400 in Florida, with a typical state requiring previous earnings just over $1,500.8

       UI benefits are paid on a weekly basis, and except for minimum and maximum benefit

amounts, are usually between 50 and 60 percent of previous earnings.9 All states have a

maximum weekly benefit amount, which varies from a low of $190 in Mississippi to over $600

in Massachusetts if dependents’ allowances are included. The median state had a maximum

benefit of about $292 in 2000. About 35 percent of claimants receive the maximum benefit. For

these individuals, the fraction of their previous earnings replaced by UI can be much lower than


       7
         See Blank and Card (1991) and Anderson and Meyer (1997) for studies of the reasons
for the low rate of UI receipt.
       8
         More precisely, earnings during the first four of the five full calendar quarters prior to the
quarter an individual files for benefits. Five states now use alternative time frames that differ
from this rule.
       9
          A typical benefit schedule would compute the weekly benefit amount as high quarter
earnings divided by 23. High quarter earnings are typically the highest calendar quarter of
earnings during the first four of the five full calendar quarter prior to the quarter an individual
files for benefits.
                                                  9

50 percent. The minimum weekly benefit is typically very low; the median state has a minimum

of about $39.

       In almost all states, benefits last up to 26 weeks. However, in all but eight states, total

benefits paid are restricted to some fraction of previous earnings or weeks worked. Table 2.1

indicates that a typical state requires just over 3 quarters (39 weeks) of work for a claimant to be

eligible for 26 weeks of benefits. This provision causes the potential duration of benefits to be

less than 26 weeks for approximately half of all recipients.10 In all but 11 states, there is a

waiting period of one week after the beginning of unemployment until one can receive benefits.

       In 1970, a permanent Federal-State extended benefits program was established to provide

additional weeks of benefits to individuals who exhaust their regular State benefits in periods of

high unemployment. When a state's insured unemployment rate is sufficiently high, weeks of

benefits are extended 50 percent beyond that which an individual would be entitled to under State

law, with the extension not to exceed 13 weeks. In addition, in times of high unemployment

Congress has typically passed ad hoc laws temporarily extending benefits further. Because the

unemployment rate has been low in recent years, benefits have only rarely been extended, despite

a change that relaxed the threshold for benefit extensions in 1993.

       Prior to 1979, UI benefits were not subject to Federal income taxation, but in 1979 they

became taxable for high income individuals. In 1982 taxation of UI was extended to most




       10
         A typical state calculates potential weeks of benefits as the minimum of 26 and base
period earnings divided by three times the weekly benefit amount. Base period earnings are
usually calculated as earnings during the first four of the five calendar quarters prior to the
quarter an individual files for benefits.
                                                  10

individuals, and in 1987 benefits became taxable for all recipients.11 UI benefits are not,

however, subject to OASDHI (Social Security and Medicare) payroll taxes.

       A convenient indicator of the work disincentive of UI is the fraction of previous after-tax

earnings replaced by after-tax benefits, the after-tax replacement rate. This replacement rate has

fallen dramatically in recent years, particularly due to the taxation of benefits, and is now

typically under one-half. As recently as 1986, some people had replacement rates near one

(often those lifted by the minimum benefit), implying that they would receive from UI nearly

what they would earn if they returned to work.12 This situation is much less common today.

Strong disincentives to work part-time remain, though, as benefits are typically reduced dollar for

dollar for earnings greater than a fairly small amount (the earnings disregard).



2.2    UI Financing



       UI financing in the U.S. is unique in that a firm's tax rate depends on its layoff history. In

other countries benefits are funded through general revenues or payroll taxes that are not

determined by a firm’s layoffs. The dependence of a firm’s tax rate on previous UI use is called

experience rating. Federal law levies a 6.2 percent tax on the first $7,000 in wages a year paid to

an employee. The law provides for a credit of 5.4 percent to employers that pay State taxes under



       11
        In 1979 UI benefits became taxable for married taxpayers filing jointly with income
over $25,000, and single filers with income over $20,000. In 1982 the cutoffs changed to
$18,000 and $12,000 respectively.

       12
            See Feldstein (1974) for an earlier discussion and evidence on high replacement rates.
                                                   11

an approved UI system, so that all employers pay at least 0.8 percent.

       State experience rating systems take many forms, but the two most common are reserve

ratio (30 states and D.C.) and benefit ratio experience rating (17 states).13 In reserve ratio

systems, a firm's tax rate depends on the difference between taxes paid and benefits accrued

divided by average covered payroll. Taxes paid and benefits accrued are typically summed over

all past years and are not discounted, whereas average payroll is typically the average over the

last three years. In benefit ratio systems, a firm's tax rate depends on the ratio of benefits paid to

taxable wages, both generally averaged over the last three years.

       In reserve ratio states, a firm’s tax rates increases in steps as its reserve ratio decreases (in

benefit ratio states tax rates rise as the benefit ratio rises). However, for most firms in almost all

states, the tax rates do not adjust sufficiently when the ratios change to cause firms to pay the full

marginal UI costs of laying off a worker. In addition, there are large ranges at the top and

bottom, over which a firms layoff history has no effect on its tax payments. This provides an

incentive to temporarily lay off workers, and subsidizes industries with seasonal variation in

employment. Forty states have a tax base that is higher than the Federal base of $7,000. Alaska

has the highest at $22,600. Overall, in 1998 UI taxes were a highly regressive 1.9 percent of

taxable wages, and 0.6 percent of total wages.14



2.3    UI Programs Outside of the U.S.

       13
         See National Foundation for Unemployment Compensation & Workers' Compensation
(2000). Michigan and Pennsylvania are counted as benefit ratio states even though they have
hybrids of reserve ratio and benefit ratio systems.
       14
        See Anderson and Meyer (2001) for an analysis of the distributional effects of UI taxes
and benefits.
                                                 12

       We should emphasize that there are often very different institutions in other countries to

insure the unemployed. Moreover, programs for the unemployed are often combined with other

programs, and those eligible for one type of benefit are often eligible for another in certain

circumstances. These features often make cross-country comparisons problematic. Subject to

these caveats, in Table 2.2 we report UI expenditures as a share of GDP and in absolute terms in

7 countries.15 Analogous expenditures on compensation for work injuries are reported for

comparison. There are pronounced differences across countries. Among these countries, the

U.K. has the lowest share of GDP devoted to UI expenditures at 0.25 percent, while four other

countries have shares at least ten times as big. Part of the explanation for the low GDP share in

the U.K. is that they provide a benefit that does not vary with previous earnings and is set at a

fairly low level. For example, a single individual over age 25 was entitled to a weekly benefit of

£52.2 ($77) in 2000. This amount is only slightly higher than a typical minimum benefit in the

U.S.

       One of the countries with a GDP share over 2.5 percent is Canada. The Canadian UI

program provides an interesting comparison as Canada is a close neighbor of the U.S. and has a

similar per capita income and industry base. Surprisingly, Canadian expenditures are almost

one-half of those in the U.S. despite Canada having a population less than 11 percent as large.

While Canadian weekly benefits are slightly higher and last slightly longer on average than U.S.

benefits, the major difference between the countries is in the ratio of UI recipients to the number

of unemployed. An unemployed individual is approximately three and one-half times more



       15
         For summary measures of the replacement rate and benefit duration in OECD countries,
Nickell (1998) provides a nice overview.
                                                 13

likely to receive benefits in Canada than in the U.S. This difference is hard to explain on the

basis of the composition of unemployment in the two countries or current statutory qualification

rules, though Canadian benefits were certainly more generous in the 1970s and 1980s than those

in the U.S.. The amount of earnings in the past needed to qualify for benefits is only slightly

higher in Canada. Those who have left their previous job are usually not eligible in the U.S., but

are often eligible in Canada. It is also true that without experience rating, Canadian employers

have less incentive to enforce eligibility rules. However, these features appear to only explain a

small part of the difference. Furthermore, the timing of when UI became more generous in

Canada than in the U.S. does not fit particularly well with when the two countries’

unemployment rates diverged.16



2.4 Theoretical Responses of Labor Supply to UI



       UI affects at least five dimensions of labor supply. First, UI can increase the probability

of unemployment by affecting worker and firm actions to avoid job loss. Second, program

characteristics affect the likelihood that workers will file a claim for benefits once a worker is

laid off. Once a claim has been made, we expect that labor supply will be affected by the adverse

incentives of the UI program. Third, once on the program, UI can extend the time a person is

out of work. Most research on the labor supply effects of UI has focused on this issue. Fourth,

the availability of compensation for unemployment can shift labor supply by changing the value


       16
         See Card and Riddell (1993, 1997), Riddell and Sharpe (1998) and Riddell (1999) for
detailed comparisons of the U.S. and Canadian UI systems and discussions of the role of UI in
explaining unemployment rate differences between the two countries.
                                                      14

of work to a potential employee. Finally, there are additional affects such as the work responses

of spouses of unemployed workers. We discuss these five effects in turn.17

           First, we discuss the effect of UI on the incidence of unemployment. UI can induce

eligible workers to search less hard for a different job or work less hard on the current job, both

of which can lead to a layoff. There has been some modeling of this issue; for example,

Mortensen (1990) examines the effect of UI on search while employed. However, these effects

have not been extensively studied. There is a substantial theoretical literature on how the

availability of UI may make layoffs more common when firms face variable demand for their

product. The presence of UI, particularly UI that is not fully experience rated, may make firms

more likely to layoff workers and employees more willing to work in layoff-prone firms (see

Baily 1977; Feldstein 1976). While this response to UI is partly a labor demand effect, it is also

partly a labor supply response as workers are induced to take jobs with higher layoff risk because

of UI.18

           Second, the generosity of UI benefits may affect the probability that a person claims

benefits conditional on a layoff. As the generosity of benefits rises, it is more likely that the

stigma and transaction costs of applying for UI will be outweighed by the benefits. Furthermore,

whether someone initially receives UI is partly related to how long they are out of work. A UI

claimant in nearly all states must be out of work over a week to be eligible for benefits.19 It is



           17
        This classification of the labor supply effects of UI leaves out some effects that can be
considered labor supply such as possible improvements in the matching of workers to jobs.
           18
          This effect of UI occurs through an outward shift in the labor supply curve to high layoff
jobs, so it partly falls under the fourth effect of UI below.
           19
                This waiting week can be thought of as the deductible in the UI insurance policy.
                                                     15

more likely that a person will remain out of work for the waiting week if benefits are high. In

addition to affecting program costs, the increased claim rate in turn affects weeks worked,

because once a person is on the UI rolls, they become subject to the implicit taxes on work and

the consequent work disincentives.

           Third, conditional on beginning an unemployment spell, the duration of time out of work

is affected by UI. This issue has received the most attention in the UI literature. Both labor

supply and search models suggest that higher and longer duration UI benefits will cause

unemployed workers who receive UI to take longer to find a new job. An elegant, yet fairly

realistic search model is provided by Mortensen (1977), though there are many search models

incorporating unemployment insurance.20 Mortensen models workers as choosing a search

intensity and a reservation wage while facing a stationary known wage offer distribution and a

constant arrival rate of job offers (for a given search intensity). If the worker is offered a job at a

wage that exceeds the reservation wage, he or she accepts it. Mortensen incorporates two key

features of the UI system in the United States into the model: benefits are assumed to be paid

only for a specified duration rather than in every period of an unemployment spell, and new

entrants or workers who quit jobs are not qualified for benefits.21

           In this framework, the main labor supply effect of UI is to lengthen unemployment spells.

This effect can be seen in the model as increases in either the level or potential duration of

benefits raise the value of being unemployed, reducing search intensity and increasing the

reservation wage. Thus, the exit rate from unemployment,


           20
                See Mortensen (1986), for example.
21
     See Burdett (1979) for an analysis of a similar model.
                                                   16

λ(s)[1-F(w)],

falls, as both s and [1-F(w)] fall, where λ( @ ) converts search effort s into job offers, w is the

reservation wage and F is the cumulative distribution function of wage offers.

        Mortensen’s model also implies a second labor supply effect of UI, known as the

"entitlement" effect. This effect of UI raises the escape rate from unemployment for workers

who currently do not qualify for benefits and for qualified workers close to when benefits are

exhausted. That is, because the potential for receiving benefits on a future job makes work more

attractive, workers who are ineligible for UI search harder to find a job. Higher benefits reduce

the escape rate for recipients when time until exhaustion is high and increase the escape rate

around the time of exhaustion. This pattern of UI effects on the hazard of leaving unemployment

is illustrated in Figure 2.1. Since the entitlement effect is likely to be small relative to the

standard search subsidy effect in many countries, the average duration of unemployment is likely

to rise with increases in both the level and potential duration of benefits.    The effect of UI on

unemployment durations has also been modeled using the standard static labor supply model. In

a version of this model, Moffitt and Nicholson (1982) assume people to have preferences over

two goods, income and leisure. Unemployment in this model raises utility because of its leisure

value. The wage on a new job is fixed and a job can be found at any time. At the time of job

loss, an individual chooses income and weeks of unemployment subject to a budget constraint

that can be seen in Figure 2.2. The budget constraint becomes flatter as the level of UI benefits

increases and is extended outward as the potential duration of benefits increases. Both effects

make unemployment more attractive, thus making it more likely that an individual will choose to

be unemployed longer.
                                                17

       The two models make very different assumptions but have similar predictions. In the

Mortensen model the individual is uncertain when a job will be found and what the wage will be.

One remains unemployed until a sufficiently high paying job is found. In the Moffitt and

Nicholson model one can find a job anytime at a fixed wage. Their model emphasizes the leisure

value that a period of unemployment may have if one optimizes over a long period of time such

as a year. This explanation has its greatest plausibility when there is a significant demand for

home production or it is difficult to take a vacation once a new job has begun.22

       One should note that unemployment benefits affect the labor supply of employed and

unemployed workers in other ways. We already mentioned the Mortensen entitlement effect

where unemployed workers who are currently not eligible for benefits search harder because a

job with UI is more valuable. In a standard labor supply framework, a similar mechanism would

shift out the labor supply curve of the unemployed. This type of affect should also apply to the

employed. Because UI makes employment more attractive if individuals realize that they may be

laid off sometime in the future, the labor supply curve shifts outward (ignoring financing).

Anderson and Meyer (1997), following Summers (1989) and Gruber and Krueger (1991),

describe how labor supply may shift in this way in response to the provision of benefits.

       UI may also reduce work by spouses and limit part-time work. One of the responses to

unemployment in the absence of UI may be an increase in hours worked by the spouse of an

unemployed worker. This spousal labor supply is likely to be “crowded out” at least in part by

unemployment benefits that reduce the loss in family income when one spouse is unemployed.



       22
         Implicit in this discussion is the assumption that the search requirement for UI receipt
can be satisfied at low cost.
                                                 18

        As for part-time work, the incentives mentioned earlier discourage part-time work. In

particular, one would expect that when there is a decrease in the allowable earnings before an

individual’s benefits are reduced (the disregard), there will be an decrease in part-time work and

a smaller increase in full-time work (McCall, 1996). In addition, those seeking part-time work

are ineligible for benefits in most states. These workers’ earnings are taxed to finance the

program, yet they are disqualified from receiving benefits. This issue has aroused controversy in

recent years.

        Finally, we should emphasize that the above results are based on partial equilibrium

analyses, i.e. they do not include the effect of the behavior of UI recipients on those that do not

receive UI. This issue is discussed briefly below.



2.5     Empirical Evidence on UI Labor Supply Effects



        There are excellent earlier surveys that include summaries of the labor supply effects of

UI, as was mentioned above. Atkinson (1987), in particular, provides concise summaries of the

literature up through the mid-1980s. In this survey we will not replow that ground, but rather

focus on mostly newer studies, though we will discuss the results in relation to some of the

earlier summaries of the literature.



2.5.1   Identification of Unemployment Insurance and Workers’ Compensation Effects



        Before discussing estimates of UI program effects, it is useful to make some general
                                                  19

comments that apply to both the UI and WC literatures. While good evidence on UI and WC

effects from outside the English-speaking countries is becoming more common (especially for

UI), there are reasons to believe that the best evidence on the effects of UI and WC–especially for

programs with features similar to those in the states--is likely to come from the U.S. With 50

states and the District of Columbia having essentially the same systems but with often sharply

different benefit levels and other characteristics, one has transparent variation in incentives that is

arguably exogenous and can be used to estimate the effects of UI and WC. Moreover, there are

often differing incentives across groups within a state, and sharp changes in program

characteristics for one group, but not another, providing additional levers to identify the effects of

the programs.

       That states differ in many respects, and that their policies are often driven by these

differences, does not invalidate many of the approaches that can be taken with U.S. data. There

certainly is work showing that state UI and WC benefits are affected by underlying state

attributes.23 Nevertheless, the best work using data from the States relies on sharp changes in

policies (and uses comparison groups), while the underlying determinants of policies tend to

move slowly. For example, studies using data immediately before and after benefits have been

increased sharply are likely to be immune from a political economy critique, especially when the

forces that lead to these policy changes are understood. Other sensible approaches include, for

example, the examination of policies that affect one group but not another or have sharply

different effects on different groups. For example, U.S. benefit schedules generally do not

provide high benefits for all of those in a particular state. Rather, they provide very different


       23
            For example, see Adams (1986) for UI, and Besley and Case (1994) for WC.
                                                20

benefit replacement rates depending on one’s earnings, and these schedules differ sharply across

states and over time.

       This is not to say that U.S. evidence is applicable to all countries or that non-U.S. studies

cannot be convincing. Only a narrow range of policies can be directly evaluated using U.S. data

because state differences in UI programs are all within the confines of the parameters of a federal

system and because state WC programs are similar (due in part to influential commissions, the

efforts of national insurance organizations, unions, and multi-state employers). Furthermore, the

economic, cultural and institutional background in other countries may render the U.S.

experience not directly transferable. Nevertheless, in the vast majority of non-U.S. studies (and

many U.S. studies) it is difficult to see the identifying variation in UI or WC program

characteristics across units that allows researchers to estimate program effects. Atkinson and

Micklewright (1985), in their review of UI research, argue that micro-data studies that do not

describe their sample and other basic facts are “likely to be meaningless” (p. 241). We would

stress that the same is true of studies that do not make clear the source of differences in program

incentives across individuals and why those sources are likely to be exogenous. Other problems

arise in cross-country studies that have difficulty holding constant the many country specific

features that affect unemployment.

       Before describing the central tendencies of the empirical work on UI and WC labor

supply effects, we describe an empirical approach that has been used successfully in a number of

recent studies. Specifically, a number of recent studies have examined changes in state laws that

affected some individuals, but not others, or reforms that provided plausible comparison groups

through another means.
                                                  21

       A useful place to start is the numerous papers that examine the effects of unemployment

insurance (UI) on the length of unemployment spells. In a typical study that does not use

exogenous variation from policy changes, the length of unemployment benefits is regressed on

the benefit level or the replacement rate, the past wage or earnings, and demographic

characteristics. Welch (1977) criticizes this conventional methodology by pointing out that

within a given state at a point in time, the weekly UI (or WC) benefit is a constant fraction of

previous earnings except when an individual receives the minimum or maximum weekly benefit.

Thus, regressions of spell length on weekly benefits and previous earnings consequently cannot

distinguish between the effect of UI and WC and the highly correlated influence of previous

earnings. This result is especially true if we are uncertain about exactly how previous earnings

affect spell length. As we discuss below, this identification problem, which is created by the

dependence of program generosity on an individual's previous earnings, is common to many

social insurance programs besides UI and WC, including social security and disability insurance.

Other sources of differences in benefits, such as family composition and earnings, are also likely

to have independent effects on spell length making their use in identification suspect. In many

studies of UI outside the U.S., eligibility for UI or benefit generosity are often taken as

exogenous even though they depend on an individual’s work history and place of employment.

This problem also arises when other outcomes are examined, such as savings.

       Several papers exploit potentially exogenous variation in UI benefit levels from increases

in state maximum weekly benefit amounts. These natural experiments are used to estimate the

effects of UI on the length of unemployment, reemployment earnings, and the incidence of UI

claims. Early work in the spirit of this approach can be found in Classen (1979) and more
                                                    22

closely Solon (1985). Classen examines benefit changes, but relies mostly on departures from a

linear effect of earnings on outcomes as a measure of benefit effects. Solon examines the length

of UI receipt in Georgia just before and after the introduction of federal income taxation of UI for

high income individuals in 1979. In the typical study of spell lengths, the variation in UI

benefits comes from some combination of different replacement rates in different states, different

minima and maxima, and maybe some variation in these parameters over time. Many of the

natural experiment type papers are able to isolate one component of this variation which can

separately be used to identify the effects of UI.

        The main idea for one of the natural experiment papers that we use as a prototype can be

seen by examining Figure 2.3, which displays a typical state schedule relating the weekly UI (or

WC) benefit amount to previous earnings. The solid line is the schedule prior to a change in a

state law which raises the minimum and maximum weekly benefit amount (WBA). The dashed

line is the schedule after the benefit increase. Between the minimum and the maximum, the

weekly benefit amount is a constant fraction of previous earnings (in the case of UI in most

states, the highest quarter of earnings during the first four of the last five calendar quarters prior

to the date of filing for benefits).

        For people with previous earnings of at least E3 (the High earnings group), one can

compare the mean weeks of UI received and reemployment earnings of people who filed for UI

benefits just prior to and just after the change in the benefit schedule.24 Those who file before the

increase receive WBABmax while those filing afterwards receive WBAAmax . An individual's filing


        24
         In principle, one could also examine the effects of increases in the minimum weekly
benefit amount. However, in many cases few people receive the minimum benefit and it is raised
infrequently.
                                                  23

date generally determines his UI benefit amount for his entire benefit year (the one year period

following date of claim). Thus, two individuals with quarterly earnings greater than E3 will

receive different weekly benefits for their entire period of receipt if one filed a few days before

and the other a few days after the effective date of the benefit increase. This is the main idea of

this approach. Most of the remaining methodological issues in the approach involve correcting

for possible differences between the individuals filing just before and just after the benefit

increase. One may also need to account for the dependence between observations from a given

earnings group for a given year. In this example, one can use as a comparison group those with

earnings between E1 and E2 (the Low earnings group) who file just before and just after the

benefit increase. The benefits these individuals receive are unaffected by the increase in the

maximum benefit amount. The so-called difference-in-differences estimator would then be used.

In studies of this type, an additional comparison group may come from states that did not

experience a benefit increase.

        One should not construe this argument as saying that all studies that use this type of

approach are convincing, and studies that do not are not convincing. Rather, this example shows

that one can make clear the sources of variation that allow the estimation of program effects, and

that one can then make a case for their exogeneity (or lack theoreof).



2.5.2   Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment or Claim Incidence



        There is a substantial literature that finds a large effect of UI on the incidence of

unemployment or the incidence of UI claims. Table 2.3 summarizes some of these studies.
                                                  24

These studies are mostly concerned with labor demand, but we include them for completeness.

Feldstein (1978) examines the effect of benefits on layoffs, finding a large effect. The

subsequent studies focus on how incomplete experience rating interacts with benefit generosity

to affect layoffs. In these studies a key variable is the marginal tax cost of a layoff, denoted by e,

which is the fraction of the UI cost of an additional layoff (in present value) that a firm can

expect to pay in future taxes. The extent to which e is below one, then, is a measure of the

degree to which experience rating is incomplete. The three studies, Topel (1983), Card and

Levine (1994), Anderson and Meyer (1994) all find large effects of incomplete experience rating

on layoffs. The first two studies find substantially larger effects using state by industry proxies

for the tax cost than is found by the third study which employs firm level tax costs. It is hard to

translate these results into effects of the level of benefits, but it should be clear that incomplete

experience rating could not have an effect on layoffs unless there were substantial UI benefits. In

a paper that is explicitly about labor demand, Anderson (1993) finds that UI induced adjustment

costs have a substantial effect on the seasonality of employment.

        A second group of studies, summarized in Table 2.4, examines how UI benefits and other

variables affect the frequency of claims for UI conditional on unemployment or a job separation.

Corson and Nicholson (1988) and Blank and Card (1991) both examine aggregate data and

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) microdata. They both find substantial effects of the

level of benefits in aggregate data, but come to conflicting results using the microdata. Anderson

and Meyer (1997) find substantial effects in administrative microdata. Overall, an elasticity of

unemployment or claims with respect to benefits in the neighborhood of .5 is a reasonable

summary of these studies.
                                                 25

2.5.3 Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Durations



       The results of many of the more recent studies of unemployment durations as well as

some older studies that rely on changes in benefits for identification are reported in Table 2.5.

Focusing on the U.S. studies first, the studies imply an elasticity of duration with respect to the

level of benefits in excess of 0.5. Several of the studies, including Classen (1979), Solon (1985),

and Meyer (1989, 1990) find elasticities over 0.5. The elasticity estimates with respect to the

potential duration (length) of benefits tend to be much lower.

       The non-American results reported in Table 2.6 are more varied. Very large effects of

potential duration in Canada but no benefit level effect is found by Ham and Rea (1987), while

Hunt (1995) finds very large effects of the level and potential duration of benefits in Germany.

The studies of Sweden (Carling et al., 1996) and Norway (Roed and Zhang, 2000) find much

smaller effects, though the sources of identification in the former study are far from clearly

exogenous. A very thoughtful recent study by Carling, Holmlund and Vejsiu (2001) examines

data before and after a benefit cut in Sweden and finds an elasticity over 1.0. The authors discuss

a paper written in Swedish that analyzes an earlier cut and also finds large effects. Other work by

Abbring, van den Berg, and van Ours (2000) suggests large effects of benefit cuts on

unemployment duration in the Netherlands, but it is difficult to separate out benefit cuts from

other policies in their work. An elasticity of unemployment duration with respect to benefits of

0.5 is not an unreasonable rough summary, though there is a wide range of estimates in the

literature. Such an elasticity is not very different from the central tendency of the duration

elasticities reported in the Atkinson (1987) survey.
                                                 26

       One should note that the elasticity of unemployment with respect to benefits is the sum of

the layoff/claim elasticity and the duration elasticity. To see this result, let weeks unemployed

W be the product of incidence, I, and duration, D. Then, letting the UI benefit be B, we have

W=I@D, and

[dW/dB][B/W]=[B/W][DdI/dB + IdD/dB]=[B/I][dI/dB] + [B/D][dD/dB].

Overall, the combined effect of benefits on unemployment through incidence and duration is

suggested to be near one by these studies. This result is consistent with the aggregate analysis of

twenty OECD countries by Nickell (1998) who finds an elasticity of unemployment with respect

to the replacement rate of close to one.

       Besides cross-sectional regression analyses of benefit effects on duration, we also have

evidence from a recent series of randomized social experiments in the U. S. that are surveyed in

Meyer (1995b). Four cash bonus experiments made payments to UI recipients who found jobs

quickly and kept them for a specified period of time. Six job search experiments evaluated

combinations of services including additional information on job openings, more job placements,

and more extensive checks of UI eligibility. The bonus experiments show that economic

incentives do affect the speed with which people leave the unemployment insurance rolls. As a

result, UI is not a completely benign transfer, but rather it affects claimants' behavior as shown

by the declines in weeks of UI receipt found for all of the bonus treatments. The job search

experiments found that various combinations of services to improve job search and increase

enforcement of work search rules reduce UI receipt. It is hard to extrapolate from these

experimental results to elasticities since the treatments were very different from benefit changes,

but the estimates probably suggest moderate effects of UI. Individuals clearly were able to
                                                27

change the speed with which they went back to work when faced with financial incentives to do

so, but the effects were not particularly large. The experiments also indicated that job search

assistance and reporting requirements have a substantial effect on unemployment duration.



2.5.4   Unemployment Insurance Spillovers

        An important issue on which more evidence is needed is the degree of spillover effects

from UI recipients to other unemployed individuals. Might the spells of non-recipients become

shorter, if UI recipients cut back on search activities and thus competed less strenuously for

available jobs? The possibility of such spillovers has been emphasized by Atkinson and

Micklewright (1985) and others. Levine (1990) examines this question empirically using the

CPS and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youths. He finds that increases in the generosity

of UI benefits appear to decrease the unemployment of those who do not receive UI. This is

important work that suggests that previous work on UI and unemployment durations may have

overestimated the overall effects of UI on unemployment rates. There is little other direct

evidence on the question of whether general equilibrium effects of UI are much smaller than

partial equilibrium effects. We should note that it is also possible that the adverse unemployment

effects of UI will be magnified in general equilibrium. Carling et al. (2001) argue that UI will

raise wage pressure in economies where wage bargaining is pervasive, thus reinforcing its

adverse incentive effects on job search.
                                                 28

2.5.5   Other Labor Supply Effects of Unemployment Insurance



        Table 2.7 summarizes two studies of other aspects of labor supply that are affected by UI.

Cullen and Gruber (2000) find that higher unemployment benefits are associated with less work

by the wives of unemployed men. The authors find that there is substantial crowd-out of this

form of family “self-insurance.” Their estimates suggest that for every dollar of UI received by

the husband, wives earnings fall by between 36 and 73 cents. McCall (1996) examines the

effects of UI on part-time work. He finds that the level of the disregard (the amount of earnings

allowed before benefits are reduced) has a significant effect on the probability of part-time

employment during the first three months of joblessness. There is also some work on the extent

to which the presence of UI shifts out labor supply of those who are employed (Anderson and

Meyer, 1997) and those whose benefits are about to run out (Katz and Meyer, 1990). The first

paper finds some support for potential workers’ valuing the benefits (and labor supply thus

shifting out), but the estimates are imprecise. The second paper finds little support for the

hypothesis that higher UI benefits raise job-finding just prior to benefit exhaustion.



3.      Workers’ Compensation



3.1     Main Features of U.S. Workers’ Compensation Programs



        States have complete discretion in designing their workers’ compensation programs.

Nevertheless, state programs have many standard features. Coverage under workers
                                                  29

compensation in the U.S. is about as universal as under UI. Approximately 97 percent of the

non-federal UI covered workforce is covered, plus all federal employees. Unlike UI, a worker is

eligible for WC benefits immediately when she starts work, even without a previous earnings

history.

       State WC programs cover the medical costs of a work-related injury or illness as well as

four main types of cash benefits (also called indemnity benefits). First, ‘temporary total’ benefits

are paid to workers who are totally unable to work for a finite period of time. All workers’

compensation claims are initially classified as temporary total cases and temporary total benefits

are paid; if the disability persists beyond the date of maximum medical improvement, the case is

reclassified as a permanent disability.25 About 70 percent of all claims are for temporary total

disabilities. Second, if a worker remains totally disabled after reaching maximum medical

improvement, she is eligible for ‘permanent total’ benefits. In most states, permanent total and

temporary total benefits provide the same weekly payment, but in some states there is a limit on

cumulative permanent total benefits. Benefits equal a fraction (typically two-thirds) of the

worker’s pre-disability average weekly wage, subject to a minimum and maximum payment.

Figure 2.3, described earlier, displays a typical state benefit schedule. The maximum allowable

benefit varies substantially across states, and is often linked to the worker’s number of

dependents. Approximately half of workers earned a high-enough wage that if they incurred a

temporary total disability their benefit would be limited by the maximum level in their state.

Third, workers who suffer a disability that is partially disabling but is expected to last indefinitely



       25
          The date of maximum medical improvement is the time at which a doctor determines
that an injured worker will not recover further from an injury.
                                                 30

qualify for ‘permanent partial’ benefits. An employee who loses the use of a limb, for example,

would receive permanent partial benefits. These benefits are typically determined on the basis of

a schedule that links benefits to specific impairments. For example, an employee who lost the

use of an arm in a work-related accident in Illinois in 2000 was entitled to a maximum benefit of

$269,943. Finally, dependents of workers who are killed on the job are paid survivors’ benefits.

       Each state law requires a waiting period ranging from three to seven days before

indemnity benefit payments begin. However, workers are compensated retroactively for the

waiting period if their disability persists beyond a specified time period. Table 3.1 illustrates the

interstate variation in workers’ compensation benefit minima, maxima, replacement rates,

waiting periods, and retroactive periods for twelve states. Comparing this table to Table 2.1 , one

will notice that WC has much higher replacement rates and maximum benefits than UI. A

typical state has a WC replacement rate of two thirds, but a UI replacement rate of just over one-

half. The typical state has a maximum WC benefit nearly twice that of its maximum UI benefit.

Furthermore, workers’ compensation benefits are not subject to income or payroll taxes.

       The high replacement rates combined with the exclusion of WC from income taxation

often leads to after-tax replacement rates near or above one. A couple of representative examples

illustrate this point. Suppose an individual’s taxable family income was under $43,850 in 2000

and she was subject to a 5 percent state income tax. Then, the combination of state income,

federal income, and OASDHI payroll taxes implied a 27.65 percent total marginal tax rate. For

someone whose benefit was not limited by the maximum benefit and who had a pre-tax

replacement rate of two-thirds, the after-tax replacement rate was 92 percent. If income was

over $43,850, the family was in a higher federal income tax bracket with a total marginal tax rate
                                                 31

of 40.65 percent and the implied after-tax replacement rate was 112 percent. When a worker has

higher take home pay not working than working, there is a strong disincentive to work.

       These sharp work disincentives also apply to those who were working full-time, but are

considering part-time or temporary work after their injury, likely leading a fifth type of benefits,

‘temporary partial benefits,’ to be uncommon. A WC recipient with low earnings upon

reemployment typically loses two dollars in benefits for every three dollars earned. Given that

WC is not subject to income or payroll taxes, the return to working part-time or at a much lower

wage than previously earned is negligible or even negative.



3.2    Workers’ Compensation Financing



       Workers’ Compensation is mostly financed through insurance premiums paid by firms.

WC experience rating is much tighter than UI experience rating, with large firms almost perfectly

experience rated. The premium rates as a fraction of payroll range from .1 percent in banking to

over 20 percent in construction and trucking in some states. To determine its premium, a firm is

placed in one or more of 600 classifications that are a mixture of industry and occupation codes.

These classifications determine manual rates, which when multiplied by payroll, give the

premium for a small firm. A large firm's rate is a weighted average of the manual rate and the

firm's incurred loss rate, typically over a 3 year period in the past. The weight put on the firm's

incurred loss rate increases with firm size, with the weight equaling one for very large firms.
                                                   32

3.3     Comparisons of UI and WC Program Costs in the U.S.



        Some striking patterns are evident in Table 3.2, which reports aggregate benefits and

revenues for UI and WC during the past twenty years. The cyclicality of UI benefit payments is

pronounced, with benefit payments high in 1982-1983 and 1992-1993 in response to the

downturns near the beginning of those periods. Any cyclicality is less apparent for WC, but a

secular rise in WC benefit payments and costs followed by a decline after 1993 is evident. Why

WC costs rose so quickly and then fell is only partly understood. The rise was likely associated

with benefit increases and associated behavioral responses, as well as the rise in medical costs,

while the recent fall is partly due to a decline in injury rates.



3.4     Workers’ Compensation Outside of the U.S.



        We should emphasize that there are often very different institutions in other countries to

compensate those injured on the job. Moreover, programs for the injured are often combined

with other programs, and those eligible for one type of benefit are often eligible for another in

certain circumstances. In particular, there is often no easy translation from the U.S. workers’

compensation program to an equivalent in another country, since the U.S. lacks national health

insurance and WC provides medical benefits.

        In Canada, WC is fairly similar to the U.S, with substantial variation in programs across

provinces. Replacement rates are typically 90 percent of earnings net of income taxes, pension

contributions, and UI contributions. The waiting period and retroactive period are typically just
                                                 33

one day, and firms in most cases must purchase insurance through a provincial fund.

        In the United Kingdom, those who suffer an industrial accident or contract an industrial

disease are generally eligible for the Industrial injuries disablement benefit (IIDB), about half of

whom also receive an additional allowance for reduced earnings. These benefits vary with the

degree of disablement, but do not vary with previous earnings. The benefits are capped at a low

level: IIDB benefits in 2000 were a maximum of £109.30 ($161) per week. As a result, these

benefits provide little insurance to middle and upper income workers in the U.K. The program

appears to be more of a backstop akin to U.S. welfare programs, and expenditures are fairly

modest.



3.5 Theoretical Responses of Labor Supply to Workers’ Compensation



Workers’ compensation affects at least four dimensions of labor supply. First, WC can affect

the likelihood of an on-the-job injury. Much research on the labor supply effects of WC has

focused on this issue. Second, program characteristics affect the likelihood that workers will

make a claim given an injury. Once a claim has been made, we expect that labor supply will be

affected by the adverse incentives of WC. Third, once on the program, WC can extend the time

a person is out of work. Finally, the availability of compensation for on the job injuries can shift

labor supply by changing the value to a worker of various jobs. We discuss these four effects in

turn.

        There is an extensive literature on how the provision of benefits can possibly make the

occurrence of an injury more likely. This research is motivated by the idea that workers’ (and
                                                 34

firms) will take fewer actions to prevent an injury when the injury becomes less costly due to the

availability of benefits that compensate workers. Krueger (1990) provides a simple model of this

situation. Let expected utility on the job be written as



(3.1) E[U]=[1-p(e)]U(W)+p(e)V(B)-e,



where e is the workers’ effort devoted to injury prevention (care taken, or use of ear plugs, etc).

U(W) is utility when working at wage W, and V(B) is the utility of the WC benefit B when

injured. The first-order condition for the choice of e that maximizes utility, assuming an interior

solution, is



(3.2) p'(e)[V(B)-U(W)]-1=0.



By differentiating (3.2) and using the second-order condition, one can show that



(3.3) Me/MB = p’V’/p”(U-V)<0, assuming p'<0, p''>0, and U-V>0.



Thus, the provision of workers’ compensation benefits may reduce effort at injury reduction (a

dimension of labor supply) and increases the probability of an injury. On the other hand, we

should note that more generous WC benefits could decrease injuries through its effect on firm

incentives, as discussed by Ruser (1985) and Ehrenberg (1988).

        Second, the generosity of WC benefits may affect the probability that a person claims
                                                  35

benefits conditional on having an injury. As the generosity of benefits rises, it is more likely that

the benefits of receiving WC will outweigh the costs, which consist of lost earnings plus the

transaction costs of establishing eligibility and possibly the stigma of WC receipt. As a result of

higher benefits, there may also be more claims in marginal cases where it is unclear whether the

injury is work related and more cases involving outright fraud.26 Furthermore, whether someone

initially receives WC is partly related to how long they are out of work. A WC claimant cannot

receive benefits until after a waiting period of typically 3 days. It is more likely that an injured

worker will be out of work longer than this waiting period when benefits are high. Once a person

is then on the WC rolls, they become subject to the implicit taxes on work and the consequent

work disincentives. Therefore, additional claims will lead to a labor supply response as well as

higher costs.

       Third, the duration of time out of work is affected by WC. Like UI, this issue is one on

which a substantial part of WC research has focused. The duration of time out of work while

receiving WC can be thought of as determined by a sequence of decisions. Each period

following an injury, an individual compares the benefits received from WC (and the leisure time

when not working) to the earnings received when working. A worker’s decision would also

reflect the disutility of working with an injury (which would tend to fall as an individual

recovers) and the increase in productivity with recovery. An additional factor in a person’s

decision is that a longer stay out of work might facilitate a full recovery, reducing future pain and

increasing future productivity. In this setting, higher WC benefits would tend to delay a return to



       26
         For anecdotal evidence that higher benefits may also lead to fraud and overstated claims
see the New York Times, December 29, 1991, p. 1.
                                                36

work, but make a full recovery more likely, just as higher UI could lead to a better job match.

        One should note that permanent benefits under WC have an income effect, but no

substitution effect. Permanent partial benefits, which are frequently paid as a lump sum

settlement, also do not affect the marginal incentives to return to work; they only reduce work by

increasing income.

        One additional labor supply response is the extent to which labor supply shifts out in

response to WC benefits because they make employment more attractive. This issue is

examined theoretically and empirically in Gruber and Krueger (1991).27



3.6     Empirical Evidence on WC Labor Supply



        There are excellent surveys that include summaries of the labor supply effects of WC,

such as Ehrenberg (1988), Krueger (1989), Moore and Viscusi (1990), and Kniesner and Leeth

(1995). The empirical research on the labor supply effects of workers’ compensation, while

extensive, is probably less developed than the research on UI. Furthermore, while European

researchers have recently produced many convincing studies of UI, research on WC outside the

U.S. has lagged.



3.6.1   The Incidence of Injuries and Workers’ Compensation Claims

        Table 3.3 summarizes a large number of studies that examine the effect of workers’

compensation program parameters on the incidence of injuries or the incidence of WC claims.


        27
             Also see Holmlund (1983).
                                                   37

Most of these studies, especially the early ones, examine aggregate data at the state-by-year level,

or industry by state-by-year level. These studies tend to find that more generous WC is

associated with higher injury rates, but the effect is usually small. This may be an accurate

estimate or a result of the use of aggregate variables and proxies that are required when

researchers use state or state by industry data. These studies also tend to find higher claims

elasticities than injury elasticities, a result that is expected given the additional effect of higher

benefits on claims conditional on an injury. The estimated benefit elasticities cluster around 0.2

or 0.3, though the only studies that use individual microdata, Krueger (1990) and Butler, Gardner

and Gardner (1997), find appreciably larger elasticities of the claims rate with respect to benefits.

There is also a short literature examining whether claims for hard to diagnose injuries and

injuries for which treatment can be delayed are more common when benefits are higher and on

days when the injury is more likely a non-work injury (such as Mondays). The evidence on these

issues is quite mixed.28



3.6.2   The Duration of Time Out of Work After an Injury



        Most work on incentive effects of workers' compensation has focused on the program's

effect on injury rates or the number of claims rather than the duration of claims. However, there

has been a great deal of recent research on the effects of WC on the duration of time out of work

that we summarize in Table 3.4. Early work by Butler and Worrall (1985) examined low-back

injuries in Illinois. They found elasticities between 0.2 and 0.4, depending on the statistical


        28
             See Smith (1990), Card and McCall (1996) and Ruser (1998).
                                                 38

technique used. When they examined data pooled from 13 states, however, they did not find a

consistent relationship between the level of benefits and the length of spells.

       Meyer, Viscusi and Durbin (1995) examined data from a natural experiment provided by

two very large increases in benefit levels in Kentucky and Michigan. This natural experiment

enables them to compare the behavior of people who are injured before the benefit increases to

those injured after the increases. By using the approach outlined in Section 2.5.1., the paper

provides a test of the effect of benefit changes on the duration of claims where the sources of

identification are readily apparent. Meyer, Viscusi and Durbin (1995) find that a 60 percent

increase in the benefit level is associated with an increase in spell duration of approximately 20

percent. The elasticities range from .27 to .62, with most clustering between .3 and .4. Overall,

the elasticity estimates are very similar in the two states. These results suggest substantial labor

supply effects of workers' compensation benefits. Subsequent papers which have followed this

natural experiment approach and examined the effects of benefit increases have found large

effects. Krueger (1990), Gardner (1991) and the Curington (1994) results for severe impairments

all imply duration elasticities over 0.7. On the other hand, the minor impairment results in

Curington (1994) and the recent work of Neuhauser and Raphael (2001) suggest smaller effects,

though that latter paper argues that the elasticities are understated due to claim composition

changes.

       Again, note that the elasticity of lost work time with respect to benefits is the sum of the

injury or claims elasticity and the duration elasticity as we indicated in Section 2.5.3. Combining

the injury or claims elasticity estimates with the duration elasticity estimates suggests an

elasticity of lost work time with respect to WC benefits of between .5 and 1.0. This elasticity is
                                                   39

probably slightly smaller than the UI elasticity, but implies large effects on work time.



3.6.3   Other Labor Supply Effects of Workers’ Compensation



        Gruber and Krueger (1991) examine the extent to which WC makes employment more

attractive for those currently not receiving benefits, leading labor supply to shift out. They find a

substantial shift in their study, concluding that workers value a dollar of WC benefits at about a

dollar. This increase in labor supply may dampen the labor supply reductions of WC,

particularly for high injury jobs that would otherwise be less desirable.



4. Social Security Retirement Program



        The Social Security system in the United States originated during the New Deal in the

1930s. Old Age Insurance, which in 1939 became Old Age and Survivors Insurance, is now the

largest source of retirement income in the United States. Disability Insurance was added in 1956

and Medicare (HI) was added in 1965. In 1998, 90 percent of those age 65 or older received

OASDI benefits.29 For 18 percent of beneficiary families, Social Security was the sole source of

income, and for 63 percent of families it was responsible for more than half of family income.

Social Security benefits accounted for 38 percent of aggregate income of the elderly population

in 1998 -- nearly twice as much as labor earnings. The poverty rate among older individuals has

fallen substantially since the advent of Social Security; in 1998 only 9 percent of beneficiaries


        29
             The statistics in this paragraph are from Social Security Administration (2000).
                                                  40

were in poverty. Excluding Social Security income, an additional 39 percent of beneficiaries

would have income below the poverty line. It would be surprising if a program of this

magnitude did not have a substantial impact on the economy.

       Social Security can affect labor supply in a myriad of ways. First, and most obviously, by

providing benefits to eligible workers after the age of 62, the program has a “wealth effect”

which induces some individuals to retire. Unanticipated increases in benefits that are granted

close to retirement age -- which were common when Congress adjusted benefits on an ad hoc

basis -- would be expected to have a particularly large effect on retirement because individuals

would not have adjusted their earlier consumption and work plans. Second, because the benefit

formula specifies greater benefits for those who delay retirement from age 62 to age 70, the

program could induce (or discourage) some workers to remain employed longer than otherwise

would be the case. The actuarial non-neutrality of benefits associated with retiring at different

ages has changed over time. Third, the program is financed by a pay-as-you-go payroll tax on the

working population which would be expected to affect labor supply, although in an ambiguous

direction, through traditional income and substitution effects, or through an “entitlement effect”

resulting from the prospect of becoming eligible for benefits. In 2000 the OASDHI tax was 7.65

percent of earnings for both employees and employers -- a combined tax rate of 15.3 percent.

The OASDI tax applied to the first $76,2000 of annual earnings, while the Medicare component

of the tax (1.45 percent) is not capped. Most workers pay more in Social Security payroll taxes

than they do in federal income taxes.30

       Social Security can have other, less obvious, but important impacts on labor supply as


       30
            This statement assumes that employees bear the incidence of the payroll tax.
                                                 41

well. For example, benefits for spouses are set to half of the primary earner’s primary insurance

amount, unless the spouse’s benefits are higher on his or her own account. Thus, Social Security

could reduce the incentive for spouses to join the labor force. In addition, Social Security can

affect the incentive for partial employment after individuals begin receiving benefits. The Social

Security “earnings test” reduces current benefits for beneficiaries whose earnings exceed a

threshold level after they begin receiving benefits, although benefits are increased subsequently

to compensate. Finally, because only 40 quarters of covered employment are required to become

eligible for Social Security, and because the Social Security benefit formula is progressive, Social

Security can influence the incentive of individuals to “double dip” -- that is, move from the

uncovered to the covered sector -- toward the end of their career. 31 Moreover, the progressive

benefit formula could possibly increase the likelihood that some individuals accept jobs with

relatively high nonpecuniary compensation.

        Most of the research on Social Security and labor supply has focused on the first two

effects outlined above -- the wealth effect and the substitution effect caused by benefits

depending on retirement age. In addition, a recent thrust of research has focused on the impact of

the earnings test.

        Some have attributed the long-term downward trend in labor force participation among

older men to the availability of Social Security and Disability Insurance. This conclusion,



        31
         The expansion of mandatory coverage to the public sector, self-employed sector, and
non-profit sector over time reduced the incentive for double dipping. Workers currently
excluded from coverage mainly include: federal civilian employees hired before January 1, 1984;
railroad workers; employees of state and local governments who are covered under a retirement
system; and household workers, self-employed workers and farm workers with very low
earnings.
                                                  42

however, hinges on what the labor force participation rate would have been in the absence of

Social Security. Such a counterfactual is suggested, in large part, by the labor force participation

trend prior to the advent of Social Security in 1935. Perhaps the post-1935 downward trend is

just the continuation of a pre-existing trend. The data in Figure 2 suggest that labor force

participation declined steadily throughout the 20th Century, including the pre-Social Security era.

Using a different definition of labor force participation, however, Ransom and Sutch (1986) find

that the labor force participation rate of men age 60 or older was fairly stable in years prior to the

start of Social Security. Costa (1998), Lee (1998) and Margo (1993) question the historical data

used by Ransom and Sutch.32 In any event, attributing causality depends on the counterfactual

trend in labor force participation in the absence of Social Security. It is possible that labor force

participation would have declined more slowly in the post 1935 period absent Social Security,

regardless of whether it was declining prior to 1935. The historical data, though interesting, are

unlikely to shed compelling evidence on the impact of Social Security on labor force

participation.

        Table 4.1 summarizes several studies of the effect of Social Security on labor supply.

The set of studies reviewed in the table is not exhaustive; rather, studies were selected because

they illustrate a particular approach to the problem and/or because they have been particularly

influential.     Studies of the impact of Social Security on labor supply can be divided into two

types. One group relies primarily on time-series variation in the law to identify the effect of

changes in benefit levels or other parameters of the Social Security system on labor supply. The



        32
         Ransom and Sutch assume that anyone who is unemployed for 6 months or more in
1900 is out of the labor force.
                                                  43

other group relies on cross-sectional variation in benefits (i.e., differences across workers at a

point in time) to identify the effect. Studies that analyze longitudinal data are a hybrid,

potentially drawing on both time-series and cross-sectional variation in benefits.

       In one of the more influential papers in the literature, Hurd and Boskin (1984) estimate

the effect of Social Security wealth on retirement using longitudinal data on men age 58 to 67

from the Retirement History Survey. They model retirement in the years 1969, 1971 and 1973,

and report many alternative ways of measuring the impact of Social Security on labor supply.

Cross tabulations of retirement rates by age, assets, and Social Security wealth indicate: (1) a

large increase in the retirement rate at age 62, when individuals become eligible to receive Social

Security benefits; and (2) a higher retirement rate for those who would qualify for greater Social

Security benefits.

       They also provide a series of logistic estimates of the probability of retiring at a given

age. Their Social Security wealth variable corresponds to the present value of benefits that the

individual would receive if he retired in that year, given his earnings history, family status, life

expectancy, and the prevailing Social Security law at that time. Although they use panel data and

study a period during which benefits were rising rapidly, variation in benefits is primarily a result

of cross-sectional differences in individual circumstances because they control for cohort effects

and estimate separate models by age (which has the effect of absorbing any time-related variable

that cuts across individuals). Their estimates imply that a $10,000 increase in Social Security

wealth (in 1969 dollars) is associated with an increase in the retirement rate of 7.8 percentage

points. Hurd and Boskin further predict that, based on this cross-sectional estimate, the 52

percent increase in Social Security benefits between 1968 to 1972 would lead to a decline in
                                                  44

labor force participation of older men of 8.4 percentage points. This slightly exceeds the actual

decline of 8.2 points. If this conclusion is correct, then Social Security has had a major impact

on the decline in male labor supply.

       Studies that examine cross-sectional data -- or exploit cross-sectional variability in

benefits in panel data by absorbing time effects -- necessarily estimate how the prevailing Social

Security law in a given year influences behavior (examples include Hurd and Boskin, 1984,

Boskin, 1977, and Pellechio, 1979 and 1981). Moffit (1987; p. 185) raises a fundamental

concern about the econometric identification of Social Security effects in such studies:

       For social security, the law is the same for all people at any given time; consequently,
       all cross-sectional variation in social security benefits or any other measure of the
       system must arise from cross-sectional variation in earnings received over the lifetime,
       in family size and the number of dependents, in maritial status, and in other such
       variables.

       That is, there is no variation in the law itself. The potential difficulty of course is that
       the variables for which variation is available may have independent effects on labor
       supply; hence there is a fundamental identification problem in cross-sectional data, a
       problem that can only be overcome by making restrictions in functional form of one kind
       or another.

Consequently, the impact of Social Security can only be untangled from the impact of other

variables if functional form and exclusion assumptions are made, such as the assumption that

marital status or past earnings do not directly influence labor supply.33 In many cases, these

assumptions are untenable. For example, if one considers two workers who qualify for different

Social Security benefits because one of the workers earned higher earnings throughout his career

by dint of hard work, motivation and innate talent, it is difficult to believe that those very

characteristics would not influence the likelihood that the workers would retire at different ages,


       33
            Quinn (1987) makes a similar point.
                                                 45

apart from their Social Security wealth. In this situation, the Social Security wealth variable

would confound the effect of one’s past earnings history on labor supply and the effect of Social

Security wealth on labor supply. Notice, however, that conditional on earnings or non-Social-

Security wealth, in all likelihood the worker with history of higher earnings has lower Social

Security wealth because the benefit formula is progressive. That is, the positive unconditional

relationship between Social Security wealth and past earnings is reversed if one conditions on

past earnings, or uses the replacement rate as a measure of benefit generosity. Therefore, the

estimates will be highly sensitive to the other variables included in the equation.

       Panel data that follow individuals over time and time-series data provide a means to

allow changes in the Social Security law to influence the benefits that individuals receive. The

difficulty here, however, is that variables often trend together. Many of the papers that rely on

time-series variation in benefits, for example, are based on the Retirement History Survey, which

follows individuals over the years 1969-1979 (examples are Hurd and Boskin, 1984; Burtless,

1986; and Anderson, Burkhauser, and Quinn, 1986). During these years Social Security benefits

grew rapidly owing to ad hoc changes to the Social Security Act and the over indexation of

benefits. Most of the analyses of data from this time period conclude that more generous Social

Security benefits reduce labor force participation, induce earlier retirement, or induce individuals

to retire earlier than they had previously planned. But the negative association between Social

Security wealth and labor supply in these studies may spuriously reflect the coincidence of two

trends: rising benefits and falling labor supply, which were due to unrelated causes.

       Indeed, the long-term time-series studies mentioned previously (see Figure 2), and

Moffitt's (1987) cohort-level study of labor supply in the years 1955-1981 suggest that the timing
                                                 46

of the decline in labor supply does not correspond well with changes in Social Security wealth.

These results suggest that estimates that are identified by continually rising benefits over time

may reflect secular time trends in labor force withdrawl, rather than a response to Social Security.

       Krueger and Pischke (1992) seek to avoid this problem by examining cohort-level data

for a period in which benefits rose and then fell for succeeding cohorts. Specifically, because

benefits were over indexed for inflation in the 1970s and then corrected abruptly by legislation

passed in 1977 for cohorts born between 1917 and 1921, the so called Notch Babies, there were

large, unanticipated differences in benefits for otherwise identical individuals depending on

whether they were born before or after 1917. This situation creates a natural experiment that can

be used to identify the effect of Social Security wealth apart from general time trends. Figure 4.1

summarizes Krueger and Pischke’s main findings. They used March CPS data from 1976 to

1988 to create a panel of labor force participation rates by single year of age for men aged 60-68.

Social Security wealth was calculated for a man with average earnings in each birth cohort at

each age and year. The data reported in the figure are the average labor force participation rate

and Social Security wealth for each cohort, after removing age effects from both series. Benefits

exhibit a sharp zig-zag pattern as a result of over indexation and the subsequent correction for the

notch cohort. Labor force participation, however, displays a steady downward trend, which is

largely unrelated to the sharp movements in Social Security wealth.34 Logistic regressions that

control for other variables, including the growth in Social Security wealth that is associated with

delayed retirement, yield a similar conclusion: labor force participation rates of older men are


       34
         Peracchi and Welch (1994) who also analyze CPS data, reach a similar conclusion
concerning trends in labor force participation of older men, although they do not directly measure
Social Security benefits.
                                                 47

unrelated to movements in Social Security wealth generated by the benefit notch.

       There is considerable disagreement in the literature as to the magnitude and direction of

the effect of Social Security on labor supply. For instance, after reviewing the past literature

Aaron (1982) concludes there is little evidence showing Social Security has reduced the labor

supply of elderly workers, whereas Boskin (1986; p. 62) concludes, "the acceleration in the

decline of the labor force participation of the elderly from 1969 to 1973 was primarily due to the

large increase in real Social Security benefits." Anderson, Gustman and Steinmeier (1999).

Quinn, Burkhauser, and Myers (1990), Hurd (1990), Ippolito (1988), Parnes (1988) and

Danziger, Haveman, and Plotnick (1981) reach more of a middle-ground conclusion, attributing a

portion of the observed decline in labor force participation of older workers to Social Security.

In our opinion, studies that use a more plausible identification strategy -- for example, using

variability in benefits due to legislated changes that cause breaks in the steady trend toward more

generosity benefits -- tend to find a very modest impact of Social Security wealth on labor supply

in the United States.

       Evidence from other countries is also mixed. For example, Baker and Benjamin (1999)

find that the introduction of early retirement benefits in Quebec in 1984 led to significant

increases in participation in the pension program for men age 60-64, but no greater increase in

early retirement than that found in the rest of Canada, which adopted early retirement benefits

later. This finding suggests that men who participated in the early retirement pension program

would have retired anyway, and serves as a useful reminder that just because there is take-up of

benefits in a social insurance program, the program may not affect behavior. On the other hand,

the studies in Gruber and Wise (1999) suggest that Social Security systems have contributed to
                                                 48

labor force withdrawal in many countries, particularly in Germany and France.



4.1 Automatic Benefit Recomputation



       When a worker delays retirement after becoming eligible for Social Security, his or her

Social Security wealth changes. Benefits are automatically recalculated to reflect the worker’s

current experience. Social Security wealth changes because: (1) the worker typically displaces a

year of low earnings with a year of high earnings, which raises the primary insurance amount, as

emphasized by Blinder, Gordon and Wise (1980); (2) the worker grows older and therefore has

less expected time left to collect benefits; (3) the actuarial adjustment to benefits may or may not

be fair.35 Moreover, because workers can self-select their retirement age based in part on their

expected life expectancy, an actuarial adjustment to benefits based on unconditional lifetables is

likely to be favorable to workers.

       As Blinder, Gordon and Wise (1980) have noted, the ad hoc changes in Social Security

benefits enacted by Congress prior to 1975 and double indexation typically resulted in more than

actuarially fair growth in Social Security wealth for workers under 65 years old who postponed

their retirement. They also noted that the 1977 amendments to the Social Security Act would

substantially reduce the relative wealth advantage of delaying retirement. As a consequence,

prior to the 1977 ammendments, one would expect the Automatic Benefit Recomputation to

induce some workers to delay their retirement. Krueger and Pischke (1992) report some



       35
         The first factor has less of an effect currently because a worker’s past earnings are now
indexed to overall earnings growth in the calculation of benefits.
                                                  49

evidence of this effect.



4.2 Liquidity constraints



       Perhaps the most noticeable feature of retirement behavior is that a high proportion of

people tend to retire immediately upon turning age 62 or age 65. Figure 4.2, taken from Rust

and Phelan (1997), illustrates the spike in the retirement rate at ages 62 and 65. Using data on

men from the Retirement History Survey, the figure shows the fraction of workers who begin

receiving Social Security benefits at various ages. Nearly a quarter of workers first receive

Social Security benefits in the year they turn 62, the very first year they are eligible, and almost

as many start to receive benefits in the year they turn 65, the “normal” retirement age. A number

of authors, including Crawford and Lilien (1981), Hurd and Boskin (1984), Boskin (1977), Kahn

(1988), and Rust and Phelan (1997) have concluded that the jump in the retirement rate at age 62

is a result of liquidity constraints. That is, workers cannot borrow against their future Social

Security wealth and many lack access to other forms of credit, so they wait until age 62 to receive

retirement benefits, even though they would prefer to retire earlier and borrow to finance their

consumption.

       Rust and Phelan (1997) provide a dynamic programming model of the retirement

decision, specifically modeling the effects of Social Security in a world with incomplete markets

for loans, annuities and health insurance. Their simulation results suggest that liquidity

constraints can account for the spike in retirement at age 62. During the period they studied, the

actuarial adjustment for delaying retirement beyond age 65 was unfair -- which would have
                                                 50

encouraged workers to retire at age 65 -- but they conclude that the actuarial penalty for working

longer only partially explains the spike in retirement at age 65. More importantly, they suggest

that eligibility for Medicare is the main reason for the spike at age 65. That is, workers become

eligible for Medicare at age 65, so the value of employer-provided health insurance drops

discretely at this point. Interestingly, they find that workers who have employer-provided health

insurance but no access to retiree health insurance are four times more likely to retire at age 65

than are those who lack health insurance or have coverage independent of employment. And

workers who lack health insurance or have coverage independent of employment are much more

likely to retire at age 62 than are those who rely on employer-provided coverage. Thus, they find

evidence that the spike in the retirement rate at age 65 is largely due to “health insurance

constrained” individuals.36

       Two additional factors might contribute to the discrete jump in the retirement rate at age

65. First, many private pensions penalize workers who continue working after age 65. Second,

until 1978, the United States permitted companies to maintain mandatory retirement policies,

which enabled them to mandatorily retire workers upon reaching age 65. The mandatory

retirement age was lifted to 70 in 1978, and then eliminated for most occupations in 1987.

       A test of the impact of the Social Security program on the jump in the retirement rate for

65 year olds will soon be possible. In 1983 the Congress approved legislation that will gradually

raise the normal retirement age from 65 to 67. The normal retirement age will rise by two

months a year from 2003 through 2008, and then after a 12 year pause, it will rise again by two


       36
         See Gruber and Madrian (1995) for related evidence showing that the likelihood of
retirement is higher for older workers in states that mandate that individuals have the right to
purchase health insurance from a previous employer after leaving the firm.
                                                 51

months a year from 2020 through 2025. It will be interesting to see if the retirement spike moves

up by two months a year along with the normal retirement age, especially because the age of

eligibility for Medicare will not increase with the normal Social Security retirement age. This

program change should provide fertile research ground in the future.



4.3 Earnings Test



        Since it was founded, Social Security has included some form of a retirement earnings

test, intended to limit benefits to retired individuals. Under the earnings test, Social Security

recipients who have labor earnings in excess of a certain threshold lose part or all of their

benefits in the year of their earnings. The particulars of the earnings test have varied

considerably over time. The original Social Security Act of 1935 required that no benefits be

paid to beneficiaries who received earnings from regular employment. Before it was repealed, in

2000 beneficiaries under the age of 65 could earn up to $10,080 without any benefit offset, but

benefits were reduced by $1 for every $2 of earnings above that threshold. The earnings test was

less stringent for beneficiaries age 65 to 69: in 2000 they were allowed to earn up to $17,000

without a benefit offset, and then faced a $1 reduction in benefits for every $3 of earnings above

that threshold.37 Since 1983, beneficiaries age 70 and older have not been subject to an earnings

test.

        A delayed retirement credit was provided to compensate workers age 65 to 69 whose



        37
         To be more precise, the lower age level pertained to people age 65 in the calendar year
in which they turned 65.
                                                 52

benefits were offset by the earnings test. The delayed retirement credit increased workers’

retirement benefits by 6 percent for each full-year-equivalent of benefits that were lost because of

the retirement test. The 6 percent increase was not actuarially fair, but it was close to being

actuarially fair. Similarly, beneficiaries age 62 to 65 who lost benefits because of the earnings

test received an actuarial adjustment to their benefits later on (at age 65) to compensate for the

earnings test.

       Legislation passed unanimously by the House and Senate and signed by President Clinton

in April 2000 eliminated the earnings test for workers age 65-69. For benefit computation, the

earnings test was repealed retroactively to the beginning of the calendar year. The earnings test

remained in place for younger beneficiaries, however. Because of the delayed retirement credit

(which was already almost actuarially neutral, and slated to become actuarially neutral in the near

future), the elimination of the earnings test was not expected to increase expenditures in the long

run.

       Policy makers including Alan Greenspan and Bill Clinton said they expected the

elimination of the earnings test to increase labor supply of elderly workers. This argument

probably relies more on psychology than economics, because the earnings test had an

approximately actuarially neutral effect on workers’ Social Security wealth. Nevertheless, if

workers who were potentially affected by the earnings test did not realize that their benefits

would subsequently be increased to compensate for benefit reductions for earnings above the

threshold, or if they acted as if they were liquidity constrained or myopic and put greater weight

on present benefits than future benefits, then eliminating the earning test is like eliminating a

payroll tax. In this case, for workers on the margin of working enough hours to exceed the
                                                53

threshold, the elimination of the earnings test would be expected to lead to an increase in labor

supply. For workers above the threshold, the elimination of the earnings test in this setting

would have opposing income and substitution effects.

        Empirical evidence on the labor supply effects of the earning test is mixed, although the

strongest evidence suggests that eliminating the earnings test will have at best a modest effect on

labor supply. Friedberg (2000) finds evidence suggesting that some workers do respond to the

earnings test because the earnings distributions of 63-69 year old workers tend to display excess

clustering just below the relevant earnings thresholds. Moreover, the mass in the distribution just

below the threshold moves when the threshold moves. It is unclear whether this clustering

signifies an important labor supply response, however, because the number of workers who are

clustered just below the threshold point is relatively small compared to total labor supply of older

workers; the response of workers above the threshold level is potentially of more importance for

overall labor supply. Friedberg (2000) estimates the impact of the earnings test on labor supply

by estimating the parameters of a labor supply function by maximum likelihood assuming utility

maximization over the piecewise linear budget constraint created by the earnings test. She

predicts that eliminating the earnings test would raise the aggregate work hours of 65-69 year old

men by 5 percent. Friedberg’s estimates imply a larger labor supply response than most of the

rest of the literature on the earnings test.

        Gruber and Orszag (2000), for example, examine the impact of past changes in the

earnings test on the labor supply behavior of elderly men and women in a less structural way.

They directly examined how various measures of labor supply of older workers changed in years

when parameters of the earnings test changed between 1973 and 1998. Specifically, they use
                                                  54

data on the previous year’s earnings, hours worked, employment status, and Social Security

receipt of men and women age 59 to 75 from March Current Population Surveys conducted from

1974 through 1999. They conclude that the earnings test exerts no robust influence on the labor

supply decisions of men, although they find some evidence of an effect for women. The

apparently weak impact of the earnings test on labor supply is probably more a result of a

relatively inelastic labor supply response to a perceived tax, than a result of a rational calculation

by the elderly that the discounted actuarial present value of their benefits is unaffected by their

labor supply.

       An obvious direction for future research is to use the elimination of the earnings test for

65-69 year olds that was enacted in 2000 to test the impact of the earnings test on labor supply

behavior. For example, changes in the aggregate hours worked by 65-69 year olds before and

after 2000 can be compared to the corresponding changes for 62-64 year olds and 70-74 year olds

to control for business cycle effects. It is rare that economists can examine the effect of such a

large and sudden change in a program parameter.



5. Disability Insurance



       To qualify for the Disability Insurance program, insured individuals must be unable “to

engage in substantial gainful activity, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental

impairment that is expected to result in death or last at least 12 months.” There is also a five-

month waiting period before an applicant to DI can start receiving benefits. This is a strict

standard. In essence, applicants must be unable to work in any job that exists in the U.S.
                                                  55

economy. The Social Security Administration advises prospective applicants: “If you cannot do

the work you did in the past, we see if you are able to adjust to other work. ... If you can adjust to

other work, your claim will be denied.”38 To qualify as covered for disability insurance,

individuals age 31 or older must fully meet the insurance coverage requirements under Social

Security and have worked in covered employment in at least 20 of the last 40 calendar quarters.

The coverage requirement is less stringent for individuals younger than 31 because they have less

time to satisfy the Social Security eligibility requirements.39

       A worker who qualifies for DI before reaching the normal Social Security retirement age

can receive a benefit equal to 100 percent of his or her primary insurance amount. The spouse

and unmarried children (under the age of 18, or 19 in the case of full-time students) of a disabled

worker can also qualify for benefits. There is a cap on the total amount of benefits a family can

receive, however.40

       Despite the official criteria, it is important to bear in mind that the assessment of a

disability is inherently a subjective decision.41 As Bound and Waidman (2001) stress, the

standards used to evaluate whether individuals meet the DI disability test have varied over time,

and are a major determinant of the number of participants on the DI program. For example, in


       38
            See http://www.ssa.gov/dibplan/dqualify6.htm.
       39
        The blind are exempt from the requirement that they have considerable covered work in
recent calendar quarters (i.e., 20 out of the last 40 quarters requirement for workers older than
30). Those who do not meet the employment history requirement for DI can apply for the
Supplemental Security Income program, which pays less generous benefits but has no past
employment requirement.
       40
            For program details, see Rejda (1999) or Bound and Burkhauser (2000).
       41
         See Diamond and Sheshinski (1995) for a model of the optimal structure of DI benefits
in a world with uncertain and imperfect evaluations of applicants’ disability status.
                                                56

1980 Congress required more frequent eligibility reviews to check if beneficiaries continued to

have a disability. Then in 1984 Congress loosened eligibility requirements, by, among other

things, shifting the burden of proof to the Social Security Administration to demonstrate that the

beneficiary’s health had improved sufficiently to return to work, and placing more weight on the

claimant’s own medical evidence. In addition, the Social Security Administration changed its

treatment of claims involving mental illness, by emphasizing the ability of the claimant to

function in work or a work-like environment. As a consequence, by 1988 mental health became

the most prevalent disabling condition among new beneficiaries, increasing from 11 percent of

all cases in 1982 to 22 percent in 1988, and peaking at 26 percent in 1993.42 In 1996 alcoholism

and drug addiction were removed as disabling conditions, but mental impairment continues to be

the most prevalent disabling condition, accounting for 22 percent of beneficiaries granted

benefits in 1999.

       Figure 5.1 illustrates the number of disabled workers receiving DI benefits in selected

years since 1960. The number of disabled workers on DI was less than 0.5 million in 1960, and

then grew rapidly in the 1960s and 1970s, reaching 2.9 million in 1980. The number of

beneficiaries fell slightly between 1980 and the mid 1980s, and then began to grow rapidly again

beginning in the mid to late 1980s. The steady rise in the number of DI beneficiaries in the

1990s is rather surprising in view of the strong labor demand in the U.S. in that period. The

unemployment rate, for example, fell from 7.5 percent in 1992 to below 4 percent at the end of

1999. DI participation usually follows a counter cyclical pattern.43 Part of the explanation is

       42
            See House Ways and Means Committee, Green Book, 2000, Table 1-43.
       43
         See Black, Daniel and Sanders (1998) for compelling evidence that economic
conditions influence participation on DI. Using exogenous shocks to local economic conditions
                                                  57

simply that mortality decreased among the stock of DI recipients (because new recipients had

longer life expectancies), which caused the number of people on the rolls to grow (see Autor and

Dugan, 2001).

       Another curious development is that the employment rate of people with a self-reported

disability fell in the 1990s, especially for men. For example, Bound and Waidman (2001) find

that the employment rate of 30-44 year old men with a work limitation fell from just over 40

percent in 1990 to below 30 percent in 1999. Employment rates of other workers increased or

remained constant over this period. The distinct downward trend in employment for people with

disabilities has stimulated new research into the DI program that is described below.

       The earliest studies of DI examined the relationship between the generosity of DI benefits

and participation in the DI program.44 Perhaps best known and most controversial, Parsons

(1980) estimated a probit model to explain labor force participation using data on 48 to 62 year

old men from the 1969 cross-sectional wave of the National Longitudinal Surveys.45 The key

independent variable was the ratio of each individual’s potential Social Security benefit to his

hourly wage three years earlier. The results indicated an elasticity of labor force participation

with respect to the potential benefit replacement rate of -.63, with a t-ratio of -2.5. The elasticity

is even larger in magnitude for those in poor health, as proxied by their subsequent mortality

probability. An issue that we have stressed repeatedly in this chapter arises in interpreting these


resulting from swings in the coal industry in four states, they find that the elasticity of DI
payments with respect to local earnings is -0.3 to -0.4. Similar results are obtained when they use
shocks due to the collapse of the steel industry in six other states.
       44
         See Bound and Burkhauser (2000) for a comprehensive summary of research on many
aspects of DI, including labor supply.
       45
            See also Leonard’s (1979) related study.
                                                  58

probit estimates: the Social Security benefit is a deterministic function of past labor market

behavior, so it is impossible to identify the effect of benefits separately from the effect of past

behavior that might be related to present labor supply for reasons having nothing to do with DI.

Had a more flexible function of past earnings been included in the model, the effect of the benefit

variable would not have been estimable. Indeed, there is an indication that identification of the

benefit elasticity apart from the effect of past wages is a problem in this analysis as Parsons

reports in a footnote that the replacement ratio was used because of collinearity programs if

wages and benefits were entered as separate variables. Because the potential Social Security

benefit relative to the wage is lower for those with higher wages or more steady employment,

there is a real possibility that the inverse relationship between the replacement rate and labor

force participation is merely a reflection of the positive relationship between employment rates

and earnings potential.

       This problem aside, Parsons (1980) provides a rather useful check on the plausibility of

his benefit elasticity. Specifically, he uses the estimated cross-sectional model to predict the

labor force nonparticipation rate each year from 1948 to 1976. This is accomplished by

combining the cross-sectional parameter estimates with values of the replacement rate and

mortality index each year to generate predicted nonparticipation rates. This exercise reveals a

fairly tight correspondence between predicted labor force nonparticipation and the actual

nonparticipation rate. Because other variables not captured by the cross-sectional model may

change over time (e.g., disability assessment standards could change), and the parameters in the

cross-sectional model may also change over time, there is no guarantee that the predicted values

will closely mirror the observed values, even under the best of circumstances. So this test does
                                                  59

provide some additional information. (Another way of performing this same type of comparison

would be to estimate a nonparticipation rate model with aggregate time-series data, and test if the

benefit elasticity is the same as in the cross-sectional model.) It is certainly possible, however,

that the similarity of the time trends in the predicted and actual nonparticipation rates is just

coincidental, a reflection of rising benefits and declining participation in this period for unrelated

reasons. Nevertheless, if the prediction diverged substantially from the actual data, then one

would have even more reason to be skeptical of the cross-sectional estimate.

       Bound (1991) challenges Parson’s conclusion that DI is responsible for the decline in

male labor force participation in the post-World War II period. He presents two types of

evidence. First, he documents that among prime-age male applicants to DI who were rejected

from the program because they were not judged to have a medical disability in 1972 and 1978,

less than one half subsequently returned to sustained employment. He argues that the experience

of these individuals, who presumably are healthier than DI beneficiaries, provides a natural upper

bound estimate for the employment rate of DI beneficiaries had they been denied access to DI.46

Because the drop in labor force participation has more than matched the rise in the proportion of

older men on DI, he concludes that “DI accounts for substantially less than half of the postwar

decline in the participation rates of older men.” Second, and related, he estimates a



       46
          Parsons (1991) questions whether the employment experiences of denied applicants to
DI provide a natural control group for successful applicants, because denied applicants may
refrain from working because they are appealing their rejection from the program or plan to
reapply to DI and would like to strengthen their case, or because they face obstacles returning to
work because they spent time out of the labor force while applying to DI. In other words, in the
absence of the program their employment rates might be higher. Similar arguments could be
applied to Bound’s logit equation described below. See Bound (1991) for a reply to this critique.
                                                   60

nonemployment logit equation similar to the nonparticipation equation in Parsons (1980), except

he uses a sample of individuals who never applied to DI, as well as a sample that closely parallels

the one used by Parsons. The estimated elasticity of nonemployment with respect to the benefit

replacement rate is similar in both samples. He infers from this that Parsons’s estimate of the DI

benefit elasticity is biased upwards because the non-applicants could not have been affected by

DI. Although Bound acknowledges that DI does influence labor supply incentives, he questions

whether the availability of the program is a major reason for the decline in male labor force

participation, and he suggests that benefits are well targeted towards those who would not seek

employment even in the absence of the program.

        More recent studies have sought to explain both the rising number of DI participants and

declining employment rate of individuals with self-reported disabilities since the late 1980s.

Ironically, this rise in DI participation occurred during a time when the overall employment-to-

population rate increased to a historically high level. Nevertheless, the employment rate fell

considerably for male high school dropouts in the 1990s. Moreover, the declining labor force

participation of people with disabilities is of concern if individuals with disabilities desire to

work, and the expanding DI rolls in a period of strong growth in employment demand raises

concerns about possible labor supply disincentive effects caused by the program. Although

several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the fall in employment of people with

disabilities and the rise in DI participation in the 1990s, a fair assessment is that this is an area

where a consensus on the causes of these developments has yet to emerge.

        Bound and Waidman (2001) attribute the decline in employment among people with a

self-reported work disability mainly to increases in the availability of DI due to changes in
                                                  61

disability assessment standards. Their evidence is rather circumstantial, however. Looking

across states between 1989 and 1999, they find that the change in the fraction of the population

that has a work limitation and is out of work tends to increase almost one for one with the

proportion of the working-age population on DI. This suggests that many of the self-reported

work-limited individuals who left employment received support from the DI program, perhaps

because access to DI was relaxed.

       Autor and Duggan (2001) attribute the rise in participation in the DI and SSI programs

since the mid 1980s to the reduced stringency in screening applicants and to the interaction

between growing wage inequality and the progressive benefit formula in these programs. The

effective benefit replacement rate increased because the earnings of less-skilled workers fell, and

the benefit formula is progressive and linked to average earnings. For example, between 1979

and 1999 the replacement rate increased from 56 percent to 74 percent for a 40-49 year old man

at the 10th percentile of the earnings distribution. The addition of Medicare or Medicaid benefits

could raise the effective replacement rate above 100 percent. Autor and Duggan also present

cross-state evidence showing that the share of the population applying for DI benefits has

become more responsive to employment shocks since the early 1980s. Thus, the declining job

opportunities for less skilled workers, together with the progressive DI benefit formula and more

liberal screening rules, may account for the increased participation in disability programs.

       Acemoglu and Angrist (2001) and DeLeire (2000) look at another policy as a possible

cause of the decline in labor force participation of those with a self-reported disability, the

Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. This Act requires employers to accommodate

disabled workers (e.g., by providing physical access) and outlaws discrimination against the
                                                62

disabled in hiring, firing, and compensation. Although the ADA was intended to increase

employment of the disabled by reducing discrimination and increasing access, it also increases

costs for employers. Acemoglu and Angrist, for example, find evidence that the employment of

disabled workers declined more in states where there have been more ADA-related

discrimination charges.47

       A final factor may be welfare reform. Even before Aid to Families with Dependent

Children was repealed in 1996, states had tightened their welfare laws. It is possible that an

increasing number of people sought DI because they were no longer eligible for welfare, or

because welfare became less generous. Because state welfare programs primarily affect women,

this might also help explain why the relative number of male to female workers who joined the

DI rolls increased from 2 to 1 in 1985 to 1.2 to 1 in 1999.48 The proportion of women who

reported having a health limitation or disability that restricts them from working increased in the

1990s, after declining in the 1980s (see Bound and Waidman, 2001). It is also possible that the

changing mores concerning welfare may have affected responses to Census questions on

disability status. It seems reasonable to speculate that during the 1990s because of the stigma

associated with welfare it became socially less acceptable for an able bodied individual to report

that he or she did not work. So a growing proportion of people who were out of the labor force

might have reported a health-related work-limitation as the reason why they did not work

because of changes in social norms.

       47
         Bound and Waidman (2001), on the other hand, point out that the rise in disability
applications began in 1989-90, prior to the passage fo the ADA.
       48
          House Ways and Means Committee, Green Book, 2000, Table 1-43. The growing labor
force participation of women might also help explain the change in the sex ratio of DI
participants.
                                                 63



6. Conclusion



       The empirical work on unemployment insurance and workers’ compensation insurance

reviewed in this chapter finds that the programs tend to increase the length of time employees

spend out of work. Most of the estimates of the elasticities of lost work time that incorporate

both the incidence and duration of claims are close to 1.0 for unemployment insurance and

between 0.5 and 1.0 for workers’ compensation. These elasticities are substantially larger than

the labor supply elasticities typically found for men in studies of the effects of wages or taxes on

hours of work; such estimates are centered close to zero (see, e.g., Killingsorth, 1983 and

Pencavel, 1987). They are also larger than the consensus range of estimates of the labor supply

elasticity for women, which is highly dispersed but centered near 0.4. These seemingly disparate

results may, in part, be reconciled by the likelihood that elasticities are larger when a labor supply

response can easily occur through participation or weeks worked, rather than adjustments to the

number of hours worked per week. Labor supply responses to WC and UI benefits occur mainly

through decisions about weeks worked, and labor supply responses of women mainly concern

participation and weeks worked. Male labor supply elasticities by contrast are primarily

determined by adjustments to hours worked per week, a margin on which employees may have

relatively little flexibility. These observations suggest that it would be misleading to apply a

universal set of labor supply elasticities to diverse problems and populations.

       Temporary total workers’ compensation insurance benefits and the UI program also may

generate relatively large labor supply responses because these programs lead to only a short-run
                                                 64

change in the returns to work. For example, individuals are not eligible to receive UI benefits for

an indefinite period; there is a maximum number of weeks benefits can be received. Thus,

workers may inter-temporally substitute their labor supply while benefits are available,

generating larger work responses than predicted by long-run labor supply elasticities. The

window of eligibility for Social Security and Disability Insurance benefits is more permanent, so

such inter-temporal considerations are likely to be less important.

       In addition, receipt of UI and temporary total WC benefits makes the net wage (after-tax

wage minus after-tax benefits) very low, often close to zero in the case of WC benefits. This

situation is different from a typical cut in wages for two reasons. First, the income effect does

not counterbalance the substitution effect to the usual extent because benefits are provided and

income often does not fall appreciably. In the case of a replacement rate of 0.8, for example, the

net wage falls by 80 percent, but short-run income falls by only 20 percent. In the usual case of

wage variation, a drop in the wage dramatically lowers income, and thus, the income effect tends

to mitigate the substitution effect. Second, the level of the net wage may be so low that it is out

of the range of typical variation in cross-section wages or wage variation due to taxes. Thus,

estimates based on other sources of wage variation may be less applicable to UI and WC.

       Despite labor supply responses to social insurance programs, we would emphasize that

the desirability of social insurance depends on the intended as well as unintended effects (or,

more appropriately put, undesired side effects) of the programs. Thus, a finding of labor supply

responses to incentives is not necessarily cause for abandoning a program. The undesired side

effects must be balanced against the improved welfare from providing income maintenance to

those in need. Moreover, for some programs, such as UI, it is quite likely that the adverse
                                                  65

incentive effects vary over the business cycle. For example, there is probably less of an

efficiency loss from reduced search effort by the unemployed during a recession than during a

boom. As a consequence, it may be optimal to expand the generosity of UI during economic

downturns (assuming the initial starting level was optimal). Unfortunately, this is an area in

which little empirical research is currently available to guide policymakers.

       A final point worth highlighting is that less research has been conducted on WC and DI

than on UI, despite the large magnitude of the programs. In our view, WC and DI are under

researched relative to their importance to the economy and merit further study. These programs

exhibit substantial variability over time or across states, and large data sets are available that can

be analyzed, so there is potential for many valuable research projects on WC and DI. Another

fruitful area for research involves the overlap among programs. For example, individuals who

receive both WC and DI benefits have their DI benefits reduced if their combined level exceeds a

certain threshold. Little research has been done on the incentive effects caused by the

interactions among social insurance programs. Also, while the UI literature for Europe is rapidly

catching up to the American literature, relatively little work has been done on WC-like programs

outside the U.S.
                                               66

                                        REFERENCES

Aaron, H. J. (1982), Economic effects of social security (Brookings Institution: Washington,
       D.C.).

Abbring, Jaap H., Gerard J. van den Berg, and Jan C. van Ours (2000), “The Effect of
      Unemployment Insurance Sanction on the Transition Rate from Unemployment to
      Employment”, Working Paper, Free University, Amsterdam.

Acemoglu, D. and J. Angrist (forthcoming), "Consequences of employment protection? The case
     of the Americans with Disabilities Act", Journal of Political Economy.

Adams, J. (1986), “Equilibrium Taxation and Experience Rating in a Federal System of
      Unemployment Insurance”, Journal of Public Economics 29:51-77.

Aiuppa, Thomas and James Trieschmann (1998), “Moral Hazard in the French Workers'
      Compensation System”, Journal of Risk and Insurance. 65(1):125-33.

Anderson, K. H., R. V. Burkhauser, and J. F. Quinn (1986), "Do retirement dreams come true?
      The effect of unanticipated events on retirement plans", Industrial and Labor Relations
      Review 39 (4):518-526.

Anderson, P. M., A. L. Gustman, and T. L. Steinmeier (1999), "Trends in male labor force
      participation and retirement: some evidence on the role of pensions and Social Security in
      the 1970s and 1980s", Journal of Labor Economics 17 (4 part 1):757-783.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer (2001), “The distributional consequences of
      unemployment benefits and taxes”, Working Paper, May 2001.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer (1997), "Unemployment insurance takeup rates and
      the after-tax value of benefits", Quarterly Journal of Economics CXII:913-938.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer (1997), "The effects of firm specific taxes and
      government mandates with an application to the U.S. Unemployment Insurance
      Program", Journal of Public Economics 65:119-144.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer (1998), “Using a natural experiment to estimate the
      effects of the Unemployment Insurance Payroll Tax on wages, employment, claims and
      denials", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6808.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer (1994), "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance
      Taxes and Benefits on Layoffs Using Firm and Individual Data", National Bureau of
      Economic Research Working Paper No. 4960.
                                               67

Anderson, Patricia M., and Meyer, Bruce D. (1993), "Unemployment insurance in the United
      States: layoff incentives and cross-subsidies", Journal of Labor Economics 11:S70-S95.

Atkinson, A. B. (1987), "Income Maintenance and Social Insurance", in Alan Auerbach and
       Martin Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics (North-Holland, Amsterdam)

Atkinson, Anthony B. (1993), "Have Social Security benefits seriously damaged work incentives
       in Britain?", in: A. B. Atkinson and G. V. Mogensen, eds., Welfare and work incentives:
       A North European perspective (Oxford University Press) 161-191.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and John Micklewright (1990), "Unemployment compensation and labor
       market transitions: a critical review", Journal of Economic Literature 29:1679-1727.

Autor, D. H. and M. G. Duggan (2001), "The rise in disability recipiency and the decline in
       unemployment", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8336.

Baily, Martin Neil (1977), "On the theory of layoffs and unemployment", Econometrica
       45:1043-1064.

Baker, M. and D. Benjamin (1999), "Early retirement provisions and the labor force behavior of
       older men: evidence from Canada", Journal of Labor Economics 17 (4 Part 1):724-756.

Banks, James and Carl Emmerson (2000), "Public and private pension spending: principles,
       practice and the need for reform", Fiscal Studies 21:1-63.

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (1994), “Unnatural experiments? Estimating the incidence of
       endogenous policies”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper W4956.

Black, D., K. Daniel, and S. Sanders (1998), The impact of economic conditions on participation
       in disability programs: evidence from the coal boom and bust (University of Kentucky,
       Lexington, KY; Monitor Company, New York, NY; Carnegie Mellon University,
       Pittsburgh, PA).

Blank, Rebecca M., and David E. Card (1990), "Recent trends in insured and uninsured
       unemployment: is there an explanation?", Quarterly Journal of Economics
       CVI:1157-1190.

Blau, D. M. (1997), "Social Security and the labor supply of older married couples", Labour
       Economics 4 (4):373-418.

Blinder, A. S., R. H. Gordon, and D. E. Wise (1980), "Reconsidering the work disincentive
       effects of Social Security", National Tax Journal 33 (4):431-442.
                                                68

Blinder, A. S., R. H. Gordon, and D. E. Wise (1990), "Social Security, bequests and the life
       cycle theory of saving: cross-sectional tests", in: Inventory theory and consumer behavior.
       (University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor) 229-256.

Boskin, M.(1977), "Social Security and retirement decisions", Economic Inquiry 15 (1):1-25.

Boskin, M. J. (1986), Too many promises: the uncertain future of social security (Dow Jones-
       Irwin, Homewood, IL).

Bound, J. (1989), “The health and earnings of rejected disability insurance applicants”, American
      Economic Review 79(3):482-503.

Bound, J. (1991), "The health and earnings of rejected disability insurance applicants: reply",
      American Economic Review 81(5):1427-1434.

Bound, J. and R. V. Burkhauser (1999), "Economic analysis of transfer programs targeted on
      people with disabilities", in: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
      Economics 3C (Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam) 3417-3525.

Bound, J. and T. Waidmann (2000), "Accounting for recent declines in employment rates among
      the working-aged disabled", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
      7975.

Brechling, Frank (1977a), "Unemployment insurance taxes and labor turnover: summary of
       theoretical findings", Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30:483-494.

Brechling, Frank (1977b), "The incentive effects of the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Tax", in:
       Ronald Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics 1 (JAI Press, Greenwich, CT) 41-
       102.

Burdett, K. (1979), “Unemployment Insurance Payments as a Search Subsidy: A Theoretical
       Analysis”, Economic Inquiry 17:333-342.

Burtless, Gary S. (1990), "Unemployment insurance and labor supply: a survey", in: W. Lee
       Hansen and James F. Byers, eds., Unemployment Insurance (University of Wisconsin
       Press, Madison, WI).

Burtless, G. (1986), "Social Security, unanticipated benefit increases, and the timing of
       retirement", Review of Economic Studies 53(5):781-805.

Burtless, G. and A. H. Munnell (1991), "Does a trend toward early retirement create problems for
       the economy?", in: Alicia M. Munnell, ed., Retirement and public policy (National
       Academy of Social Insurance, Washington, DC).
                                               69

Butler, Richard (1983), “Wage and Injury Response to Shifting Levels of Workers’
        Compensation”, in: J. Worrall, ed., Safety and the Workforce (Cornell University Press,
        Ithaca) 61-86.

Butler, Richard J., B. Delworth Gardner and Harold H. Gardner (1997), "Workers' Compensation
        Costs When Maximum Benefits Change", Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 15:259-269.

Butler, Richard J. and John D. Worrall (1991), “Claims Reporting and Risk Bearing Moral
        Hazard in Workers' Compensation”, Journal of Risk and Insurance 49:91-204.

Butler, Richard J., and John D. Worrall (1983), "Workers' compensation: benefit and injury
        claim rates in the seventies", Review of Economics and Statistics 50:580-589.

Butler, Richard J., and John D. Worrall (1985), "Work injury compensation and the duration of
        nonwork spells", Economic Journal 95:714-724.

Butler, R., D. Durbin, and N. Helvacian (1996), "Increasing claims for soft tissue in workers'
        compensation: cost shifting and moral hazard", Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 13:73-87.

Card, David and Phillip B. Levine (2000), “Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells:
       evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program”, Journal of Public Economics.

Card, David and Phillip B. Levine (1994): "Unemployment Insurance Taxes and the Cyclical
       and Seasonal Properties of Unemployment," Journal of Public Economics 53:1-29.

Card, David and Brian P. McCall (1996), "Is workers' compensation covering uninsured medical
       costs? Evidence from the 'Monday effect'", Industrial and Labor Relations Review
       49:690-706.

Card, David and W. Craig Riddell (1993), “A comparative analysis of unemployment in Canada
       and the United States”, in: David Card and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Small differences
       that matter (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL) 149-189.

Card, David and W. Craig Riddell (1997), “Unemployment in Canada and the United States: A
       Further Analysis,” in B. Curtis Eaton and Richard G. Harris, eds., Trade, Technology
       and Economics: Essays in Honour of Richard Lipsey. (Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK).

Card, David and W. Craig Riddell (1993), “A Comparative Analysis of Unemployment in
       Canada and the United States”, in: David Card and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Small
       Differences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and the
       United States. (University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Chicago, IL).
                                               70

Carling, Kenneth, Per-Anders Edin, Anders Harkman, Bertil Holmlund. (1996), "Unemployment
       Duration, Unemployment Benefits, and Labor Market Programs in Sweden”, Journal of
       Public Economics 59:313-334.

Carling, Kenneth, Bertil Holmlund and Altin Vejsiu (2001), “Do Benefit Cuts Boost Job
       Finding? Swedish Evidence from the 1990s”, Economic Journal 111:766-790.

Chelius, James (1982), “The Influence of Workers’ Compensation on Safety Incentives”,
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35:235-42.

Clark, Kim B., and Lawrence H. Summers (1982), "Unemployment insurance and labor market
       transitions", in: Martin Neil Baily, ed., Workers, Jobs, and Inflation (Brookings
       Institution, Washington, DC).

Classen, Kathleen P. (1979), "Unemployment insurance and job search", in: S. A. Lippman and
       J. J. McCall, eds., Studies in the economics of search (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

Corson, Walter and Walter Nicholson (1988), An Examination of Declining UI Claims During
      the 1980's, Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 88-3, Washington, DC: US
      Department of Labor - ETA.

Costa, D. (1998), The evolution of retirement: an American economic history, 1880-1990
       (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).

Crawford, V. and D. Lillien (1981), "Social Security and the retirement decision", Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 96(3):505-529.

Cullen, Julie and Jonathan Gruber. (2000), “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd out Spousal
       Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics 18(3):546-572.

Curington, William P. (1994), “Compensation for Permanent Impairment and the Duration of
       Work Absence: Evidence from Four Natural Experiments”, Journal of Human Resources
       29(3):888-910.

Curington, William P., Amy Farmer, and W. David Allen (1997), “Retroactive Benefits in
       Income Replacement Programs: Results from a Modified Natural Experiment”,Southern
       Economic Journal 64(1):255-67.

Danziger, Sheldon, Robert Haveman, and Robert Plotnick (1981), "How income transfer
      programs affect work, savings, and the income distribution: a critical review", Journal of
      Economic Literature XIX:975-1028.

Deleire, T. (2000), "The wage and employment effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act",
       Journal of Human Resources 35(4):693-715.
                                               71

Devine, Theresa J. and Nicholas M. Kiefer (1991), Empirical labor economics: the search
      approach (Oxford University Press, New York, NY).

Diamond, P. A. and J. A. Hausman (1984), "The retirement and unemployment behavior of older
      men", in Henry Aaron and Gary Burtless, ed., Retirement and economic behavior: Studies
      in Social Economics series (Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.) 97-132.

Diamond, Peter and Eytan Sheshinski. (1995), "Economic aspects of optimal disability benefits",
      Journal of Public Economics 57:1-24.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. (1988), "Workers' compensation, wages, and the risk of injury", in John F.
      Burton, Jr., ed., New perspectives in workers' compensation (ILR Press, Ithaca, NY) 71-
      96.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Ronald L. Oaxaca (1976), "Unemployment insurance, duration of
      unemployment, and subsequent wage gain", American Economic Review 66:754-766.

Emmerson, Carl and Andrew Leicester (2001), “A Survey of the UK Benefit System”,The
     Institute for Fiscal Studies, Briefing Note No. 13.

Engen, Eric M. and Jonathan Gruber (1995), “Unemployment insurance and precautionary
       saving”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper W5252.

Feldstein, Martin S. (1974), "Unemployment compensation: adverse incentives and
       distributional anomalies", National Tax Journal 27:231-244.

Feldstein, Martin S. (1976), "Temporary layoffs in the theory of unemployment", Journal of
       Political Economy 84:837-57.

Feldstein, Martin S. (1978), "The effect of unemployment insurance on temporary layoff
       unemployment", American Economic Review 68:834-846.

Feldstein, M. and M. Liebman (2001), "Social Security", this volume.

Friedberg, L. (2000), "The labor supply effects of the Social Security Earnings Test", Review of
       Economics and Statistics 82(1):48-63.

Fuchs, V. R., A. B. Krueger, and J. M. Poterba (1998), "Economists' views about parameters,
       values, and policies: survey results in labor and public economics", Journal of Economic
       Literature 36(3):1387-1425.

Gardner, John A. (1991), "Benefit increases and system utilization: the Connecticut experience",
      Workers Compensation Research Institute.
                                               72

Gordon, R. H. and A. S. Blinder (1980), "Market wages, reservation wages, and retirement
      decisions", Journal of Public Economics 14(2):277-308.

Gritz, R. Mark, and Thomas MaCurdy (1990), "The influence of unemployment insurance on the
        unemployment experiences of young workers", Working Paper, Hoover Institution.

Gruber, J. (1997), "The consumption smoothing benefits of unemployment insurance", American
       Economic Review 87(1):192-205.

Gruber, J. and B. C. Madrian (1995), "Health-insurance availability and the retirement decision",
       American Economic Review 85(4):938-948.

Gruber, J. and P. Orszag (2000), "Does the Social Security Earnings Test affect labor supply and
       benefits receipt?", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7923.

Gruber, J. and D. A. Wise. (1999), "Social Security and retirement around the world:
       introduction and summary", National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Alan Krueger (1991), "The incidence of mandate employer-provided
       insurance: lessons from Workers' Compensation Insurance", in: David Bradford, ed., Tax
       Policy and the Economy 5 (National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA)
       111-143.

Gustman, Alan L. (1982), "Analyzing the relation of unemployment insurance to
      unemployment", in: Ronald Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics 5 (JAI Press,
      Greenwich, CT).

Ham, John C. and Samuel A. Rea, Jr. (1987), “Unemployment Insurance and Male
      Unemployment Duration in Canada”, Journal of Labor Economics 5(3):325-353.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1977), Jobless Pay and the Economy. (Johns Hopkins University Press,
     Baltimore, MD).

Holmlund, Bertil (1983), "Payroll Taxes and Wage Inflation: The Swedish Experience",
      Scandinavian Journal of Economics 85(1):1-15.

Holmlund, Bertil (1998), “Unemployment Insurance in Theory and Practice”, Scandinavian
      Journal of Economics 100:113-141.

Hunt, Jennifer. (1995), “The Effect of Unemployment Compensation on Unemployment
       Duration in Germany”, Journal of Labor Economics. 13(1):88-120.

Hurd, M. D. and M. J. Boskin (1984), "The effect of Social Security on retirement in the early
       1970s", Quarterly Journal of Economics 99(4):767-790.
                                                 73


International Labour Organization (2001), "Cost of Social Security", (Geneva, Switzerland).
        Available from www.ilo.org/public/english/protection/socsec/publ/css/cssindex.htm.

Ippolito, R. A. (1998), "Disparate savings propensities and national retirement policy", in: O. S.
        Mitchell and S. J. Schieber, eds., Living with defined contribution pensions: Remaking
        responsibility for retired men (University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA) 247-
        272.

Johnson, William, and Jan Ondrich, (1989), "The duration of post-injury absences from work",
      mimeo., Syracuse University.

Kahn, J. A. (1988), "Social Security, liquidity, and early retirement", Journal of Public
       Economics 35(1):97-117.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer (1990), "Unemployment insurance, recall expectations
       and unemployment outcomes", Quarterly Journal of Economics CV:973-1002.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer (1990), "The impact of the potential duration of
       unemployment benefits on the duration of unemployment", Journal of Public Economics
       41:45-72.

Killingsworth, Mark R. (1983), Labor supply (Cambridge University Press, New York).

Kniesner, Thomas J., and John D. Leeth (1995), Simulating workplace safety policy (Kluwer
      Academic Publishers, Boston, MA).

Krueger, Alan B. (1990a), "Incentive effects of Workers' Compensation Insurance", Journal of
      Public Economics 41:73-99.

Krueger, Alan B. (1990b), "Workers' Compensation Insurance and the duration of workplace
      injuries", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 3253.

Krueger, Alan B. and John F. Burton, Jr. (1990), “The Employers’ Cost of Workers’
      Compensation Insurance: magnitudes, Determinants, and Public Policy”, Review of
      Economics and Statistics 72:228-240.

Krugman, Paul. (2001), “Outside the box”, The New York Times, July 11, p. A17.

Lee, C. (1998), "The rise of the welfare state and labor-force participation of older males:
       evidence from the pre-Social Security era", American Economic Review 88(2):222-226.

Leonard, J. S. (1979), "The Social Security Disability Insurance program and labor force
      participation", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 392.
                                                 74

Levine, Phillip B. (1993), "Spillover effects between the insured and uninsured unemployed",
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47:73-86.

Margo, R. A. (1993), "The labor force participation of older Americans in 1900: further results",
      Exploration in Economic History 30(4):409-423.

McCall, Brian (1996), “Unemployment Insurance Rules, Joblessness, and Part-Time Work”,
      Econometrica 64(3):647-82.

Meyer, Bruce D. (1990), "Unemployment insurance and unemployment spells", Econometrica
       58:757-782.

Meyer, Bruce D. (1992a), "Using natural experiments to measure the effects of unemployment
       insurance", working paper, Northwestern University.

Meyer, Bruce D. (1992b), “Quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of unemployment
       insurance from New York State”, working paper.

Meyer, Bruce D. (1995a), “Natural and Quasi- Experiments in Economics”, Journal of Business
       & Economic Statistics 13:151-162.

Meyer, Bruce D. (1995b), "Lessons from the U.S. unemployment insurance experiments",
       Journal of Economic Literature 33:91-131.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum (1996), "Repeat use of unemployment insurance”,
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 5423.

Meyer, Bruce D., W. Kip Viscusi and David Durbin (1995), "Workers' compensation and injury
       duration: evidence from a natural experiment", American Economic Review 85:322-340.

Moen, J. (1987), "The labor of older men: a comment", Journal of Economic History 47(3):761-
      767.

Moffitt, R. A. (1987), "Life-cycle labor supply and Social Security: a time-series analysis", in:
       Gary Burtless, ed., Work, health, and income among the elderly (The Brookings
       Institution, Washington D.C.).

Moffitt, Robert (1985), “Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment
       Spells,” Journal of Econometrics 28:85-101.

Moffitt, R., and W. Nicholson (1982), "The effect of unemployment insurance on
       unemployment: the case of federal supplemental benefits", The Review of Economics
       and Statistics 64:1-11.
                                              75

Mont, D, J.F. Burton Jr. and V. Reno (2000), Workers’ Compensation: benefits, coverage, and
      costs, 1997-1998, new estimates ( National Academy of Social Insurance, Washington,
      DC).

Moore, Michael J., and W. Kip Viscusi (1989), "Promoting safety through Workers'
      Compensation: the efficacy and net wage costs of injury insurance”, Rand Journal of
      Economics 20:499-515.

Moore, Michael J., and W. Kip Viscusi (1990), Compensation mechanisms for job risks: wages,
      Workers' Compensation, and product liability (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).

Mortensen, Dale T. (1977), "Unemployment insurance and job search decisions", Industrial and
      Labor Relations Review 30:505-517.

Mortensen, Dale T. (1986), “Job search and labor market analysis”, in: Orley C. Ashenfelter and
      Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of labor economics (North Holland, Amsterdam) 849-
      919.

Mortensen, Dale T. (1990), "A structural model of UI benefit effects on the incidence and
      duration of unemployment," in: Yoram Weiss and Gideon Fishelson, eds., Advances in
      the theory and measurement of unemployment. (St. Martin's Press, New York).

National Academy of Social Insurance (2000), “Workers’ compensation: benefits, coverage, and
       costs, 1997-1998, new estimates”, (Washington, DC).

National Foundation for Unemployment Compensation & Workers' Compensation (1998),
       Highlights of state unemployment compensation laws (NFUCWC, Washington, DC).

Nelson, W.J. Jr. (1988a), “Workers’ compensation: coverage, benefits and costs, 1985”, Social
       Security Bulletin 51(1):4-9.

Nelson, W.J. Jr. (1988b), “Workers’ compensation: 1980-84 benchmark revisions”, Social
       Security Bulletin 51(7):4-21.

Nelson, W.J. Jr. (1991), “Workers’ compensation: coverage, benefits and costs, 1988”, Social
       Security Bulletin 54(3):12-20.

Neuhauser, Frank and Steven Raphael (2001), “The Effect of an Increase in Worker’s
      Compensation Benefits on the Duration and Frequency of Benefit Receipt”, working
      paper, University of California, Berkeley.

Nickell, Stephen (1998), “Unemployment: Questions and Some Answers”, Economic Journal
       108:802-816.
                                                76

Parnes, H. S. (1988), "The retirement decision", in: M. Borus, H. Parnes, S. Santell, and B.
       Seidman, eds., The older worker (Industrial Relations Research Association, Wisconsin).

Parsons, D. O. (1980), "The decline in male labor force participation", Journal of Political
       Economy 88(1):117-134.

Parsons, D. O. (1991), "The health and earnings of rejected disability insurance applicants:
       comment", American Economic Review 81(5):1419-1426.

Pellechio, A. J. (1979), "Social Security financing and retirement behavior", The American
       Economic Review 69(2):284-287, Papers and Proceedings of the Ninety-First Annual
       Meeting of the American Economic Association.

Pellechio, A. J. (1981), "Social Security and the decision to retire", National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper W0734.

Pencavel, J. H. (1986), "Labor supply of men: a survey", in: Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
      Layard, eds., Handbook of labor economics, vol. 1, 3-102.

Peracchi, Franco and Finis Welch (1994), Journal of Labor Economics 12(2):210-42.

Quinn, J. F. (1987), "Life-cycle labor supply and Social Security: a time-series analysis:
       comment", in: Gary Burtless, ed., Work, health, and income among the elderly. Studies
       in Social Economics series (Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.) 220-228.

Quinn, J. F. (1999), Has the early retirement trend reversed? (Boston College, Chestnut Hill,
       MA).

Quinn, J. F., R. V. Burkhauser, and D. A. Myers (1990), Passing the torch. The influence of
       economic incentives on work and retirement (W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
       Research, Kalamazoo, MI).

Ransom, R. L. and R. Sutch (1986), "The labor of older Americans: retirement of men on and off
      the job 1870-1937", Journal of Economic History 46(1):1-30.

Rejda, G. E. (1999), Social insurance and economic security (Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River,
       NJ).

Riddell, W. Craig (1999), “Canadian Labour Market Performance in International Perspective”,
       Canadian Journal of Economics 32:1097-1134.

Riddell, W. Craig and Andrew Sharpe (1998), “The Canada-US Unemployment Rate Gap: An
       Introduction and Overview”, Canadian Public Policy 24:1-37.
                                                77

Roed, Knut and Tao Zhang (2000), “Does Unemployment Compensation Affect Unemployment
       Duration”, working paper, Frisch Centre for Economic Research, Oslo.

Ruser, John W. (1985), "Workers' Compensation Insurance, experience-rating, and occupational
       injuries", Rand Journal of Economics 16:487-503.

Ruser, John W. (1991), "Workers' compensation and occupational injuries and illnesses", Journal
       of Labor Economics 9:325-350.

Ruser, John W. (1998), "Does workers' compensation encourage hard to diagnose injuries?",
       Journal of Risk and Insurance 65:101-124.

Rust, J. and C. Phelan (1997), "How Social Security and Medicare affect retirement behavior in a
        world of incomplete markets", Econometrica 65(4):781-831.

Smith, Robert S. (1990), "Mostly on Monday: is workers' compensation covering off-the-job
       injuries?" in: Philip S. Borba and David Appel, eds., Benefits, costs, and cycles in
       workers' compensation (Kluwer, Boston, MA).

Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics (2000), "Fast facts
       and figures about Social Security", (Washington, D.C.) Available from
       www.ssa.gov/statistics/fast_facts/index.html.

Social Security Administration (2001), "Social Security Disability planner", (Washington, D.C.)
       Available from www.ssa.gov/dibplan/dqualify6.htm.

Solon, Gary (1985), "Work incentive effects of taxing unemployment benefits", Econometrica
       53:295-306.

Summers, Lawrence H. (1989), "Some simple economics of mandate benefits", American
     Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 79:177-183.

Topel, Robert H. (1983), "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," American Economic
       Review 73:541-559.

U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2000), Analysis of workers' compensation laws, 2000. (U.S.
       Chamber of Commerce, Washington, DC).

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means (various years), Green Book,
       Background material and data on programs within the jurisdiction of the Committee on
       Ways and Means. (U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC).
                                               78

Viscusi, W. Kip and Michael J. Moore (1987), "Workers' compensation: wage effects, benefit
       inadequacies, and the value of health losses", Review of Economics and Statistics
       66:249-261.

Welch, Finis (1977), "What have we learned from empirical studies of unemployment
       insurance?", Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30:451-461.

Worrall, John D., Richard J. Butler, Phillip Borba, and David Durbin (1988), "Estimating the exit
       rate from workers' compensation: new hazard rate estimates", working paper.
 Figure 1.1: Social Insurance Benefits as a Percent of Federal Government Expenditures
60.0




50.0




40.0




30.0




20.0




10.0




 0.0




   7
          9
                 1
                        3
                               5
                                      7
                                             9
                                                    1
                                                           3
                                                                  5
                                                                         7
                                                                                9
                                                                                       1
                                                                                              3
                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                                   9
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                               7




    6
           6
                  7
                         7
                                7
                                       7
                                              7
                                                     8
                                                            8
                                                                   8
                                                                          8
                                                                                 8
                                                                                        9
                                                                                               9
                                                                                                      9
                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                0




 19
        19
               19
                      19
                             19
                                    19
                                           19
                                                  19
                                                         19
                                                                19
                                                                       19
                                                                              19
                                                                                     19
                                                                                            19
                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                       Figure 1.2: Labor Force Participation Rate

                                     100


                                                                                                                             Age 55-64
                                     90


                                     80


                                     70


                                     60


                                     50
                                                                                                                              Age 65+
                                     40


                                     30




Labor Force Participation Rate (%)
                                     20


                                     10


                                      0
                                           1850   1860   1880   1890      1900    1910    1920   1930    1940       1950   1960    1970   1980   1990
                             Figure 2.1
          The Job Finding Rate and Unemployment Benefits

  Hazard
  Rate of
Job Finding




                 Without UI Benefits


8(s)[1-F(w)]


                       With UI Benefits

                                                   Benefit
                                                  Exhaustion
                        Figure 2.2
    How Unemployment Insurance Alters the Budget Constraint

Income
                                    W = weekly wage
              Slope = -W(1-R)       R = replacement rate
    52W



                                Slope = -W




                                                  Weeks of Nonmarket
                         26                  52
                                                  Time During Year
                                Figure 2.3
UI or WC Benefit Schedule in a Common Natural Experiment Study Approach


  Weekly
  Benefit
  Amount


  WBAAmax
                                            After Benefit Increase



  WBABmax
                                            Before Benefit Increase
  WBAmin



                E1       E2            E3            Previous Earnings

             Low Earnings Group              High Earnings Group
                                                      Fig. 4.1: Labor Force Participation and Social Security Wealth
                                                            Average Cohort Effects After Removing Age Effects
                                                       0.1
                                                      0.08
Labor Force Participation Rate and Soc. Sec. Wealth




                                                      0.06
                                                      0.04                                                                 SSW
                                                      0.02
                                                         0
                                                      -0.02
                                                      -0.04
                                                      -0.06
                                                                                                                                   LFP
                                                      -0.08
                                                       -0.1
                                                      -0.12
                                                      -0.14
                                                          1907      1909      1911     1913      1915      1917     1919   1921   1923   1925   1927
                                                                                                       Birth Year
                                                                 Source: Krueger and Pischke (1992).
                                                            Figure 4.2: Retirem ent Age Distribution
                     0.28
                     0.24
                      0.2
Relative Frequency




                     0.16
                     0.12
                     0.08
                     0.04
                       0
                            56     57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64   65    66   67    68   69    70   71   72   73   74
                                                            Age First Received OASDI Benefits
                                 Source:RustandPhelan(1997).
                                  Figure 5.1: Number of Disability Insurance Beneficiaries, 1960-99
                              6
DI Beneficiaries (Millions)




                              4
                              2
                              0
                                  1960               1970                1980                1990     1999
                                                                        Year
Source:HouseWaysandMeansCommittee,Green Book, 2000, Table 1-41.
                                Table 1.1
                    Social Insurance Spending, 1996
                                          Percent of        Percent of
                         Percent         Central Govt       Total Govt
                         of GDP          Expenditures      Expenditures
Sweden                    32.47              86.60             49.58
Germany                    28.05             82.91             49.44
Mexico                     1.355             8.82               6.39
Columbia                   6.61              43.33              NA
United Kingdom             17.53             43.13             33.77
United States             12.22              59.76             30.02
Japan                      2.50              19.44             16.00
Czech Republic             11.89             38.90             25.75
Source: International Labour Organization: World Labour Report 2000,
International Monetary Fund: International Financial Statistics, and UK
Statistical Abstract , and Japanese Statistical Abstract.
Notes: Social Insurance Spending includes spending on benefits for old age,
survivors, invalidity, employment injury, sickness and health, family, and
unemployment. Data from the Czech Republic exclude some health care
expenditures. Data for US pertain to 1995.
                                                              Table 2.1
                          Main Characteristics of State Unemployment Insurance Programs in the U.S.
     State          Base Period Earnings Replacement Rate (1) Minimum Weekly          Maximum Weekly
                                                                                      Quarters of Work
                         Required                                  Benefit                Benefit
                                                                                        Required for 26
                                                                                       Weeks of Benefits
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

California                 $1,125               39-57%                  $40                  $230                1.56-2.28
Florida                     3,400                  50                     32                  275                    4
Illinois                    1,600                49.5 (2)                 51                296-392                 1.38
Massachusetts               2,400              50-61.9 (2)             24-36                431-646              2.77-3.44
Michigan                    3,090                 67 (3)                  88                  300                   2.67
Mississippi                 1,200                  50                     30                  190                    3
Missouri                    1,500                  52                     40                  220                   3.12
Nebraska                    1,600                52-65                    36                  214                  3-3.9
New Jersey                  2,060                 60 (2)                  61                  429                   2.67
New York                    2,400                  50                     40                  365                   1.5
Texas                       1,776                  52                     48                  294                   3.85
Median State           1,576             52               39               292               3.12
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Source: Highlights of State Unemployment Compensation Laws, January 2000.

Notes: (1) Where a range is given, a benefit schedule is used in which the replacement rate is higher for lower paid workers.
(2) Illinois, Massachusetts, and New Jersey have dependent allowances. (3) Of average after tax weekly wage.
                                                         Table 2.2
             International Comparisons of Expenditures on Unemployment Insurance and Workers Compensation

        Country                        Unemployment Insurance                    Employment Injuries (Workers’ Compensation)

                                   % of GDP                 $US millions               % of GDP                 $US millions

        Canada                       2.52                       13,776                      0.85                     4,624
       Denmark                       4.54                        6,113                      0.24                       325
       Germany                       3.40                       65,049                      0.60                    11,427
         Japan                       0.46                       19,788                      0.25                    10,744
        Sweden                       2.95                        5,460                      0.81                     1,502
   United Kingdom                    0.25                        2,445                       --                        --
     United States                   0.50                       28,334                      0.74                    41,654




Sources: International Labour Organization, Cost of Social Security 1990-96.

Note: Expenditures include cash and in-kind benefits, and administrative and other expenditures. All figures are in nominal dollars
and pertain to 1993 (1991 for the United States).
                                                                   Table 2.3
                                         Studies of Unemployment Insurance and the Incidence of Layoffs

         Empirical Specification             Data and Identification                  Findings
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 Feldstein (1978). Linear regression of temporary         U.S. March 1971 Current Population Survey             Elasticity of temporary layoff unemployment rate
 layoff probability on the after-tax UI replacement       (CPS) data for experienced labor force members        with respect to the replacement rate ranging from
 rate, controlling for age, union status, race, marital   who were not labor for re-entrants and not self-      .74 to .91. “The average UI benefit replacement
 status, gender, a linear effect of the wage, and         employed. Identified by differences in benefits       rate implied by the current law can account for
 industry and occupation (in some specifications).        across states and individuals within state.           about half of temporary layoff unemployment.”

 Topel (1983). Estimation of time constant layoff         U.S. March 1975 CPS data on full-time, full-year      “...the layoff unemployment rate would have been
 and reemployment hazard rate using cross-section         labor force participants. Identified by differences   about 30 percent lower if the subsidy to
 data on labor force status and unemployment.             in benefit and experience rating schedules across     unemployment caused by the current UI system
 Key UI variable is subsidy rate b((1/1-t))-e, where      states interacted with industry unemployment          had been eliminated.” Argues that most of the
 b is the benefit, t is the income tax rate and e is      rates.                                                effect is through incomplete experience increasing
 fraction of the cost of a marginal layoff that the                                                             layoffs.
 firm pays through experience rating.

 Card and Levine (1994). Estimation of annual             U.S. CPS outgoing-rotation-group data for 5           “We estimate that a move to complete experience-
 and seasonal temporary layoff, permanent layoff          industries in 36 states from 1978-1985. Identified    rating would reduce the temporary layoff
 and other unemployment rates. Linear models for          by differences in experience rating schedules         unemployment rate by about 1.0 percentage point
 the probability of unemployment with e (see              across states interacted with industry                ( or roughly 50 percent) in the trough of a
 above for definition) as the main regressor are          unemployment rates.                                   recession, and by about the same amount in the
 used, with state, state*year and industry*year                                                                 lowest demand months of the year.”
 controls in some specifications.

 Anderson and Meyer (1994). Linear probability       U.S. Continuous Wage and Benefit History            “Our preferred estimates imply that incomplete
 models of temporary job separations and all job     (CWBH) administrative data on both workers and      experience rating is responsible for over twenty
 separations with firm specific measure of e (see    firms from 6 states during 1978-1984. Identified    percent of temporary layoffs.”
 above for definition) and controls for past firm    by the differential effects of changes in state tax
 layoffs. Some specifications difference the data to schedules on different firms.
 remove firm and individual fixed effects.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                        Table 2.4
                                                   Studies of Unemployment Insurance and Benefit Takeup

        Empirical Specification              Data and Identification                  Findings
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 Corson and Nicholson (1988). Aggregate claims         U.S. state by year aggregate data on the fraction of   Elasticity over 0.5.
 ratio regressed on replacement rate=average           unemployed that receive UI.
 weekly benefit of recipients divided by average
 weekly wage of employed.

 Micro claims data regressed on variable for           Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)                  Large effect of benefit taxation variable.
 income taxation of UI, but replacement rate not       individual data on UI claims.
 used.


 Blank and Card (1991). Aggregate claims ratio         U.S. state by year aggregate data on the fraction of   Replacement rate elasticities of 0.32 to 0.58.
 adjusted for estimated eligibility regressed on       unemployed that receive UI.
 replacement rate=average weekly benefit of
 recipients divided by average weekly wage of
 employed.

 Micro claims data regressed on state average          Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)                  Insignificant effect of replacement rate.
 replacement rate. No variable for income taxation     individual data on UI claims.                          Coefficient usually of “wrong” sign.
 of UI included.

 Meyer (1992). Difference in difference analysis       New York administrative data on UI claims from         “The numbers are consistent with large effects of
 of claim incidence by earnings group, industry        1988 and 1989. Identification comes from a 36          the higher benefits on the relative incidence of
 and region.                                           percent increase in the maximum benefit.               claims.”

 Anderson and Meyer (1997). Linear and logit        U.S. CWBH data on both workers and firms from   Elasticity of benefit takeup with respect to
 models of UI receipt conditional on separation.    6 states during 1978-1984. Identified by        benefits of 0.33 to 0.60. Slightly smaller
 Explanatory variables include logarithms of:       differences in benefit schedules across states, elasticities with respect to (1-tax on benefits).
 weekly benefit, 1-tax on benefits, 1-tax on        changes in these schedules, changes in income   Elasticities of takeup with respect to potential
 earnings, and potential duration of benefits. Some taxation of benefits.                           duration about half as large as those with respect
 specifications with flexible controls for past                                                     to the benefit level.
 earnings, state, and state*time.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                           Table 2.5
                                         Studies of Unemployment Insurance and the Duration of Unemployment in the U.S.

          Empirical Specification                   Data and Identification                         Findings
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 Classen (1979). Linear and log-linear regression of          U.S. Continuous Wage and Benefit History (CWBH)           Benefit elasticity of 0.6 in levels and 1.0 in logarithms.
 unemployment duration on benefits using deviations of        adiministrative data from Arizona from the year before
 relationship from linearity at benefit maximum as an         and year after a 1968 benefit increase.
 estimate of benefit effects. Tobit models were also
 estimated.

 Solon (1985). Hazard model for exit from                     U.S. CWBH data for Georgia before and after the           After-tax benefit elasticity of duration equal to 1.0.
 unemployment with key variable b(1-ρt) to capture            introduction of income taxation of UI benefits for high
 taxation of benefits.                                        income families.

 Moffitt (1985). Flexible discrete hazard model of exit       U.S. CWBH data for 13 states 1978-1983.                   “The results indicate that a 10-percent increase in the UI
 from unemployment with explanatory variables for             Identification from differences in benefit schedules      benefit increases spells by about half a week and that a
 benefit level, potential duration at start of spell, past    across states and changes in benefits and potential       1-week increase in potential duration increases spells by
 wages, and state unemployment rate.                          duration over time.                                       about 0.15 weeks.”
                                                                                                                        These numbers suggest a benefit elasticity of about .4
                                                                                                                        and a potential duration elasticity of 0.34.

 Meyer (1990) and Katz and Meyer (1990b). Hazard              Subset of Moffit (1985) data with some recoding.          Elasticity of duration with respect to the benefit of 0.8,
 model for exit from unemployment with nonparametric          Same as Moffitt, but the inclusion of state indicators    and with respect to potential duration of 0.5.
 baseline hazard and variables for benefit level, and         weights identification toward changes in schedules and
 measures of time until benefits run out. Includes controls   differential treatment across states of those with
 for state unemployment and past wages, and state             different levels of earnings.
 indicator variables.

 Meyer (1992a). Comparisons of durations of those filing      U.S. CWBH data for six states. Identification of          A range of estimates, but central tendency of elasticity
 3 months before and after 17 benefit increases. Most of      benefit effects comes from changes in benefits due to     of duration with respect to the benefit amount of 0.6.
 increases due to automatic cost-of-living adjustments.       cost-of-living adjustments in period of high inflation.
 Estimates with and without controls for demographics.

 Meyer (1992b). Difference in difference analysis of          See Table 2.4.                                            Duration elasticities of .24 to .42, though several
 claim duration with extensive controls.                                                                                estimates are smaller.

 Card and Levine (2000). Hazard models of exit from           U.S. administrative data for New Jersey. Examines         Elasticity of duration with respect to potential duration
 unemployment receipt.                                        program that offered 13 weeks of ‘extended benefits’      of 0.1.
                                                              for 6 months in 1996. The program was part of a
                                                              political compromise over funding care for indigent
                                                              hospital patients.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                              Table 2.6
                        Studies of Unemployment Insurance and the Duration of Unemployment Outside of the U.S.

           Empirical Specification              Data and Identification              Findings
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 Ham and Rea (1987). Models the hazard from                  Canadian Employment and Immigration Longitudinal             Benefit effect of wrong sign or insignificant. The
 unemployment as a function of a polynomial of the           Labour Force Files with weekly data on men aged 18-64,       potential duration coefficients were both significant
 duration of unemployment, initial entitlement and its       for 1975-80. Identification comes from legislative           in all specifications. An increase in the initial
 square, weekly benefits and wages, and the provincial       changes in the benefit rate, individuals with weekly wages   potential duration of one week was estimated to
 and industrial unemployment rates. Estimation is by         above the maximum earnings, and changes in weeks of          increase expected duration by .26 to .33 weeks (an
 maximum likelihood.                                         entitlement.                                                 elasticity of 1.02 - 1.33).

 Hunt (1995). Models exit from unemployment in a             German Socioeconomic Panel public use file, for the years    The extension of benefits lowered by 46% the
 competing risks hazard framework, combined with a           1983-88. 2,236 individuals under age 57. One policy          hazard from unemployment for those aged 44-48, but
 difference in differences approach. Control variables       change reduced benefits to the childless unemployed, and     the other benefit extensions had insignificant effects.
 are an individual’s age group, the time period, the         three policy changes extended the duration of benefits to    For those 44-48 the implied elasticity of mean
 interaction of time and age (treatment groups), and         unemployed individuals that were of a certain age (aged      duration with respect to the maximum duration of UI
 various demographic variables. Identification comes         49+ for the first, aged 44+ for the second, and aged 42+     was 2.27. In several cases, the extensions cut escapes
 from the differential effect of the policy changes on the   for the third). The control group consisted of unemployed    to employment and out of the labor force. The cut in
 treatment and control groups.                               individuals that were 41 years old or less.                  benefits for the childless significantly increased
                                                                                                                          employment. The author notes that many of the
                                                                                                                          effects are implausibly large.

 Carling, Edin, Harkman, and Holmlund (1996). The            Sweden. Non-disabled unemployed workers under 55             Elasticity of exit to employment with respect to the
 hazard of leaving unemployment (to any alternative) is      registered at public employment agencies in 3 months of      benefit level is estimated at -.06.
 modeled using an unrestricted baseline hazard, and is       1991. Identification from variation in claimant status
 estimated semiparametrically. Explanatory variables         across individuals. UI recipients were members of a UI
 include indicators for receiving UI benefits, or KAS        fund for at least 12 months, and had worked for a certain
 (cash assistance, which gives smaller benefits for a        number of days in the past 12 months. KAS provided
 shorter period of time) age, education, training, gender,   compensation for those not covered by UI, and who met
 citizenship, and the regional unemployment rate.            work or school requirements and included labor force
                                                             entrants.

 Roed and Zhang (2000). Flexible hazard rate model.          Norway. Register data on all unemployment spells             Elasticity of hazard with respect to benefit of 0.35
                                                             between August 1990 and December 1999. Benefit               for men and -0.15 for women.
                                                             variation due to changes in indexation over the year is
                                                             used for identification.

 Carling, Holmlund and Vejsiu (2001), Flexible hazard        Sweden. Register-based longitudinal data from 1994-          “Our implied elasticity of the hazard rate with respect
 rate model of exits to employment and competing risks       1996. Data from before and after cut in replacement rate     to benefits is about 1.6...”
 model of exits to employment, labour market                 from 80% to 75%.
 programmes, and non-participation.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                               Table 2.7
                                     Studies of Other Unemployment Insurance Effects on Labor Supply

         Empirical Specification              Data and Identification                Findings
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 McCall (1996). The exit from unemployment to           U.S. CPS Displaced Worker Supplements from           Significant effect of disregard on probability of
 full-time or part-time work is modeled using a         1986, 1988, 1990, and 1992. Cross-state              part-time employment during the first three
 competing risks hazard model with explanatory          differences in disregard and changes in disregards   months of joblessness.
 variables including an indicator for UI receipt, the   (state fixed effects specifications).
 replacement rate, the disregard (amount that can be
 earned without reducing benefits) and interactions
 of these variables.

 Cullen and Gruber (2000). The labor supply of       U.S. SIPP data from the 1984-88 and 1990-92   Estimates of the implied income elasticity of
 wives modeled as a linear function of potential UI  waves. Married couples where both husband and labor supply for wives ranges from -0.49 using
 benefits, demographic variables, the unemployment wife are between 25 and 54. 2560 spells of      OLS to -1.07 using 2SLS. In a specification
 rate, the average wage of women similar to the      unemployment.                                 check, potential UI benefits also had a
 wife, and lagged husband’s job characteristics.                                                   significant negative effect on the labor supply of
 Dependent variables are the share of months                                                       women with employed husbands, suggesting that
 employed and average hours worked per month.                                                      these estimates may overstate the true effect of
 OLS, Tobit and 2SLS estimates with benefits                                                       UI benefits.
 received instrumented for using potential benefits.
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                               Table 3.1
                           Main Characteristics of State Workers’ Compensation Programs in the U.S.
           State Minimum Weekly Maximum Weekly Replacement Rate        Waiting Period  Retroactive Period
                     Benefit           Benefit
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

California                $126.00 (1)            $490.00               66 2/3 %                3 days                2 weeks
Florida                     20.00                 541.00                 66 2/3                7 days                2 weeks
Illinois               100.90-124.30 (2)          899.81                 66 2/3                3 days                2 weeks
Massachusetts               149.93                749.69                    60                 5 days                3 weeks
Michigan                    170.00                611.00                   80 (4)              7 days                2 weeks
Mississippi                25.00 (3)              303.35                 66 2/3                5 days                2 weeks
Missouri                    40.00                 578.48                 66 2/3                3 days                2 weeks
Nebraska                   49.00 (1)              487.00                 66 2/3                7 days                6 weeks
New Jersey                  151.00                568.00                    70                 7 days                 8 days
New York                   40.00 (1)              400.00                 66 2/3                7 days                2 weeks
Texas                       80.00                 531.00                   70 (5)              7 days                4 weeks
Median State          100.00            529.00           66 2/3            3 days           2 weeks
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Source: 2000 Analysis of Workers’ Compensation Laws: U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

Notes: (1) In California the minimum is actual earnings if less than the amount listed. (2) Illinois’ minimum benefit increases if
additional dependents are present. (3) In Mississippi the minimum does not apply in cases of partial disability. (4) In Michigan the
replacement rate is a percent of after-tax earnings. (5) In Texas the replacement rate is 75% if earnings are less than $8.50 per hour.
                                                       Table 3.2
               Financial Characteristics of Workers Compensation and Unemployment Insurance Programs

                              Workers Compensation                         Unemployment Insurance

Year                  Benefit Payments             Costs             Benefit Payments         Tax Collections
                        ($ millions)            ($ millions)            ($ millions)            ($ millions)

1980                    13,618                   22,256                  14,070                     15,010
1981                    15,054                   23,014                  15,580                     15,630
1982                    16,407                   22,764                  21,240                     15,950
1983                    17,575                   23,048                  28,850                     18,010
1984                    19,685                   25,122                  16,340                     24,060
1985                    22,470                   29,320                  14,360                     24,450
1986                    24,647                   33,964                  15,700                     22,880
1987                    27,317                   38,095                  15,080                     24,180
1988                    30,703                   43,284                  13,280                     23,820
1989                    34,316                   47,955                  13,500                     21,750
1990                    38,237                   53,123                  16,860                     21,360
1991                    42,170                   55,216                  24,420                     20,630
1992                    45,668                   57,394                  36,770                     23,010
1993                    45,330                   60,820                  35,070                     25,230
1994                    44,586                   60,475                  26,220                     27,960
1995                    43,373                   57,054                  20,990                     28,900
1996                    42,065                   55,057                  22,000                     28,550
1997                    40,586                   52,040                  20,300                     28,200
1998                    41,693                   52,108                  19,410                     27,370
1999                    --                                     --        20,720                     26,480

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Sources: Workers’ Compensation: Benefits, Coverage, and Costs (1980-84 Benchmark Revisions, 1985, 1988, and 1997-1998 New
Estimates). Committee on Ways and Means Green Book, (1990, 1998, 2000)
Note: All amounts are in nominal dollars.
                                                          Table 3.3
                            Studies of Workers’ Compensation and the Incidence of Injuries or Claims

 Study                       Unit of Observation                   Dependent                     Benefit Elasticity
                              and Sample                           Variable
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Chelius (1982)            U.S. State by two-digit SIC        Injuries per 100 full-time workers. 0.14
                          manufacturing industry; 36 states
                          from 1972 to 1975.
Ruser (1985)              U.S. State by three-digit SIC     Injuries per 100 full-time workers.  0.062
                          manufacturing industry;           Injuries with lost workdays per 100
                          unbalanced panel of 41 states     full-time workers.                   0.116
                          from 1972 to 1979.
Butler (1983)             U.S. Manufacturing industries by Closed workers’ compensation cases    0.290
                         year; 15 industries over 32 years reported in the fiscal year per
                         in South Carolina.                 worker.

Butler and Worrall (1983)      U.S. State by year: 35 states from Temporary total claims of non self-   0.344
                               1972 to 1978.                      insured firms per worker.
Krueger (1990a)                U.S. Individuals in 47 states in   Workers’ compensation claims.         0.45
                               1984 and 1985.

Krueger and Burton (1990)      U.S. state level data for 29 states Premiums per employee or manual      Not significantly different
                               in 1972, 1975, 1978, and 1983. rate.                                     from zero.

Butler and Worrall (1991)      U.S. state level data for 1954-   Workers’ compensation claim costs.     0.68
                               1981.
Butler, Gardner and Gardner    U.S. Individuals at a large       Frequency of disability claims.        -0.45 to 1.24
(1997)                         nationwide firm during 1990-                                             (with median of 0.78)
                               1993.
                                                                 Indemnity cost per worker.
                                                                                      0.06 to 2.90
                                                                                      (with median of 1.27)
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                   Table 3.4
                           Studies of Workers’ Compensation and the Duration of Claims
  Study                     Unit of Observation              Dependent                 Benefit Elasticity
                             and Sample                      Variable
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Butler and Worrall (1985)      Low-back injuries in Illinois.         Length of claim using hazard       0.2 - 0.4
                                                                      models.

Worrall, Butler, Borba and     Low-back injuries in 13 states.        Length of claim using hazard       0.0
Durbin (1988)                                                         models.


Meyer, Viscusi and Durbin      All injuries in Kentucky (1979-        Length of claims; comparisons of   0.3 - 0.4
(1995)                         1981) and Michigan (1981-1982).        means and Log(duration).

Krueger (1990b)                All injuries in Minnesota in           Length of claims; comparisons of   >1.5
                               1986.                                  means and Log(duration).

Gardner (1991)                 All injuries in Connecticut in1985-    Mean length of claims.             0.9
                               1990.

Curington (1994)               All injuries in New York 1964-1983     Severe impairment durations.       0.7 - 1.3

                                                                      Minor impairment durations         0.1 - 0.2

Aiuppa and Trieschmann         France. Administrative region level    Indemnity costs per injured        0.78
(1998)                         data from Caisse Nationale for years   employee.
                               1973-91.
Neuhauser and Raphael (2001)California Workers’ Compensation     Duration of temporary disability 0.25 - 0.35, but much
                            Institute Administrative Data from 2 claims.                          larger with selection
                            years before and after 1994 and                                       correction
                            1995 benefit increases.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Table 4.1: Summary of Selected Studies of Social Security and Labor Supply


Study                 Description                                   Analysis and Identification                   Findings

Hurd and Boskin       Examine the effect of Social Security         Examine conditional retirement rates for      Based on cross-sectional estimates,
(1984)                benefits in 1969 on retirement rates of       birth cohorts over time, and estimate         the increase in Social Security
                      older men. The cohorts under study            logit models of whether men retire in a       benefits can account for the entire 8.2
                      experienced a largely unanticipated 52%       particular year as a function of Social       percentage point fall in labor force
                      increase in Social Security Wealth            Security wealth, wages, and wealth, and       participation of older men from 1968
                      between 1968 and 1972.                        interactions of these variables. Sample       to 1973. Evidence also suggests that
                                                                    consists of white married men age 58-67       liquidity constraints cause a
                                                                    with non-working spouses. Identification      substantial number of men to retire
                                                                    from cross-sectional nonlinear                upon reaching age 62, when they
                                                                    differences in the Social Security benefit.   initially qualify for benefits.


Krueger and Pischke   Examine effect of Social Security benefit     Identification is based on the Social         A decline in Social Security wealth for
(1992)                generosity and the growth in benefits from    Security benefit notch, which lowered         the notch cohort did not significantly
                      delaying retirement one year on labor         benefits for the 1917-21 cohort. Use          affect labor supply, although the
                      force participation, weeks worked and         cohort level data on men from Current         increase in benefits from delaying
                      retirement.                                   Population Survey, 1976-88.                   retirement is significantly related to
                                                                                                                  labor force participation. Social
                                                                                                                  Security wealth effect is less than one-
                                                                                                                  sixth as large as Hurd and Boskin
                                                                                                                  find.

Burtless (1986)       Proposes a model of retirement behavior       Use Retirement History Survey to              Finds that the long-run effect of the
                      for anticipated and unanticipated changes     analyze unanticipated SS benefits from        unanticipated increases in benefits
                      in real social security benefits and how      '69-'72 on male workers who still have to     decreased the average retirement age
                      the retirement decision is affected by        make a retirement decision. Unlike            by .17 years and increased the
                      unanticipated changes.                        previous work, the econometric model          probability of retiring between age 62
                                                                    accounts for non-linear relationship          and 65 by 2 percent. Also, found that
                                                                    between goods consumption and                 the effect would have been greater
                                                                    retirement age.                               had the benefit increase come
                                                                                                                  sooner.

Rust and Phelan       Examine whether liquidity constraints and     Estimate a dynamic programming model          For a sample of men whose only
(1997)                lack of access to health insurance can        of the labor supply and participation in      retirement income is Social Security,
                      explain spike in retirement rate at age 62    Social Security decisions, with               they find that liquidity constraints can
                      and 65. Also consider the effect of           incomplete loan, annuity and health           account for the spike in retirement
                      actuarially unfair benefits after age 65 on   insurance markets. Use data on a panel        rates at age 62 and 65. They also
                      retirement at age 65 for their sample low-    of individuals initially aged 58-63 from      find that the fact that individuals do
                      income men.                                   1969 to 1979 from the Retirement              not qualify for Medicare until age 65
                                                                    History Survey.                               induces some individuals to work
                                                                                                                  longer than otherwise to be covered
                                                                                                                  employer-sponsored health insurance.


Blau (1997)           Examines the impact of social security        The model accounts for the features of
                      benefits, specifically the spouse benefit     the differing labor force decisions of the
                      provision, on the labor supply behavior of    joint labor force behavior of older
                      older married couples.                        married couples. The analysis looks at
                                                                    the transitions of these joint labor force
                                                                    decisions.
Moffitt (1987)        Examines impact of changes in social          Uses time-series data to estimate the         Finds that although there is a negative
                      security wealth on labor supply of four       wealth elasticity of labor supply from        relationship between social security
                      broad age groups of men (25-34, 35-44,        variations in unexpected changes in net       wealth and labor supply, the timing of
                      45-64, 65+).                                  social security wealth over the life cycle.   the labor supply response does not
                                                                    Aggregate data are constructed from the       correspond well to changes in social
                                                                    March Current Population Survey, 1955-        security wealth.
                                                                    1981.
Diamond and          Studies the effect of bad health,             Estimate hazard models of the               Emphasize that cross-sectional
Hausman (1984)       unemployment and permanent income on          retirement decision, probit models of       studies of the effect of retirement
                     retirement behavior. Focuses on the           whether involuntarily unemployed            income on retirement status overstate
                     impact of uncertainty.                        workers become retired, and competing       the substitution effect of retirement
                                                                   risk hazard models of retirement or         income because people may have
                                                                   reemployment using data from the            retired prior to being eligible for
                                                                   National Longitudinal Survey of Older       benefits. Both social security and
                                                                   men.                                        private pensions have a positive effect
                                                                                                               on the probability of retirement.


Gordon and Blinder   Examine the determinants of the               Estimate a structural model of the          Find that the Social Security system
(1980)               retirement decisions of white men age 58-     retirement decision using data from the     has little or no effect on retirement
                     67.                                           1969, 1971, and 1973 waves of the           decisions. Instead, retirement is
                                                                   Longitudinal Retirement History Survey.     driven primarily by the effects of aging
                                                                   Jointly estimate via maximum likelihood     on market and reservation wages and
                                                                   structural models of the reservation        by the incentives set up by private
                                                                   wage and the market wage. Use these         pension plans.
                                                                   estimates to predict an individual's
                                                                   retirement decision, under the
                                                                   assumption that men retire when their
                                                                   reservation wage exceeds their market
                                                                   wage.

Baker and Benjamin   Examine the effect of the introduction of     Exploit the fact that early retirement      Find that the introduction of early
(1999)               early retirement provisions in Canada's       provisions were introduced sequentially--   retirement provisions led to significant
                     public pension plans on pension receipt       in 1984 in Quebec and in 1987 in the        increases in benefit take-up among
                     and labor market behavior of men age 60-      rest of Canada--to estimate a difference-   men age 60-64 but did not increase
                     64.                                           in-difference model of the effect of the    incidence of early retirement.
                                                                   policy change. Data are from the
                                                                   individual files of the 1982-83 and 1985-
                                                                   90 Survey of Consumer Finance.

Gruber and Orszag    Examine the impact of the social security     Identification based on changes in the      Find that the earnings test exerts no
(2000)               earnings test on the labor supply behavior    parameters of the earnings test between     robust influence on the labor supply
                     of older men and women. The earnings          1973 and 1998. Data on earnings, hours      decisions of men. Find some
                     test reduces immediate payments to            worked, and social security receipt of      evidence of an effect on women's
                     beneficiaries of certain ages who are still   men and women ages 59-75 are from           labor supply decisions.
                     working and whose current labor income        the March Current Population Survey,
                     exceeds a given threshold, although           1974-99.
                     benefits are subsequently increased to
                     compensate for any reduction.
