                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INTERMEDIARIES IN THE U.S. MARKET FOR TECHNOLOGY, 1870-1920


                                               Naomi R. Lamoreaux
                                               Kenneth L. Sokoloff


                                               Working Paper 9017
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w9017


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 2002

We would like to express our appreciation to our research assistants Marigee Bacolod, Young-Nahn Baek, Dalit
Baranoff, Lisa Boehmer, Nancy Cole, Yael Elad, Svjetlana Gacinovic, Anna Maria Lagiss, Huagang Li, Catherine
Truong Ly, Homan Dayani, Gina Franco, Charles Kaljian, David Madero Suarez, John Majewski, Yolanda McDonough,
Dhanoos Sutthiphisal, and Matthew Wiswall. We are also indebted to Marjorie Ciarlante and Carolyn Cooper for their
assistance in accessing the Patent Office’s assignment records at the National Archives, and to the many helpful archivists
and librarians we encountered at the Rutgers University Library, the AT&T Archives, and the Harvard Business School’s
Baker Library. We have also benefited from the suggestions of Ann Carlos, Yongmin Chen, Lance Davis, Stanley
Engerman, Louis Galambos, Laura Giuiliano, Stuart Graham, Rose Marie Ham, David Hounshell, Adam Jaffe, Zorina
Khan, Margaret Levenstein, Kyle J. Mayer, Terra McKinnish, Richard Nelson, Ariel Pakes, Daniel Raff, Roger Ransom,
Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Bhaven Sampat, Deepak Somaya, William Summerhill, Peter Temin, Steven Usselman, David
Weiman, Oliver Williamson, Mary Yeager, and participants in seminar presentations at Columbia University, Harvard
University, McGill University, Queen’s University, the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Colorado,
the University of Toronto, the All-UC Group in Economic History, and at a conference held at the California Institute
of Technology in honor of Lance Davis. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support we have received for this
research from the National Science Foundation, as well as from the Collins Endowment and the Academic Senate at the
University of California, Los Angeles. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for Technology, 1870-1920
Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 9017
June 2002
JEL No. O31, N00



                                              ABSTRACT

        We argue that the emergence of a well-developed market for patented technologies over the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries facilitated the emergence of a group of highly specialized and
productive inventors by making it possible for them to transfer to others responsibility for developing and
commercializing their inventions. The most basic of the institutional supports that made this market
possible was, of course, the patent system, which created secure and tradable property rights in invention.
But trade was also facilitated by the emergence of intermediaries who economized on the information
costs associated with assessing the value of inventions and helped to match sellers and buyers of patent
rights. Patent agents and lawyers were particularly well placed to provide these kinds of services, because
they were linked to similar attorneys in other parts of the country and because, in the course of their
regular business activities, they accumulated information about participants on both sides of the market
for technology. Our quantitative analysis of assignment contracts demonstrates that patentees whose
assignments were handled by these specialists produced more patents over their careers, assigned a greater
fraction of their patents, and also were able to find buyers for their inventions much more quickly than
other patentees. In other words, the development of institutions supporting market trade in patented
technology seems to have made it possible for creative individuals to specialize more fully in inventive
work -- that is, it seems to have set in motion the kind of Smithian processes that have generally been
associated with higher rates of productivity growth.



Naomi R. Lamoreaux                                                        Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics                                                   Department of Economics
UCLA                                                                      UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095                                                     Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                                                  and NBER
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu                                                   sokoloff@ucla.edu
                                                                                                      3


        The critical role played by intermediaries in the operation of financial markets is

well known. Because entrepreneurs often lack sufficient savings to finance their ventures

on their own and people with savings often do not have projects that will put their funds

to profitable use, there are significant benefits to be derived from trades in which savers

transfer funds to entrepreneurs in return for income in the form of interest or dividend

payments. The problem, however, is that high transactions costs may prevent such

mutually advantageous exchanges from occurring. Because it is costly for savers to

assess the prospects of each entrepreneurial project, or conversely for entrepreneurs to

convince savers individually of the merits of their ventures, many good (if risky) projects

may be starved for support, while savings get channeled to more conventional, easier to

evaluate, investments. Intermediaries can significantly reduce this problem by

mobilizing and pooling resources from savers, and investigating the creditworthiness of

alternative investment opportunities on their behalf. By thus economizing on information

costs, intermediaries increase the efficiency with which existing savings are employed to

support economic development. Moreover, because their activities raise the return to

saving in the economy as a whole, they also have a positive effect on the pool of

available investment funds.1

        Similar kinds of transaction costs can impede both the generation and exploitation

of technological knowledge. In the first place, the individuals who come up with ideas

for new products or processes often need capital from outside investors in order to

transform their visions into workable inventions. They thus face financing problems

analogous to those of traditional entrepreneurs. In addition, because the comparative

        1
          Lance Davis and Robert Gallman, "Capital Formation in the United States During the Nineteenth
Century," in The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol. 7, part II, eds. P. Mathias and M.M. Postan
                                                                                                          4


advantage of inventors typically stems from their creativity or specific knowledge, any

time and resources they are compelled to devote to developing and commercializing their

inventions may be relatively unproductively spent; indeed, they may, in fact, be poorly

suited for these tasks. As a consequence, there are potential advantages to exchanges in

which inventors sell or license the rights to the new technologies they have created to

others better able to exploit their commercial potential. The problem, however, is that it

is extremely costly for would-be buyers or lessors to assess the worth of the many and

varied ideas that inventors devise. As in the case of financial markets, therefore, one

might reasonably expect specialized intermediaries to emerge to economize on

assessment costs and improve allocative efficiency.2

        During the early twentieth century, large firms as diverse as General Electric,

DuPont, and General Motors began to build in-house R&D laboratories. The apparent

success of these investments, and the spread of this model to other important firms

throughout the economy, led scholars to posit that vertical integration was a solution to

the information problems associated with the market exchange of technological

information. Indeed, some went so far as to argue that the development of complex

technologies depended on the movement of R&D inside large, managerially coordinated

enterprises.3 Recent events, however, have brought this view increasingly into doubt.


(Cambridge, ENG: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
          2
            Although they do not discuss the technology sector, Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinsky and
Gary Biglaiser have provided theoretical rationales for the emergence of middlemen in industries with
similar types of matching and assessment problems. See Rubinstein and Wolinsky, “Middlemen,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102 (Aug. 1987), pp. 581-94; and Biglaiser, “Middlemen as Experts,”
Rand Journal of Economics, 24 (Summer 1993), pp. 212-23.
          3
            See David J. Teece, “Technological Change and the Nature of the Firm,” in Technical Change
and Economic Theory, ed. Giovanni Dosi, et al. (London: Pinter, 1988), pp. 256-81; David C. Mowery,
“The Relationship between Intrafirm and Contractual Forms of Industrial Research in American
Manufacturing, 1900-1940,” Explorations in Economic History, 20 (October 1983), pp. 351-74; and “The
Boundaries of the U.S. firm in R&D,” in Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the
Organization of Enterprise, ed. Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Daniel M. G. Raff (Chicago: University of
                                                                                                             5


Many large firms have reduced or even eliminated their research operations, and venture

capital has flowed to smaller enterprises that focus on inventive activity and sell or license

the resulting intellectual property—not infrequently to the same firms that earlier had built

their own in-house labs.4 These developments, which intriguingly have been most

prominent in the “high-tech” sectors of the economy, mark a return, we argue, to an earlier

pattern that scholars have neglected, perhaps because of their preoccupation with the rise of

big business. As we show, over the course of the nineteenth century there was a

tremendous expansion of market trade in technology that facilitated a division of labor

across (rather than within) organizations between those who generated and those who

exploited new technological knowledge. By enabling, indeed encouraging, creative but

ambitious inventors to focus on what they did best, this division of labor gave rise to the

most technologically fertile period in American history, at least as measured by patents

issued on a per capita basis (see Figure 1).

                                          [Figure 1 about here]

         In this article we examine some of the mechanisms through which this market for

technology operated. We show that the U.S. patent system created a framework that

supported trade in technology, and that the patent agents and lawyers who serviced this


Chicago Press, 1995), pp. 147-76; and Richard Zeckhauser, “The Challenge of Contracting for
Technological Information,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93 (Nov. 1996), pp. 12743-
8. Earlier scholars were more likely to attribute the success of these labs to the benefits of putting together
teams of researchers to work systematically on technological problems. See, for example, Joseph A.
Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (New York: Harper, 1942); Alfred P. Sloan, My Years
at General Motors, eds. John McDonald and Catharine Stevens (Garden City: Doubleday, 1964); and John
Kenneth Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1975).
          4
            The principal explanations offered thus far for this change have focused on the effects of
increases in the security of intellectual property rights and of expanded access to venture capital. For
examples, see Josh Lerner and Robert Merges, “The Control of Strategic Alliances: An Empirical Analysis
of the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46 (March 1998), pp. 125-156; and
Joshua S. Gans and Scott Stern, “Incumbency and R & D Incentives: Licensing the Gale of Creative
Destruction,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, forthcoming. For a general theoretical
                                                                                                      6


system often took on the functions of intermediaries, matching inventors seeking capital

with investors seeking profitable outlets for their funds and also inventors seeking to sell

new technological ideas with buyers eager to develop and commercialize them. Through

systematic analysis of samples drawn from the Patent Office’s manuscript records of

patent sales and from other official sources, we explore the effect of these intermediaries

on patentees’ access to, and use of, the market for technology. Our findings suggest that

intermediaries appear to have the lowered transactions costs and improved the efficiency

of exchange and that, as one might expect, inventors who were most specialized in

patenting and most likely to sell off the rights to their intellectual property were the ones

who made the most intensive use of intermediaries. We also provide evidence in support

of the idea that the increased ability to extract returns from invention by selling off patent

rights was in fact associated with a growing division of labor that enabled talented

inventors to devote a greater proportion of their time and resources to creative work. In

the final section of the article, we draw on a particularly rich set of papers for one patent

attorney, Edward Van Winkle, to develop a more complete picture of what services these

intermediaries provided to support the market for technology. Although Van Winkle’s

activities may not have been representative of patent attorneys in general, his papers open

a window on a world that hitherto had been largely unknown—a world in which at least

some patent attorneys played key informational roles at the center of overlapping groups

of businessmen who were in effect operating much like modern-day venture capitalists,

investing in new technologies and financing high-tech startups.




treatment, see Philippe Aghion and Jean Tirole, “The Management of Innovation, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109 (Nov. 1994), pp. 1185-1210.
                                                                                                           7


The U.S. Patent System and the Sale of Patent Rights

        The patent system provided the institutional framework within which trade in

technology evolved over the course of the nineteenth century. Consciously designed with

the aim of encouraging inventive activity—and thus technological progress—the U.S.

system provided the inventor of a device with an exclusive property right for a fixed term

of years. Because patent rights were transferable assets, inventors who did not wish to

exploit their inventions themselves could sell (assign) or lease (license) the rights to

others.5 Moreover, because a patent could be awarded only to the “first and true” inventor

of a device, sellers of new technologies could reveal information to potential buyers at an

early stage and still be protected against the possibility that someone else would patent

their ideas.

        Of course, this protection and, more generally, the ability of inventors to find

buyers or licensees for their patents depended on the security of these property rights.

From the beginning the law left responsibility for enforcing patents to the federal courts,

and as Zorina Khan has shown, judges quickly evolved an effective set of principles for

protecting the rights of patentees and also of those who purchased or licensed patented

technologies. Subsequent legislation in 1836 instituted an examination system under

which, before granting patents, technical experts scrutinized applications for novelty and

for the appropriateness of claims about invention. This procedure made patent rights

more secure by increasing the likelihood that a grant for a specified technology would




        5
          One important feature of the law was the requirement that patentees be individual men or
women. Firms could not be awarded patents for ideas developed in their shops but could obtain the rights
by assignment.
                                                                                                       8


survive a court challenge, and may also have provided some signal about the significance

of the new technology. Thereafter, both patenting and sales of patent rights boomed.6

        Although the main purpose of the patent system was to stimulate invention by

granting creative individuals secure rights to their intellectual property, another important

goal was to promote the diffusion of technological knowledge. The law required

patentees to provide the Patent Office with detailed specifications for their inventions

(including, where appropriate, working models), and the result was a central storehouse

of information that was open to all. Anyone could journey to Washington and research

others’ inventions in the Patent Office files. In addition, more convenient means of

tapping this rich source of information soon developed. The Patent Office itself opened

branch offices around the country and published on a regular basis lists (some with

descriptions of specifications and drawings) of the patents it granted. By the middle of

the century, moreover, a number of private journals had emerged to improve upon these

official services. One of the most important was Scientific American, published by Munn

and Company, the largest patent agency of the nineteenth century. Others included the

American Artisan, published by the patent agency Brown, Coombs & Company; the

American Inventor, by the American Patent Agency; and the Patent Right Gazette, by the

United States Patent Right Association (which, despite its name, functioned as a general

patent agency). Covering the full spectrum of technologies, these journals featured

articles about important new inventions, printed complete lists of patents issued, and

offered to provide readers with copies of patent specifications for a small fee. Over time,

        6
          See B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Patent Institutions, Industrial Organization, and
Early Technological Change: Britain and the United States, 1790-1850,” in Technological Revolutions in
Europe: Historical Perspectives, ed. Maxine Berg and Kristine Bruland (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar,
                                                                                                             9


the scope and number of these periodicals increased, reflecting an expanding and ever

more articulated demand for information about new technologies. Moreover, specialized

trade journals also appeared to report on developments in particular industries. The

Journal of the Society of Glass Technology, for example, provided detailed descriptions

of all patents taken out in the United States and Britain that were relevant to the

manufacture of glass.

         In addition to disseminating information about new technologies, these

periodicals provided a forum for those seeking to sell rights in patents. The Patent Record

and Monthly Review, for example, featured lists of “Inventions and Patents for Sale” and

of “Partners Wanted: Capital Wanted to Develop these Inventions.” The inventions

described in these columns ranged from the simple (curtain fastener, clothes line reel, can

opener) to the complex (automatic street railway switch, rotary engine, flying machine).7

Moreover, the texts of these brief advertisements suggest that inventors felt secure

enough in their intellectual property actively to seek buyers for their inventions before

they secured the protection of patents. The very titles of these lists (for example,

“Inventions and Patents for Sale”) provide evidence for this claim, as do the many

advertisements that did not include patent numbers.8 Because, all other things being

equal, having a patent already in hand should have raised the value of the invention in the

eyes of prospective buyers, it is reasonable to conclude that most of the inventions listed

without patent numbers had not yet been protected in this manner.


1997), pp. 292-313; and Khan, “Property Rights and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century
America,” Journal of Economic History, 55 (Mar. 1995), pp. 58-97.
         7
           This particular journal claimed that its mission was “to bring the capitalist and inventor together
for mutual benefit.” It earned revenues from advertisements placed by both buyers and sellers of
inventions. See The Patent Record and Monthly Review, New Series, 3 (Jan.-Feb. 1902), p. 47.
         8
           See, for example, the lists in The Patent Record and Monthly Review, New Series, 3 (May 1902),
p. 32.
                                                                                                        10


        It is, of course, difficult to know how effective any of these advertisements were,

but the advice manuals that targeted audiences of inventors at this time generally agreed

that such methods could work if they were coupled with other efforts. The best option “if

the inventor [could] afford it” was to have the invention “illustrated and described in one

or more of the scientific and mechanical publications of the day,” like Scientific

American or the American Artisan. But if the inventor did not have sufficient resources,

it was still effective, the manuals claimed, to put a notice in the “regular advertising

columns,” especially if one took care to choose specialized publications that would “meet

the eye of the class or classes of persons to whom the invention is of special interest.”9 In

addition, however, the patentee was advised to prepare a circular describing his invention

and its potential market, to procure a list of businesses most likely to be interested in the

invention, and to mail the circular to these firms. He should then follow up these

circulars with personal solicitations.10

        Marketing a patent in this way was not only expensive but time consuming, and it

distracted an inventor from more creative tasks. Not surprisingly, therefore, these

publications also contained advertisements from individuals and companies offering to

handle the sale of patent rights for inventors. For example, one issue of The Patent

Record included advertisements from Dr. J. O. White of Philadelphia asserting that he

had “excellent facilities for placing a valuable patent, suited to that market, in Europe”;

from Messrs. Comere & Co. announcing, “We have several customers wanting to

        9
            William Edgar Simonds, Practical Suggestions on the Sale of Patents (Hartford, Conn.: privately
printed, 1871), pp. 24-5; F. A. Cresee, Practical Pointers for Patentees, Containing Valuable Information
and Advice on the Sale of Patents (New York: Munn & Co., 1907), pp. 46-52.
          10
             The quotes are from Simonds, Practical Suggestions on the Sale of Patents, pp. 19-28; but for
additional examples, see W. B. Hutchinson and J. A. E. Criswell, Patents and How to Make Money Out of
Them (New York: D. Van Nostrand, 1899); An Experienced and Successful Inventor, Inventor’s Manual:
                                                                                                11


purchase patented articles suited to the mail-order trade”; from the International Patent

Promotion Company of Cleveland claiming, “We have a large number of good patents

for sale and would be pleased to have you call your attention to this fact in your paper”;

and from the Wouther Patent Promoting Co. of Roswell, Georgia declaring that “We

promote patents, and if there are any inventors desiring their inventions promoted, would

be glad to hear from them.”11

        More important, the patent agencies that published these kinds of journals were

themselves in the business of buying and selling patents and, indeed, often saw their

publications as means to solicit inventions. Hence the U.S. Patent Right Association used

the pages of its Patent Right Gazette to tell inventors that it was the best agent to choose

“if you wish to dispose of a Patent with the greatest possible certainty, in the shortest

time and at its full value.”12 Similarly, the American Patent Agency heavily advertised

the patent selling arm of its business in the American Inventor, crowing that it was “the

only Agency for the sale of patents in America that has two PRINCIPAL OFFICES and

permanent branch offices in all the prominent cities of the Union.13 Although Munn and

Company and Brown, Coombs and Company, the publishers respectively of Scientific

American and the American Artisan (the two leading journals in the field), may not have

so explicitly advertised such services, they too were functioning as intermediaries. An

examination of manuscript assignment records for the years preceding and following the

Civil War suggests that Munn and Company alone served as correspondent for roughly




How to Work a Patent To Make It Pay (Rev. ed.; New York: Norman W. Henly & Co., 1901); and Cresee,
Practical Pointers for Patentees.
         11
            The Patent Record and Monthly Review, New Series, 3 (May 1902), p. 33.
         12
            See, for example, the cover pages of The Patent Right Gazette, 3 (July 1872)
         13
            See, for example, American Inventor, 6 (Jan. 1883), p. 23.
                                                                                                         12


15 percent of all of the contracts for the sale of patents recorded by the Patent Office in

1866, though by the mid 1870s its share had dropped to less than five percent.14

         Beginning around this same time, advice manuals increasingly warned inventors

to stay away from intermediaries who advertised in trade publications or mailed out

circulars soliciting their business. Such agents, the writers of the manuals claimed, “are

unreliable and seek only to get what money they can from the patentee. It is seldom

indeed that most of them effect a sale.” Although agents typically advertised that they

sold patents on commission, they often charged up-front fees ranging from $25 to $250 to

cover advertising costs. Patentees, therefore, bore relatively high costs with little

assurance of return. Indeed, one writer went so far as to claim, “from long experience

and observation,” that he had “never known where a patentee was ever materially

benefited by placing his interests in the hands of these concerns.” He went on to assert

that “very few of these concerns have any facilities whatever for selling patents,” all of

their time being taken up in “working inventors up to the remitting point which usually

ends the matter so far as they are concerned.”15




         14
             These figures are based on an examination (for patentees whose surnames began with the letter
“B”) of the manuscript digests of assignments kept by the Patent Office. For a more complete description
of these records, see below. The share for Munn and Co. appears to have increased from the 1840s and
1850s to the period just after the Civil War, and then dropped off rather substantially.
          15
             It is not entirely clear whether or not these advice manuals were including firms such as Munn
& Co. among the agencies they were encouraging inventors to avoid. Probably not, given that these last
quotes came from a pamphlet published by Munn & Co. It seems likely that, although their overall market
share declined, firms like Munn & Co. were able to establish themselves as reputable enterprises, both
because the journals they published were so prestigious and because they eschewed such questionable
practices. For example, in response to an inquiry from an agent offering a patent for sale, Brown, Coombs
& Co, haughtily replied, “We [do] not interest ourselves in patents as a matter of speculation.” Letter of 3
Dec. 1870 to Lemuel Jenks, Box 2, Folder 45, Mss. 867, Lemuel Jenks, 1844-1879, Baker Library, Harvard
Graduate School of Business Administration. For the warnings, see Cresee, Practical Pointers for
Patentees, pp. 42-3; Hutchinson and Criswell, Patents and How to Make Money Out of Them, pp. 161-2;
An Experienced and Successful Inventor, Inventor’s Manual, p. 61; and Simonds, Practical Suggestions on
the Sale of Patents, pp. 7-9.
                                                                                                   13


        Rather than work through these kinds of agencies, inventors who needed help

selling their patents were advised to seek the assistance of business people whom they

knew they could trust. Some of the men to whom inventors thus turned were local

manufacturers or merchants whose enterprises were completely unrelated to the purpose

of the invention. Thus when James Edward Smith, a machinist and professional inventor,

designed a cigar machine, he approached George E. Molleson, owner of a granite quarry

and agent for marble producers, for help in getting “a practical moneyed man who

understood the manufacture of cigars to take an interest in Mr. Smith’s cigar machine.”16

Molleson had previously advanced Smith money to help him develop a patent letter box.

How the initial contact was made is unclear, but this previous association encouraged

Smith to entrust the marketing of his cigar patent to Molleson. It may be that similar

connections account for other cases where businessmen handled the sale of patents

unconnected to their main areas of expertise. For example, intermediaries whose

businesses were as diverse as textile manufacturing and engineering consulting submitted

telephone inventions for sale to AT&T on behalf of inventors.17

        More commonly, however, inventors turned for marketing assistance to the local

attorneys and agents who processed their patent applications. After the 1836 law

increased the security of patent rights and both patenting activity and trade in patented

inventions took off, the numbers of these practitioners began to grow—first in the

vicinity of Washington, DC (where, of course, the Patent Office was located) and then in

other urban centers, especially in the Northeast (where the overwhelming majority of

        16
           “Testimony Taken on Behalf of James Edward Smith,” Hammerstein v. Smith (1890), pp. 62-8,
Case 13,618, Box 1868, Interference Case Files, 1836-1905, Records of the Patent Office, Record Group
241, National Archives.
                                                                                                               14


patented inventions were generated). By the early 1880s there were about 550 such

agents registered to practice before the Patent Office. Slightly more than half of these

were located in New England and the Middle Atlantic states, a quarter in the District of

Columbia, another fifth in the Midwest, and the rest were scattered through a few

southern and western locations.18

         The ostensible function of these specialists was to shepherd inventions through

the Patent Office’s application process and, in the case of lawyers, to defend their clients’

patents in interference and infringement proceedings. In the regular course of their

business, however, patent agents and lawyers obtained a great deal of information about

participants on both sides of the market for technology. They were used, for example, by

buyers of new technology to evaluate the merits of inventions in advance of purchase,

and, in this manner, gained knowledge about the kinds of patents buyers were interested

in purchasing, as well as personal insight into the character of the people involved.

Inventors, of course, used them to file patent applications, in the process providing them

with advance information about technologies soon to come on the market. Moreover,

inventors frequently developed close relationships with their patent agents that

encouraged them to try out new ideas on these specialists. For example, when Joseph

Arbes, a fur manufacturer in New York City who also invented sewing machines, came

         17
              T. D. Lockwood, Reports of Inventions (Not Approved), 1904-8, Box 1383, AT&T Corporate
Archives.
         18
             U.S. Patent Office, Roster of Registered Attorneys Entitled to Practice before the United States
Patent Office (1883). The practice of inventors extracting income from their inventions by selling off or
licensing the rights to their patents began early. Among a sample of “great inventors” active during the
first half of the nineteenth century, roughly two-thirds derived some income from either the sale of
licensing of their patent rights. It is also relevant to note that these great inventors were disproportionately
located in those areas where patent agents and lawyers were concentrated. See B. Zorina Khan and
Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “‘Schemes of Practical Utility’: Entrepreneurship and Innovation Among ‘Great
Inventors’ in the United States, 1790-1865,” Journal of Economic History, 53 (June 1993), pp. 289-307.
Around the turn of twentieth century, Cresee estimated that only about one-fifth of inventors wanted to
                                                                                                          15


up with an idea for a blind stitching machine that would use a flat-sided needle, he

immediately dispatched a sketch of the needle to his attorney, William E. Knight, for a

judgment as to its potential patentability. He had not even experimented with the needle

on a sewing machine at that point, and both the casualness with which he made the

request and the primitive state of his invention at that time suggest that he had an ongoing

relationship with his attorney, who acted in part as a sounding board for his ideas.19

         Patent agents and solicitors were advantageously placed to function as

intermediaries in another way as well: they often had links with colleagues in different

cities who could be sources of information about new inventions originating elsewhere

and about potential buyers for patents developed locally. Some of these links were

formal. For example, Boston patent lawyer Frederick Fish took on a partner, Charles

Neave, in 1893. Two years later Fish sent Neave to New York City to open a branch

office.20 Similarly, after Samuel S. Fisher, U.S. Commissioner of Patents during the

Grant administration, returned to private practice in Cincinnati, he took in Samuel A.

Duncan as a partner and almost immediately packed him off to New York to open an

office for the firm there.21 Other links derived from familial connections. For example,

the Boston firm of Wright, Brown, Quinby & May had ties with a Chicago firm

established by the brother of one of the partners. Still other links were built up through

letters of introduction and repeat business. Thus Wright, Brown, Quinby & May


manufacture their devices themselves whereas about four-fifths wanted to sell off the rights to others. See
Practical Pointer for Patentees, p. 15.
         19
            Knight apparently thought that the invention was not promising, so Arbes experimented with it
for a few months before approaching Knight again. See “Testimony on Behalf of Joseph Arbes,” pp. 10,
22-3, 26, Arbes v. Lewis (1900), Case 20,049, Box 2,715, Interference Case Files, 1836-1905.
         20
            John E. Nathan, Fish & Neave: Leaders in the Law of Ideas (New York: Newcomen Society,
1997), pp. 13, 19.
                                                                                                     16


funneled their Philadelphia business through a firm with which the partners had no

apparent personal connection but with which they had long done business. Virtually all

patent agents, moreover, had regular dealings with at least one attorney in Washington,

who assumed responsibility for conducting searches of patent records and also

represented them in preliminary interviews with examiners in the Patent Office.22 That

these links to agents in other parts of the country could be used to market patents is

suggested by a letter from one intermediary to “friend Jenks” (Lemuel Jenks, a patent

lawyer), asking for Jenks’s assistance in marketing the device: “We have offered said

Patent so far to the B & O and N C R R Comps. . . . We intend to sell it to one person for

the six New England States and I therefore wish you would give me your opinion in that

matter: to viz what price you think we should ask; what would we have to pay you for

your assistence [sic] in carrying and effecting a sale.”23

        Just as advice manuals cautioned inventors not to trust intermediaries who

advertised in trade publications, there were warnings to be wary of unscrupulous patent

agents and attorneys. Indeed, some practitioners themselves took the extreme position

that it was improper for members of their profession to function as intermediaries. Thus

H. W. Boardman & Company announced in a pamphlet promoting the firm’s services

that it was “a rule rigidly adhered to in this establishment, never to take contingent

interests in applications for Patents, nor to negotiate sales of Patent rights, or become the

owners in whole or in part of them.” As the pamphlet explained, such activity potentially

        21
            In Memoriam: Samuel S. Fisher (Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co., 1874), pp. 23-4. It was
common for individuals who worked in the patent office, even as simple examiners, to move on to become
private patent agents later in their career.
         22
             For insight into such correspondent relations, see Wright, Brown, Quinby & May
Correspondence Files, Waltham Watch Company, 1854-1929, Mss. 598, Case 2, Baker Library, Harvard
Graduate School of Business Administration.
                                                                                                            17


put the interests of the patentee in conflict with those of his attorney: “If an attorney

become a dabbler in Patents (as many do), how is it possible for an Investor to be assured

that he is not disclosing his secret to the very party who will be the most interested in

defeating his application?”24

         Certainly, when patent solicitors functioned as intermediaries, all kinds of

conflicts of interest were possible. Although some patentees may have hesitated to reveal

information about their inventions to agents who “dabbled” in patents in this way, the

more likely problem was that agents interested in seeing transactions concluded may have

put their own interests before those of either the patentee or the assignee. In this respect

the market for technology can be thought of as much like the real estate market, where

agents’ primary goal is a sale, and where buyers and sellers alike face a great deal of

uncertainty about whose interest the agent is truly representing. Although these kinds of

conflicts of interest have been mitigated in the case of real estate by a combination of

regulation and self-policing, during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the

market for technology was largely unregulated and professional organizations like the bar

association were extremely weak. In such a context, one would expect to see reputational

mechanisms playing an increasingly important role and to observe that successful patent




         23
            Letter of 30 April 1870 from Aug. H. Fick [last name not completely legible] to Jenks, Box 3,
Folder 59, MSS 867, Lemuel Jenks, 1844-1879, Baker Library.
         24
            H. W. Boardman & Co., Solicitors of American & European Patents for Inventions, Hints to
Inventors and Others Interested in Patent Matters (Boston: privately printed, 1869), p. 13. Practitioners in
this wing of the profession also warned inventors that if they entrusted their inventions to agents who were
primarily intermediaries rather than legal specialists, they risked obtaining patents that would not withstand
scrutiny by the courts. “The result is, that out of the numerous patents which have been litigated since the
foundation of our Patent System, not one in ten has been sustained by the courts without being reissued to
cure defects.” See the brochure of A. H. Evans & Co., Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents (Rev.
ed.; Washington, DC: privately printed, n. d.), p. 1.
                                                                                                      18


agents and lawyers were those who made substantial investments in cultivating

reputations for fair, as well as insightful, dealing.25

        As we will show in the next two sections of this article, there is evidence that

successful intermediaries did indeed make such investments and that, as a result, they

were able to improve the efficiency of the market for patented technology. Before

proceeding to this analysis, however, it is important to note that the willingness of patent

agents and lawyers to function as intermediaries sometimes made it possible for inventors

without funds to gain access to patent protection in the first place. Although the cost of

filing a patent application in the United States was modest by British standards, the $35

filing fee was still a substantial barrier for many wage earners. Moreover, even in routine

cases, the additional charges associated with securing drawings, models, searches of

patent office records, and legal assistance might add another $50 to $100 to total costs.

Patent agents and lawyers who functioned as intermediaries might reduce or even waive

many of these charges in the case of patents they thought were valuable, or they might

find purchasers for the inventions who would bear the costs of applying for the patents.

For example, Lansing Onderdonk, an inventor of sewing machines, testified that he did

not have the funds to patent his lock-stitch invention. When he secured employment with

the Union Special Sewing Machine Company, he tried to interest his new employers in

the invention without success (the firm specialized in a different type of stitch). He was

only able finally to patent the invention when lawyer Charles L. Sturtevant took an




        25
           For a more formal analysis of an analogous case, see Asher Wolinsky, “Competition in a Market
for Informed Experts’ Services,” Rand Journal of Economics, 24 (Autumn 1993), pp. 380-98.
                                                                                                              19


interest in the invention and “said he would take the case and that I could pay him as I

could.”26



Quantitative Evidence on the Role of Intermediaries

         It seems likely that, when patent agents and lawyers functioned as intermediaries

in the market for technology, they improved the efficiency with which patents were

traded. The sheer number of patents offered for sale by the late nineteenth century

suggests that the knowledge these specialists were well positioned to acquire, both about

inventions still on the drawing boards and also about the needs of potential purchasers of

new technologies, would have helped them match sellers with appropriate buyers in an

expeditious way.27 It also seems likely that such intermediation would have had positive

effects on the pace of technological change in general. By facilitating a division of labor

that enabled inventors to spin off the distracting and time-consuming work of

commercialization to others, intermediaries should have made it possible for creative




         26
             See “Deposition of witnesses examined on behalf of Lansing Onderdonk,” pp. 36-8, 47-8,
Onderdonk v. Mack (1897), Case 18,194, Box 2,521, Interference Case Files, 1836-1905. The interference
records are filled with statements by patentees that lack of funds had prevented them from patenting
inventions or from filing applications in a timely fashion.
          27
             Moreover, the personal knowledge that they were also able to acquire about parties on both
sides of the market helped them solve information problems that were unique to these kinds of transactions.
To give one example, suppose that a firm bought a patent from an independent inventor and the patent was
subsequently challenged in an infringement or interference proceeding. Although an assignee could seek
redress against an assignor who conveyed a patent later declared invalid, there were many instances in
which the assignee’s position vis à vis competitors depended on the successful defense of the patent—
which in turn often depended on the cooperation of the patentee. For example, in an interference case (a
proceeding set in motion when two inventors applied for or received patents for the same device), the
outcome usually hinged on the inventors’ relative ability to demonstrate priority by documenting the dates
on which they conceived of the invention and reduced it to practice. Hence when a firm bought an
invention, it needed to know more than technical details. It needed personal knowledge of the patentee—
the assurance that, if necessary, the patentee would assist in a patent office or court proceeding and, further,
that the patentee would be an articulate witness who would be able to document the priority and substance
of his claim.
                                                                                                     20


people to focus their attention more exclusively on coming up with new technological

ideas.

         In this section, we explore these possibilities systematically, using the rich trove

of data that the Patent Office has left to historians. These sources include published lists

of patent grants that contain the names and places of residence of the patentees and of any

assignees to whom the patentees transferred rights in advance of issue.28 More important

for the purposes of this paper are the manuscript copies of contracts for the assignment of

patent rights now stored in the National Archives. In order to be legally valid, a complete

copy of any contract selling or transferring the right to a patent had to be deposited with

the Patent Office within three months. Patent Office clerks maintained a chronological

registry of these documents and, in addition, summarized their basic details into a

separate digest that was organized chronologically but also divided into volumes

according to the first letter of the patentee’s surname.29

         Our first step was to document the changes that occurred over the course of the

nineteenth century in the way that rights to patents were most commonly sold. Although

intermediaries potentially increased the efficiency with which patents could be marketed,

their role was shaped in turn by the kinds of rights that purchasers most wanted to buy

and patentees to sell. Inspection of the Patent Office’s assignment records for the 1840s

and 1850s —that is, for the period when the sale of patent rights first exploded after

passage of the 1836 patent law—reveals that most of the contracts entailed

geographically specific assignments to producers in different parts of the country. Such

assignments, which constituted the vast majority of the total until well into the 1850s and

         28
           See the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Patents, published by the Government Printing
Office in Washington.
                                                                                                         21


as much as 90 percent during the 1840s, made a great deal of sense in a context where

high transportation costs led to geographically segmented markets protected against

competition from other regions. Even inventors engaged in exploiting their ideas

themselves could increase their returns by selling geographically limited rights to their

inventions in other parts of the country.30 Once, however, the expansion of railroads and

other improvements in transportation and distribution made it possible for manufacturers

in a single location to market their products nationally, producers increasingly wanted to

purchase full national rights to technologies important in their businesses. Not

surprisingly, the proportion of assignments that involved geographically limited rights

began to rapidly decline. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for all of the

approximately 4,600 contracts filed with the Patent Office during the months of January

1871, January 1891, and January 1911. Already by 1871 geographic assignments

accounted for less than a quarter of the total for the nation as a whole, though they

retained greater importance in the Middle West, particularly in the West North Central

states. By 1911, they had almost completely disappeared in all regions of the country.31

                                         [Table 1 about here]

        Table 1 also provides suggestive indications that the efficiency of the market for

technology was increasing at the same time as the nature of the rights being sold was

changing. In the first place, there was a drop in the proportion of secondary assignments

        29
            [need information on the Record Group, etc. here]
        30
            For an excellent example, see Carolyn Cooper’s account of the assiduousness with which
Thomas Blanchard, inventor of the gunstocking lathe and other wood-shaping inventions, assigned
geographically limited patent rights to producers in distant areas. See Shaping Invention: Thomas
Blanchard’s Machinery and Patent Management in Nineteenth-Century America (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1991).
         31
            Because of this shift away from multiple geographic assignments, the reported ratio of
assignments in our sample to the total number of patents should not be interpreted as a measure of the
                                                                                                               22


(sales of patents where the assignor was neither the patentee nor a relative of the

patentee). That there was less reselling of patents as time went on may be an indication

that the market was doing a better job of matching patentees who wanted to sell patents

with buyers who were well placed to exploit them. In any event, an increasingly large

proportion of sales were being made directly by patentees to assignees who would hold

on to the property rights for the duration of the grants.32 Second, the table records a

dramatic fall in the proportion of assignments that occurred after the date the patent was

issued—from 72.3 percent of the total in 1870-71 to 36.5 percent in 1910-11. That

patentees were able to sell their inventions earlier and earlier—increasingly before their

patents were actually issued—may also be an important indication that the efficiency of

trade in patents was improving.33

         Whether these changes signaled real advances in the operation of the market for

technology and, if so, whether intermediaries were responsible for a significant

proportion of the gains are issues that remain to be explored. We tackle these questions

by exploiting an intriguing feature of the Patent Office’s digests of assignment

contracts—their inclusion of the names and addresses of the persons to whom all

correspondence concerning assignments was to be addressed. Although some of these

correspondents may simply have handled the paperwork associated with drawing up and


proportion of patents that were ever assigned. Nor should trends in this ratio be taken to indicate trends in
the proportion of patents assigned.
          32
             The assignor might, however, license the right to use the invention to others. Although
assignment contracts had to be filed with the Patent Office in order to be legally binding, there was no
similar legal requirement to file licensing agreements. Our sample of assignment contracts does contain
some licensing agreements, but they are very few in number, and anecdotal evidence suggests that those
recorded in this manner were a declining proportion of the total of such agreements over time.
          33
             At least part of the rise in the fraction of assignments that occurred before issue resulted from an
increase in the length of time consumed by the application process. In order to get a rough idea of the
extent of the increase, we compared two samples of 125 patents each drawn from the October 1874 and
October 1911 issues of the Official Gazette of the United States Patent Office. In 1874 the median time
                                                                                                    23


recording contracts for the sale of patent rights, others likely functioned as deal makers.

We investigate this possibility by testing whether change in the identity of these

correspondents was systematically related to other developments in the market for

technology—for example, increases in the speed with which patent rights were sold.

        Examination of the digests of the assignment contracts for the 1840s and 1850s,

when the great majority of assignments entailed geographically limited rights, suggests

that there was wide variety in the identity of the correspondents. Many, of course, were

principals in the transactions. Some of these were assignors who previously had received

shares of the patents and who may have been taken on as partners with responsibility for

marketing the rights. Many others were located near assignees who purchased rights

limited to the geographic areas in which they resided. These correspondents may simply

have been local attorneys with diverse practices. Assignees may have learned about the

patents through other channels and have come to them to process the paperwork.34

        Over time, however, the identity of the correspondents changed in important

ways. As already mentioned, for a brief period around the Civil War, a substantial

fraction of assignments was handled by the large patent agencies (such as Munn &

Company) that published respected periodicals on technological developments. By the

1870s, however, the market share of these firms had begun to decline as patentees

increasingly turned to specialized patent agents and lawyers to handle their assignments.

In order to gauge the role that this new category of correspondents played in the market

for technology, we collected information from the assignment digests on all of the


between application and issue was 4 months and the mean 5.8 months. In 1911 the median was 12 months
and the mean 18.2 months.
         34
            This interpretation is supported by the observation that it was not uncommon for multiple
geographically limited assignments of the same patent to be handled by different correspondents. That
                                                                                                        24


contracts filed with the Patent Office during the first three months of 1871, 1891, and 1911

for patents whose inventors had surnames beginning with the letter “B.”35 We then

classified each assignment contract (and the patents it included) by the identity of the

correspondent. Working with lists of patent agents and lawyers from 1883 and 1905, we

distinguished correspondents who were formally registered with the Patent Office in at

least one of these two years as a separate class of intermediaries. Correspondents who were

principals to the contract (either the patentee, the assignor, or the assignee of one of the

patents involved) were grouped together in a second category of intermediaries. A third

category consisted of third parties who did not appear on either of the two lists of registered

agents. It seems likely, however, that we would have been able to identify some of these

correspondents as registered agents if we had rosters for additional years. Finally, we

include in an “unknown” category cases where no correspondent was reported in the digest.

Because some of these contracts in the sample covered more than one patent, we present

the data with the unit of analysis defined in two different ways: the individual patent

assigned and the complete assignment contract (with the descriptive statistics calculated on

the basis of the first patent described in the contract).

                                         [Table 2 about here]

        In Table 2 we report descriptive statistics (across both patents and contracts) for

each of the correspondent classes for 1871, 1891, and 1911. As is immediately evident, the

relative prominence of registered patent agents in this trade increased over time.

Registered agents served as correspondents for 26.1 (29.7) percent of the patents (contracts)


some of the correspondents during this period were merely processing paperwork is also implied by the
identification of quite a few of them as congressmen.
                                                                                                           25


assigned in 1871, with their shares increasing to 42.7 (51.8) percent in 1891, and 55.7

(58.1) percent in 1911. The rise in importance of these registered agents was paralleled by

a decline in the proportion of patent assignments handled by one of the principals

(patentees, assignors, or assignees)—from 33.0 (33.9) percent of patents (contracts) in 1871

to 11.2 (9.5) percent in 1911. There was also a drop in the fraction handled by third

parties, indicating that not only was there a shift over time toward the use of intermediaries,

but there was a shift toward more specialized ones as well. That registered agents were

indeed relatively more specialized in this activity is indicated by the higher average

numbers of contracts they handled, compared to correspondents in the other categories.

For example, in 1871 the average registered agent served as correspondent for 2.36

contracts, whereas the averages for principals and unregistered third parties were 1.05 and

1.26 respectively. These figures, moreover, undoubtedly underestimate the total number of

contracts handled by specialized intermediaries, as they are based on only a small subset of

all assignment contracts (3 months of assignments for patents whose patentees had

surnames beginning with the letter “B”).

         The use of specialized intermediaries seems to have been particularly important for

the types of assignments that, as we saw from Table 1, were growing in relative importance

by the end of the century—that is, primary assignments that were geographically

unrestricted. Although all types of correspondents handled roughly similar proportions of

secondary assignments in 1871, by 1911 only 9 percent of the contracts mediated by

registered agents (15 percent of patents) involved secondary assignments, as opposed to 24

(28) percent for principals and 21 (31) percent for unregistered third parties. As early as

         35
           We chose “B” because more surnames began with this letter than with any other. The sample
included 286 contracts (involving 437 patents) from 1871, 423 contracts (858 patents) from 1891, and 614
                                                                                               26


1871, moreover, assignments handled by intermediaries (especially registered agents) were

much more likely to be national in scope than those handled by principals. Fully 89

percent of the contracts for which the correspondent was a registered patent agent were

national, as opposed to 70 percent for unregistered third parties and 51 percent for

principals. Despite the general shift toward national assignments, the differences were still

evident in 1911, when 97 percent of the contracts mediated by specialized agents were for

national assignments but only 69 percent of the contracts handled by principals.

         Although skeptics might object that the increased use of patent agents might simply

reflect a growing tendency for employees to transfer patent rights to their employers, rather

than a true professionalization of intermediation in arms-length trading of technology, the

evidence in the table suggests otherwise. The reported percentages of patent assignments

going to companies (as opposed to individuals), show that the trend over time toward

assigning patents to companies accounts for very little of the change in the composition of

correspondents. If we look at patents, for example, the proportion of the assignments

handled by registered agents that went to companies (28, 39, and 61 percent in 1871, 1891,

and 1911 respectively) was in general only slightly greater than the fraction in the category

handled by principals (24, 28, and 55 percent in the respective years) and that handled by

unregistered third parties (20, 48, and 46 percent). It seems, therefore, that the growth of

trade in patented technologies over the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was

indeed accompanied by the emergence and increased importance of agents who were

specialized at working in that market.

         If patent agents offered efficiency advantages in trading patents, we would expect

to find that patentees who employed them were able to dispose of their rights more quickly


contracts (880 patents) from 1911.
                                                                                              27


than those who used less specialized intermediaries and than those who handled the sale of

their patents themselves. Table 2 shows that this expectation is borne out by the data. In

1871, for example, 47 percent of the patent assignments (61 percent of the assignment

contracts) handled by registered patent agents occurred before issue, as opposed to only 18

(23 percent) for those handled by unregistered third parties and 9 (8) percent of those

handled by principals. At this time, the average interval between application for and grant

of a patent was very short—less than half a year. The high proportion of assignments

handled by registered agents that nonetheless occurred before issue suggests that these

specialists were indeed performing an important matching function—that, perhaps by

cultivating long-term relationships with inventors, they were able to obtain advance

information about new technologies coming on the market, and that they also had a

sufficient range of contacts within the business community to enable them sell patents very

quickly.

                                    [Table 3 about here]

       Table 3 provides additional evidence that the use of registered agents enabled

inventors to dispose of their property rights more quickly than they could on their own.

The table reports for different classes of correspondents the distributions of both primary

and secondary assignments, broken down by the speed of assignment (measured relative to

the date the patent in question was granted by the Patent Office). Once again, assignments

handled by registered agents were much more likely to occur before the patent was actually

issued than those handled by others. Conversely, registered agents were less likely to

handle assignments that occurred more than five-years after issue. These patterns,

moreover, held in general for secondary as well as for primary assignments.
                                                                                                28


        We can get a better sense of the importance of the role played by these specialized

intermediaries by comparing the characteristics of patentees whose assignments were

handled by registered agents to patentees who either negotiated their assignments

themselves or relied on other principals (assignors or assignees) to do so. If intermediaries

did indeed offer some advantage in trading patent rights, such as lower transactions costs,

one would expect that the inventors who sought out relationships with them would be those

who were both more specialized at inventive activity and more inclined to extract the

returns to their efforts by selling off the rights to their inventions. In order to test this

proposition, we retrieved, for each of the assigned patents in our sample, a five-year history

of all patents received and assigned at issue by the respective patentees, using the year the

assigned patent was granted as the mid-year (thus, we looked two years back and two years

forward from the base year). The results, which are reported in Table 2, indicate that the

predicted pattern did develop over time.

        In 1871 the average five-year total of patents awarded to patentees whose contracts

were handled by registered agents was roughly similar to the numbers for patentees whose

assignments were handled by the other categories of correspondents (although patentees

whose contracts were handled by registered agents were somewhat more likely to assign

their patents at issue). By 1891, however, a clear difference had emerged between

patentees whose assignments were mediated by third parties and those who used principals

as correspondents—both in terms of the average number of patents obtained over the five-

year period and the proportion of those patents assigned at issue. As time went on,

moreover, the use of the two types of intermediaries grew even more differentiated, such

that by 1911 the tendency for patentees who were both most productive and most involved
                                                                                                29


in the market to turn to registered agents to handle their contracts was even more

pronounced. In that year, patentees who used registered agents averaged five-year totals of

6.92 patents weighting over patents (4.99 over contracts), compared to 3.76 (4.04) patents

for those who used unregistered third parties and 2.28 (2.45) patents for those who used

principals. Patentees who used registered agents also, on average, assigned markedly

higher proportions of their patents at issue: 5.97 (4.21) of the patents they received during

the five-year period, as opposed to 2.66 (3.11) for those who used unregistered third parties

and 0.69 (0.84) for those who relied on principals.

                                     [Table 4 about here]

        The increased association between specialized inventors and specialized

intermediaries is explored in another way in Table 4. Here the total number of contracts

(appearing in our sample) that were handled by each correspondent is employed as an

indicator, albeit perhaps a weak one, of his degree of specialization in this function.

Although the choices of productive (or specialized) inventors appear to have been little

different from those of other patentees in 1871, over time a stronger relationship between

specialized inventors and specialized intermediaries emerged. For example, in 1911, 67

percent of the contracts involving the least productive patentees (those with only one patent

over five years) were handled by correspondents with only one contract, and a mere 4

percent by correspondents with six or more contracts to their credit. By contrast, patentees

with four or more patents over the five-year period were relatively more likely to have

turned to correspondents with six or more contracts in our sample (who handled 16 percent

of their contracts), and relatively less likely to use correspondents with only one (who

handled 35 percent of their contracts). Although not strong evidence, this pattern is
                                                                                               30


remarkably striking, given that our measure of a correspondent’s degree of specialization

includes only three months of assignments for patentees with surnames beginning with the

letter “B” and, therefore provides only a crude means of distinguishing between specialized

and unspecialized correspondents.

                               [Table 5 about here]

       The tendency for patentees with the greatest market involvement to turn to

professional intermediaries is also evident in Table 5, which shows that as early as 1871, 80

percent of the patentees who assigned at issue more than 60 percent of their five-year total

of patents (not including the patent involved in the assignment originally sampled from the

Digest) made use of an intermediary (that is, a correspondent that was not a principal to the

contract) for the recorded transaction, and that fully 50 percent employed a registered

agent. Over time, moreover, the table reveals a general shift both toward higher rates of

assignment and toward the use of registered agents. Indeed, by 1911 the modal cell in the

entire distribution was patentees who assigned more than 60 percent of their five-year total

of patents and who also used a registered agent. Two-thirds of the patentees who assigned

more than 60 percent of their patents employed registered agents for the transaction

sampled. These results provide intriguing support for the idea that because registered

agents were more efficient at intermediation in the market for technology than other types

of correspondents, inventors who wanted to make extensive use of the market sought them

out.

       The literature on financial markets, to which we alluded in our introduction, makes

the case that intermediaries not only improved the efficiency with which funds were

transferred from savers to investors, but also raised the level of savings in the economy.
                                                                                                    31


One might expect that the appearance of intermediaries between buyers and sellers of

patented technology might have had a similar effect on the pace of technological change by

encouraging creative people to specialize in invention. Unfortunately, we cannot test this

proposition directly, but the evidence that we can present is highly suggestive. For

example, the effect of the growth of the market for patented technology on the assignment

behavior of inventors can be traced in Table 6, which reports descriptive statistics for three

random cross-sectional samples of patents drawn from the Annual Reports of the

Commissioner of Patents for the years 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11. It is important to

note that the table only includes assignments that were arranged in advance of the grant of

the patent. Nonetheless, we can see from the table that there was a sharp increase over time

in the proportion of patents thus assigned—from 18.4 to 31.1 percent. There was also a

pronounced shift toward assignments in which patentees transferred all rights to their

intellectual property to buyers with whom they had no formal connection. In 1870-71, for

example, more than half of the assignments (52.1 percent) went to groups that included the

patentee. By 1910-11 this proportion had fallen to 25.4 percent. At the same time, the

share of assignments going to companies increased sharply from 23.6 percent in 1870-71 to

64.2 percent in 1910-11. Although some of these transfers involved companies in which

the patentee had an ownership interest (for example, the proportion made to companies

bearing the patentee’s name increased from 5.6 percent in 1870-71 to 9.2 percent in 1910-

11), the vast majority were arms-length sales. As we have shown in other work,

assignments by employees to the firms that employed them were not a major determinant

of the increased frequency of assignments at issue or the trend toward assignments to

companies.36

       36
            See Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for
                                                                                                   32


                                        [Table 6 about here]

        That this increased ability to sell off patent rights did indeed make it possible for

creative individuals to specialize in inventive activity is supported by the evidence in Table

7, which we constructed first by selecting from our three random cross-sectional samples

patentees whose surnames began with the letter “B” and then by collecting data on all the

patents awarded to these individuals over the twenty-five years before and after they

appeared in one of our samples. We analyze the patenting and assignment behavior of these

individuals in two ways: by including in our calculations each patent they obtained and by

selecting for analysis only one patent per patentee (the patent included in the original cross-

sectional sample). The table reports descriptive statistics for four categories of patentees:

those who did not assign their patent before issue; those who assigned the patent but also

maintained an ownership interest in it; those who assigned away all of their rights to the

patent to an individual; and those who assigned full rights to a company.

                                        [Table 7 about here]

        As Table 7 shows, in each of the three time periods patentees who assigned all their

rights to companies by the time of issue had very different careers of inventive activity than

other groups of patentees. They received many more patents over time, were active at

inventive activity for a longer period, and assigned away a much higher proportion of the

patents they were awarded. The contrasts are evident as early as the 1870-71 cohort, but

they are much starker by 1910-11. For example, the means computed over patentees

(patents) drawn in the 1910-11 cross-section indicate that those who assigned their patents

at issue to companies received 32.6 (135.6) patents over their careers on average, whereas


Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries,” in Learning by Doing in Firms,
Markets, and Countries, Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel M. G. Raff, and Peter Temin, eds. (Chicago:
                                                                                              33


those who did not assign, those who made only partial assignments, and those who made

full assignments to individuals were granted 6.4 (38.2), 2.6 (24.4), and 3.0 (39.2).

        In general, Table 7 highlights the emergence over time of two rather sharply

differentiated classes of inventors. The first was composed primarily of individuals who

tended to retain control of the relatively few patents they received over rather short careers

at invention. These occasional inventors had little involvement with the market for

technology. The other class of inventors, by contrast, had careers that were largely shaped

by the market. They assigned away a high proportion of their inventions (especially to

companies) and were quite focused on generating patented inventions, receiving many

patents over careers that extended over several decades. Most prolific patentees fell into

this second category, and it would seem reasonable to conclude on the basis of the evidence

we have collected that the market for technology played a central role in enabling them to

specialize in this creative activity.



The Case of Edward Van Winkle

        The quantitative evidence thus supports the contention that the use of specialized

intermediaries like patent agents and lawyers improved the efficiency of the market for

patented technology. Ideally we would like to collect data on the activities of a broad

sample of these specialists so that we can document the ways in which they facilitated the

sale of patent rights, but most patent agents and lawyers have left only fragmentary traces

in the historical record. The fortuitous preservation of one set of business diaries,

however, has enabled us to track the activities of one such solicitor, Edward Van Winkle,

in unusually close detail. Van Winkle resided in Jersey City, New Jersey, but worked in


University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1999), pp. 31-40.
                                                                                                       34


New York City. In January 1905, he moved into a new office in the Flatiron Building in

lower Manhattan, and for the rest of that year we are able to analyze the relationships he

cultivated with men on both sides of the market for technology and to observe the various

ways in which he performed the function of intermediary.37

        Like many patent agents of the time, Van Winkle’s formal training was in

engineering rather than law. He was a graduate of Columbia University, and his diary

records the pride with which he displayed his certificate of membership in the American

Society of Mechanical Engineers, as well as the eagerness with which he sought positions

in other engineering societies.38 By contrast, Van Winkle’s legal education was quite

casual. In 1905, he enrolled in Sprague’s Correspondence School, signed up for courses

in contracts, agency, partnerships, corporations, and real property, studied the assigned

texts during his spare time, took written examinations in these subjects, and received a

Certificate of Law—all in the space of five months.39

        As befitted his training, Van Winkle earned part of his living as an engineering

consultant. For example, in 1905 he was employed by various parties to determine the

horsepower needed for a hydraulic pump, design the hub of an automobile wheel, and

calculate specifications for a twelve-story apartment house project.40 By contrast, he did

no legal work outside the area of patents and, indeed, hired other lawyers to represent his

interests in lawsuits or to process incorporation papers.41 Even in the area of patents, his


        37
            Our main source for the following discussion is Van Winkle’s 1905 Diary, but other relevant
papers include “Accounts: Personal and Business 1904-1916” and “Reports on Patents, 1905-1907.” See
Edward Van Winkle Papers, Ac. 669, Rutgers University Libraries Special Collections.
         38
            For example, his entry for 22 Jun. 1905 proudly recorded that the council of the Canadian
Society of Civil Engineers “had passed upon my application for associate grade.”
         39
            See entries for 4 Mar., 6 Mar., 9 Mar., 11 Mar., 3 Apr., 13 Apr., 17 Apr., 10 May, 15 May, 19
May, 10 Jul., 11 Jul., and 24 Jul. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         40
            6 Jan., 10 Jan., 18 Jan., 19 Jan., 27 Feb., 15 May, 16 May, and 22 May 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         41
            See, for example, 24 Jun., 26 Jun., and 30 Jun. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
                                                                                                           35


legal knowledge seems to have been limited. For example, he asked around and got the

name of someone “who is very capable in foreign patent application work” and thereafter

subcontracted much of this kind of business to him.42 He also did relatively little of the

more complex side of patent law, such as defending inventors’ rights in infringement

proceedings. Like other patent lawyers, however, he had long-standing relationships with

solicitors in other parts of the country. For example, he routinely used the Washington

firm of Evans & Company to conduct searches of patent office records and preliminary

interviews with patent examiners.43 As we will see, he also had extensive dealings with

an agent in another city named Zappert.44

         Van Winkle’s engineering expertise enabled him to provide technical assistance

to businessmen interested in purchasing patents. For example, Frank P. Parker and

Frederick J. Bosse brought him a “non-refillable bottle” and several other devices

invented by John L. Adams, and requested that he test the inventions and assess their

patentability. When Van Winkle reported positively, the men engaged him to process

Adams’s patent applications and also papers assigning the patents to themselves.45

Parker and Bosse seem to have invested in these patents with the aim of reselling them,

for Van Winkle’s diary includes a couple of entries noting visits by potential purchasers,

including one businessman who indicated that, though his company did not want to take

up the invention, he himself “would be interested to look at it.”46 It is unclear, however,


         42
             1 May 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         43
             See, for example, 23 Mar. and 1 Jun. 1905,Van Winkle Diary.
          44
             Zappert’s city of residence is unclear, but was certainly not New York because the only contacts
between the two men recorded in the diary occurred by letter. See 11 Mar., 27 Mar., 20 Apr., 28 Apr., 1
Jun., 2 Jun., and 12 Jun. 1905,Van Winkle Diary.
          45
             See the diary entries for 12 Jan., 2, Feb. 22 Mar., 23 Mar., 29 Mar., 6 Apr., 20 Apr., 28 Apr.,
and 16 Aug. 1905. On 29 Dec. 1905, the same two men brought in a soap shaving machine invented by a
Mr. Luis for Van Winkle to examine and evaluate.
          46
             29 Mar. 1905, Van Winkle Diary. See also 21 Jul. 1905
                                                                                            36


whether Van Winkle had lined up these potential customers—that is, whether he was

functioning as an intermediary in these instances—or whether he was simply providing

information to prospective buyers contacted by Parker and Bosse.

       On other occasions, however, Van Winkle clearly played the role of

intermediary—sometimes on behalf of inventors and sometimes on behalf of purchasers

of patents. He noted in his diary, for example, that inventor S. A. Davis “placed in my

hands a matter of adjusting royalties + disposing of his drophead patent and said he

would give me half of what I collected.”47 A businessman named Kendall dropped by

Van Winkle’s office to discuss letting him “have the foreign patents in melting furnaces.”

Later Kendall called again, and “we started the ball a rolling for sale of foreign pats of the

Rockwell furnace.” Among the first steps Van Winkle took in marketing these patents

was to forward information about them to Zappert, an agent in another city with whom he

had ongoing contact.48 Van Winkle also worked from time to time as an intermediary on

behalf of parties in other cities. For example, after Zappert wrote and sent him

“specimens + literature” about a dry adhesive photographic mounting process, he “took it

around to Chas Walsh + he thought it would be a valuable thing to control, he is going to

get ideas on the matter and see what he can do towards making some money out of the

scheeme [sic].”49

       In some cases Van Winkle himself took a position in a patent as part of the deal.

Thus an inventor named Pratt “agreed to let me have that patent [for a differential valve

motion] on a shop right royalty of 10¢ and all over that sum I would have if I sold.”50


       47
          5 Jun. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
       48
          28 Apr., 9 May, 1 Jun., and 2 Jun. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
       49
          27 Mar. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
       50
          9 Jun. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
                                                                                                          37


Indeed, there is evidence that Van Winkle actively sought such participations. For

example, he told one of the officers of the Davis, Redpath Company, that “I would sell

him the Canadian patent for 5000xx + if he would assine [sic] me” and do certain other

things not specified in the diary entry, “[I] would be willing to go in with him.”51 On still

other occasions, he displayed an interest in investing in a new technology long before it

got to the patent stage. After “Sol Katz called with a kite proposition,” he began to study

kites and flying machines and visit the shops of people who were experimenting with the

devices. A month late he and Katz agreed jointly to put up money for the development of

a promising invention.52

         As one might expect, Van Winkle’s work as intermediary sometimes put him in

situations where there was a clear conflict of interest. For example, W. N. Richardson,

one of the businessmen with whom he regularly dealt, wanted an option to buy out

inventor Edward A. Howe’s interest in some patents. Van Winkle recorded Richardson’s

offer as follows: “He will give $3000 to 4000 for the last two patents and give me a

commission of 10%. If I can get the patents for less, will receive a larger fee.”53 Van

Winkle called on Howe and “had a hard fight to get Howe to accept terms.” Ultimately,

however, after a session that lasted two and a half hours, Howe agreed to accept

Richardson’s terms “provided R will give him a free hand in all future patents.”54

Somehow, throughout all of these negotiations, Van Winkle managed to be completely

above board with the inventor about his interest in the deal. He maintained excellent

relations with Howe, who continued to do business with him for the rest of the period of

         51
           25 May 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         52
           To Van Winkle’s disappointment, the inventor later backed out of the deal. See 7 Jun., 16 Jun.,
17 Jun., 18 Jun., 9 Jul., 17 Jul., 23 Jul., 3 Aug., 4 Aug., 19 Sept., 24 Sept., 12 Nov., 13 Nov., 21 Nov., 4
Dec., 18 Dec., 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
                                                                                           38


the diary. Indeed, after Richardson later decided not to take up the patents, Howe

confided to Van Winkle that he had “only signed option so that I [Van Winkle] could

collect my fee.” Although this statement should probably not be taken at face value, it is

an indication of the strength of the relationship that Van Winkle had been able to build

with this inventor.

          That Van Winkle was able to cultivate relations of trust with a number of

inventors is evinced by their willingness to come back to him again with new ideas. For

example, the Adams who invented the non-refillable bottle subsequently approached him

seeking “money on a tooth pick scheme. Saturated wooden toothpicks with spice flavors

that are antiseptic auromatic [sic], etc.”55 Previous work for Pratt involving elevator and

escalator devices was what had led Pratt to return and suggest the deal for the differential

motion valve.56 Similarly, Katz had earlier used Van Winkle to file a patent for a shoe

heel.57

          Not surprisingly, Van Winkle devoted a great deal of his time to cultivating these

kinds of personal relationships—not just with inventors but also with businessmen

interested in investing in patents. Van Winkle’s diary shows that he spent the bulk of

each day receiving visitors, calling on people, and talking business over lunch and dinner

at the Columbia Club or other similar places. This constant round of face-to-face

meetings helped Van Winkle build relationships of trust with parties on both sides of the

market. In addition, these meetings became an important source of tips about potential

buyers for inventions, new technologies for Van Winkle to explore, and clients he might

          53
             16 May 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
          54
             16 May and 17 May 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
          55
             28 Sept. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
          56
             7 Feb., 17 Feb., 2 Mar., 23 Mar., and 27 Apr. 1905, VanWinkle Diary.
                                                                                                      39


attract to his practice. Thus when Van Winkle was handling an elevator safety invention

for Pratt, he received information from a friend with whom he often dined “that C. L. C.

Howe of the N.Y. Life Co was looking for a safety for Elevators.” Van Winkle called on

Howe that very afternoon, noting in his diary that “There might be something doing

later.”58 On another occasion, he lunched with Charlie Halsey, who “said he had some

cigarette machine patents + papers which he would bring to my office and let me look

over.”59 A similar lunch with Robert E. Booream, an inventor whose work embraced

electric bridge hoists, washers for gold mining, and methods of roadway construction,

yielded the notation that the two men had “lightly touched on business. We will no doubt

be associated.”60 Van Winkle’s use of the word “associated” suggests that he envisioned

his work with Booream to encompass more than simply filing patent applications,” and

the diary entries show him later putting Booream in contact with a mining engineer.61

         A few businessmen appeared over and over again in the pages of the diary as

purchasers of, or investors in, patents. One of the most striking things about these men is

the wide variety of technologies in which they displayed an interest. Richardson, for

example, was involved in patents for hat-frame formers, rails for high-speed railroads,

electric railroad systems, and pliers.62 Another businessman, Arthur DeYoung, was in

frequent contact to discuss technologies as diverse as coin counters, arc lamps, and dry

mounting processes for photographs.63 The most intriguing case is a man who is

identified in the records only as Mr. Oliver, although he was closely associated with Van

         57
            4 Feb., 5 Apr., and 22 May, Van Winkle Diary.
         58
            31 Mar. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         59
            8 Aug. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         60
            24 Jan. 1905, Van Winkle Diary. See also 5 Mar., 7 Jun., and 12 Jun. 1905.,
         61
            7 Jun. And 8 Jun. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         62
            See, for examples, 30 Jan., 16 Mar., 17 Mar., 1 Apr., 1 May, and 7 May 1905, Van Winkle
Diary.
                                                                                                          40


Winkle in a number of important deals. Oliver’s investments spanned the full gamut of

technologies, from envelopes to drills to arc lamps to sewing machines to signaling

systems for railroads.64

         The wide variety of technologies in which these men were interested suggests that

they were not primarily manufacturers seeking to purchase new inventions to improve the

efficiency of their enterprises or expand their product lines. Instead, they seem to have

been functioning essentially as venture capitalists eager to profit from cutting-edge

technologies by getting in on the ground floor. Sometimes getting in on the ground floor

simply meant purchasing the rights to promising new technologies. Richardson, for

example, typically operated this way. Similarly, Oliver offered an inventor named Peters

a note for $100,000 in exchange for the assignment of a patent for a wireless receiver—

after Oliver and Van Winkle had thoroughly discussed possible complications from the

Deforrest Company, the value of foreign patents, and the likelihood of marketing the

device to the U.S. government.65

         Sometimes, however, getting in on the ground floor meant much more—meant

actually organizing companies to develop and exploit an invention’s potential. Van

Winkle was involved in at least two such promotions during the period of the diary: the

Simplex Machine Company and the Automatic Security Signal Company.66 Both efforts


         63
            See, for examples, 6 Jan., 28 Jan., and 13 Jun. 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         64
            See, for examples, 1 Jan., 4 Feb., 16 Feb., 23 Feb., 7 Apr., 11 May, 20 May, and 6 Sept. 1905,
Van Winkle Diary. Oliver also financed the invention of a cloth guide for sewing machines by Van Winkle
himself. See entries for 24 Aug. and 29 Aug. 1905.
         65
            See diary entry for 20 May 1905. Oliver and Peters subsequently had some disagreement about
the terms of the arrangement, and it is not clear from the diary whether the deal actually went through. See
also 21 Jan., 24 Jan., 25 Feb., 28 Feb., 2 Mar., 13 May, 22 May, and 27 May 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         66
            Van Winkle was also involved with DeYoung in a coincounting venture, but the two men
appear to have been shut out of the resulting company and had to negotiate to have their interests in the
patents bought out. See 6 Jan., 28 Jan., 23 Feb., 4 Mar., 9 Aug., 16 Aug., 18 Aug., and 14 Sept., 1905, Van
Winkle Diaries.
                                                                                                        41


concerned inventions patented by William M. Murphy, and in each case Van Winkle

worked closely with Oliver. These promotions suggest that the roles of patent agents as

intermediaries could extend far beyond simply matching inventors with potential buyers

of their patents. Although Van Winkle did not handle the formal legal work associated

with incorporation, he did everything else: he brokered agreements between the inventor

and the main investors, arranged for the inventor to assign his patents to the company,

arranged for the application and sale of foreign patents, worked to find buyers for the

companies’ securities and customers for the companies’ products, and even helped the

inventor work out knotty technical details.67 In exchange, he received payment in the

form of shares in the new company’s stock. In the case of Simplex, for example, he

received 25 out of 500 shares; Murphy received 175.68

         Although we have no basis for assuming that Van Winkle was representative of

the general population of patent lawyers, his diary nonetheless offers an intriguing

window on the market for patented technology, allowing us to observe in close detail

some of the ways in which patent attorneys might improve the efficiency of this kind of

trade. The diary provides concrete evidence of the extensive investments that

intermediaries had to make in cultivating the trust of participants on both sides of the

market—the time and resources that had to be devoted to building personal relations with

inventors and also with businessmen who were potential buyers of patented technology.

The diary also highlights the very personal nature of many of the channels through which

information about inventions flowed during this period. Despite the existence of


        67
            See 27 Feb., 22 Mar., 14 Apr., 20 Apr., 11 May, 12 May, 5 Jun., 15 Jun., 21 Jun., 26 Jun., 17
Jul., 8 Aug., and 14 Aug., 1905, Van Winkle Diary.
         68
            See page inserted by the entry of 27 Jul. 1905, Van Winkle Diary. Neither of these companies
appear to have been successful, but that is a subject for another paper.
                                                                                                    42


publications that specialized in reporting new technological developments, the operation

of the market for technology depended to a large extent on the circulation by word of

mouth of details about new inventions that had not yet been fully worked out—details

patent agents and lawyers were uniquely well placed both to obtain and assess. More

interesting still, the diary opens a window on a world hitherto largely unknown—a world

in which businessmen who were operating in effect as venture capitalists eagerly

purchased interests in patents, and where attorneys like Van Winkle not only helped them

by assessing the investment potential of new inventions, but also played a vital role in

bringing businessmen and inventors together in companies formed to exploit these

promising new technologies.

        Although much work needs to be done to assess the extent and importance of such

activities during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, evidence from

interference records and other sources suggests that Van Winkle and his associates were

by no means alone. For example, Lansing Onderdonk, a sewing machine inventor,

testified that he and patent attorney Henry P. Wells had been part of a group that had

organized a business, in the early 1880s, to exploit a combination plaiting and ruffling

attachment for sewing machines.69 The president of the Bonsack Machine Company,

Demetrius B. Strouse, was none other than the patent attorney who had filed James A.

Bonsack’s original cigarette machine patents.70 To give a final, but very suggestive

example, patent lawyer Grosvenor Porter Lowrey played an important role in putting

together financing for Thomas Edison’s work in electric lighting. Lowrey was a partner


        69
            See “Deposition of witnesses examined on behalf of Lansing Onderdonk,” pp. 32-4, Onderdonk
v. Mack (1897), Case 18,194, Box 2,521, Interference Case Files, 1836-1905.
         70
            See “Testimony on Behalf of Bonsack,” pp. 45-46, Bohls v. Bonsack (1893), Case 15,678, Box
2,159, Interference Case Files, 1836-1905.
                                                                                                    43


in the firm of Porter, Lowrey, Soren & Stone and also general counsel for Western

Union. In this latter capacity, he had handled a number of patents for Edison and had

developed a close relationship with the inventor. Edison was thinking of working on

electric lighting, but had put the idea aside because he could not see how to come up with

the funding he needed for the project. Lowrey came to his aid by putting together “a

syndicate of his friends and closest business associates,” including some of his legal

partners, colleagues from Western Union, and personal friends such as the Fabbri

brothers, partners in Drexel, Morgan & Company. Financing from this group enabled

Edison to create the primitive research lab at Menlo Park where he conducted his

experiments with incandescent lighting. When the experiments proved successful,

Lowrey convinced essentially same people to organize the Edison Electric Light

Company in 1878.71



Conclusion

        This essay has investigated the institutions that helped to make the late nineteenth

and early twentieth century such a fertile period in U.S. technological history. As we have

argued, the creation of a well-developed market for patented technology facilitated the

emergence of a group of highly specialized and productive inventors by making it possible

for them to transfer to others responsibility for developing and commercializing their

inventions. The most basic of the institutional supports that made this market possible was,

of course, the patent system, which created secure and tradable property rights in invention.

But, as we have argued, trade was also facilitated by the emergence of intermediaries who


        71
         See especially Jocelyn Pierson Taylor, Mr. Edison’s Lawyer: Launching the Electric Light
(New York: Topp-Litho, 1978), pp. 32-4.
                                                                                              44


economized on the information costs associated with assessing the value of inventions and

helped to match sellers and buyers of patent rights. Patent agents and lawyers were

particularly well placed to provide these kinds of services, because they were linked to

similar attorneys in other parts of the country and because, in the course of their regular

business activities, they accumulated information about participants on both sides of the

market for technology. As our quantitative analysis of assignment contracts demonstrated,

patentees whose assignments were handled by these specialists assigned a greater fraction

of their patents and also were able to find buyers for their inventions much more quickly

than other patentees.

        In the case of financial markets, scholars have argued that the emergence of banks

and other similar kinds of formal intermediaries not only improved the efficiency with

which capital was transferred from savers to investors, but also had a more profound effect

on the economy by raising the general level of savings and investment. Although we do

not have the evidence we need to test formally whether levels of inventive activity were

similarly spurred by the appearance of specialized intermediaries in the market for patents,

our results provide at least circumstantial support for such a view. Thus we have shown

that inventors who were most specialized in patenting (that is, had the greatest numbers of

patents over a five-year period) and who were most involved in the market (that is, had

assigned a higher fraction of these patents at issue) made the most extensive use of

registered intermediaries. Moreover, our analysis of the longitudinal “B” sample indicates

that inventors who were most involved in the market both had the longest patenting careers

and received the highest numbers of patent grants over their careers. In other words, the

development of institutions supporting market trade in patented technology seems to have
                                                                                           45


made it possible for creative individuals to specialize more fully in inventive work—that is,

it seems to have set in motion the kind of Smithian process that generally has been

associated with higher rates of productivity, in this case in the generation of new

technological knowledge.
                                  TABLE 1

     DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON ASSIGNMENTS MADE BEFORE
                 AND AFTER ISSUE OF PATENTS


                                     1870-71   1890-91   1910-11

New England
  Assignment to Patenting Index       115.1    109.5     132.4
  % Assigned After Issue               70.4     31.2      30.1
  % Secondary Assignments              26.6     14.8      12.0
  % Geographic Assignments             17.1      0.8       0.0

Middle Atlantic
  Assignment to Patenting Index       100.7     94.8     116.3
  % Assigned After Issue               70.9     44.4      37.9
  % Secondary Assignments              33.3     16.4      11.0
  % Geographic Assignments             19.1      1.9       0.7

East North Central
  Assignment to Patenting Index        96.3    118.1     104.9
  % Assigned After Issue               77.7     48.5      32.8
  % Secondary Assignments              18.1     18.4      11.8
  % Geographic Assignments             34.3      5.7       1.8

West North Central
 Assignment to Patenting Index         90.7    110.1      73.5
 % Assigned After Issue                77.4     48.6      42.6
 % Secondary Assignments               32.3     19.2      11.0
 % Geographic Assignments              41.9     13.0       2.6

South
  Assignment to Patenting Index        60.0     68.9      68.0
  % Assigned After Issue               74.4     42.3      48.2
  % Secondary Assignments              27.9     11.3      19.1
  % Geographic Assignments             20.9      6.2       2.5

West
 Assignment to Patenting Index        150.0     67.2      81.5
 % Assigned After Issue                59.1     57.4      36.0
 % Secondary Assignments               22.7     11.4      10.4
 % Geographic Assignments              18.2      7.4       1.2

Total Domestic
  Assignment to Patenting Index       100.0    100.0     100.0
       % Assigned After Issue                   72.3           44.1           36.5
       % Secondary Assignments                  27.8           16.4           12.0
       % Geographic Assignments                 22.8            4.6            1.2

       Assignments to Patents Ratio             0.83           0.71           0.71
       Number of Contracts                      794           1,373          1,869

Sources and Notes: Our sample consists of all assignment contracts filed with the Patent
Office during the months of January 1871, January 1891, and January 1911. These
contracts are recorded in “Liber” volumes stored at the National Archives. There are a
total of about 4,600 contracts in our sample. Only those involving assignors that resided
in the United States are included in this table. The assignment to patenting index is based
on the ratio of assignments originating in the respective regions (given by the residence
of the assignor) to the number of patents filed from that region in 1870, 1890, and 1910
respectively. In each year the index has been set so that the national average equals 100.
The percentage of secondary assignments refers to the proportion of assignments where
the assignor was neither the patentee nor a relative of the patentee. The percentage of
geographic patent assignments refers to the proportion of assignments where the right
transferred was for a geographic unit smaller than the nation.
                                     TABLE 2

             DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON PATENT ASSIGNMENT,
                   BY CORRESPONDENT TYPE, 1871-1911


                                                 Patentee,     Third
                                    Registered   Assignor,   Party but
                                     Patent         or          not
                                      Agent      Assignee    Registered   Unknown

1871
Number                  Patents        114         144          126         53
                        Contracts       85          98           82         21

% of Total Number       Patents       26.1         33.0        28.8        12.1
                        Contracts     29.7         33.9        29.4         7.0

Proportion Assigned     Patents       0.47         0.09        0.18          –
   Before Issue         Contracts     0.61         0.08        0.23          –

Proportion Secondary    Patents       0.35         0.33        0.32        0.85
   Assignments          Contracts     0.20         0.31        0.30        0.80

Proportion National     Patents       0.89         0.53        0.71          –
   Assignments          Contracts     0.89         0.51        0.70          –

Proportion Assigned     Patents       0.28         0.24        0.20        0.66
   to Company           Contracts     0.25         0.16        0.20        0.48

Prop. Where Patentee    Patents       0.46         0.28        0.40        0.32
   in County With       Contracts     0.39         0.31        0.35        0.38
   City of >100,000

Patentees’ Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents       3.90         3.73        3.35        4.69
   Total of Patents     Contracts     2.45         3.10        3.27        3.05

Patentees’ Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents       1.47         0.88        0.80        0.88
   Total of Patents     Contracts     1.08         0.64        0.88        0.70
   Assigned at Issue

Ave. No. of Contracts
   Assigned by          Contracts     2.36         1.05        1.26          –
   Correspondent
1891
Number                  Patents     336    188    235     69
                        Contracts   219     89     88     27

% of Total Number       Patents     42.7   21.9   27.4   8.0
                        Contracts   51.8   21.0   20.8   6.4

Proportion Assigned     Patents     0.44   0.15   0.32   0.24
   Before Issue         Contracts   0.52   0.18   0.40   0.37

Proportion Secondary    Patents     0.20   0.31   0.37   0.81
   Assignments          Contracts   0.13   0.25   0.23   0.78

Proportion National     Patents     0.91   0.78   0.86    –
   Assignments          Contracts   0.94   0.72   0.78    –

Proportion Assigned     Patents     0.39   0.28   0.48   0.68
   to Company           Contracts   0.41   0.27   0.45   0.52

Prop. Where Patentee    Patents     0.51   0.45   0.55   0.58
   in County With       Contracts   0.46   0.45   0.48   0.52
   City of >100,000

Patentees’ Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents     6.61   3.65   5.80   5.45
   Total of Patents     Contracts   4.90   3.43   5.17   3.00

Patentees’ Ave. 5-Yr.   Patents     4.29   1.10   3.50   3.65
   Total of Patents     Contracts   3.39   1.27   3.43   1.74
   Assigned at Issue

Ave. No. of Contracts
   Assigned by          Contracts   1.77   1.07   1.24    –
   Correspondent

1911
Number                  Patents     467     94    189     89
                        Contracts   337     55    112     77

% of Total Number       Patents     55.7   11.2   22.5   10.6
                        Contracts   58.1    9.5   19.2   13.2

Proportion Assigned     Patents     0.70   0.15   0.31    –
   Before Issue         Contracts   0.72   0.18   0.41    –

Proportion Secondary    Patents     0.15   0.28   0.31    –
   Assignments          Contracts   0.09   0.24   0.21    –
Proportion National        Patents          0.97         0.69          0.89           –
   Assignments             Contracts        0.97         0.69          0.92           –

Proportion Assigned        Patents          0.61         0.55          0.46           –
   to Company              Contracts        0.57         0.47          0.51           –

Prop. Where Patentee       Patents          0.51         0.32          0.49         0.37
   in County With          Contracts        0.50         0.40          0.43         0.39
   City of >100,000

Patentees’ Ave. 5-Yr.      Patents          6.92         2.28          3.76          2.96
   Total of Patents        Contracts        4.99         2.45          4.04          3.13

Patentees’ Ave. 5-Yr.      Patents          5.97         0.69          2.66          2.49
   Total of Patents        Contracts        4.21         0.84          3.11          2.64
   Assigned at Issue

Ave. No. of Contracts
   Assigned by             Contracts        1.72         1.04          1.24           –
   Correspondent

Sources and Notes: The data were collected from the manuscript Digests of assignment
contracts for patentees whose family names began with the letter “B.” Our data set
includes information on all such patent assignments filed with the Patent Office during
the months of January through March for 1871, 1891, and 1911. Because some contracts
involved the sale or transfer of more than one patent, and some encompassed multiple
transfers of the same patent (such as the sale of a patent from A to B, and then another
transfer of the patent from B to C), we report one set of figures computed over all patents
assigned and another set computed over all contracts. For every patent in our sample of
assignments, we compiled a five-year record of all of the patents received by the
patentee, using the year of the assigned patent as the central year. From this record, we
computed the total number of patents the patentee received over the five years and the
total number of these patents that he assigned at issue. We categorized each assignment
contract (and the patents it included) by the identity of the person to whom all
correspondence about the assignments was to be addressed. Working with lists of patent
agents and lawyers from 1883 and 1905, we distinguished correspondents who were
formally registered with the Patent Office in at least one of these two years as a separate
class of intermediaries. Correspondents who were principals to the contract (either the
patentee, the assignor, or the assignee of one of the patents involved) were grouped
together in a second category of intermediaries. A third category consisted of third parties
who did not appear on either of the two lists of registered agents that we relied upon. It
seems likely, however, that we would have been able to identify some of these
correspondents as registered agents if we had rosters for additional years. Finally, we
include an “unknown” category that is primarily composed of cases where multiple
patents were assigned together and where the details of the contract were summarized in
the record of another patentee whose family name began with a letter other than “B”—
and was thus in another Digest volume.
                                       TABLE 3

   DISTRIBUTION OF ASSIGNMENTS BY DATE AND TYPE OF ASSIGNMENT
                   AND BY CORRESPONDENT CLASS

                                                        Assignment
                        Assignment       After Issue,   More Than 5
                        Before Issue     but Within 5   Years After
                         of Patent          Years          Issue            Total

                        No.     %        No.      %     No.    %      No.       %

1871
Registered      Prim.   40     69.0       17     29.3    1      1.7   58       24.3
 Patent Agent   Sec.     5     13.2       26     68.4    7     18.4   38       23.3

Principal       Prim.   12     12.8       77     81.9    5      5.3   94       39.3
                Sec.     0      –         39     86.7    6     13.3   45       27.6

Unregistered    Prim.   21     26.6       53     67.1    5      6.3   79       33.1
 Third Party    Sec.     0      –         31     81.6    7     18.4   38       23.3

Unknown         Prim.    0      –          6     75.0    2     25.0    8        3.4
                Sec.     1      2.4       38     90.5    3      7.1   42       25.8

Total           Prim.   73     30.5      153     64.0   13      5.4   239
                Sec.     6      3.7      134     82.2   23     14.1   163

1891
Registered      Prim.   141    48.3      127     43.5   24      8.2   292      50.3
 Patent Agent   Sec.     20    27.0       40     54.1   14     18.9    74      27.1

Principal       Prim.   25     19.4       82     63.6   22     17.1   129      22.2
                Sec.     4      6.8       27     45.8   28     47.5    59      21.6

Unregistered    Prim.   60     40.8       59     40.1   28     19.1   147      25.3
 Third Party    Sec.    14     16.1       47     54.0   26     29.9    87      31.9

Unknown         Prim.    7     53.9        2     15.4    4     30.8   13        2.2
                Sec.     9     17.0       28     52.8   16     30.2   53       19.4

Total           Prim.   233    40.1      270     46.5   78     13.4   581
                Sec.     47    17.2      142     52.0   84     30.8   273
1911
Registered       Prim.    231     76.5      57     18.9     14        4.6   303     63.7
 Patent Agent    Sec.      19     33.9      25     44.6     12       21.4    56     43.4

Principal        Prim.     12     18.8      40     62.5     12       18.8    64     13.5
                 Sec.       1      4.6      17     77.3      4       18.2    22     17.1

Unregistered     Prim.     46     42.6      45     41.7     17       15.7   108     22.8
 Third Party     Sec.       4      7.8      36     70.6     11       21.6    51     39.5

Total            Prim.    289     61.0     142     30.0     43        9.1   474
                 Sec.      24     18.6      78     60.5     27       20.9   129


Sources: See Table 2.

Notes: The unit of analysis in this table is the patent. For 1911, we omit the unknown
category because we have no information on the assignments as well as on the
correspondents for those cases.
                                    TABLE 4

  DISTRIBUTION OF CONTRACTS BY THE FIVE-YEAR TOTAL OF PATENTS
         RECEIVED BY THE INVENTOR AND BY THE NUMBER OF
           CONTRACTS HANDLED BY THE CORRESPONDENT



                               Number of Contracts Handled by Correspondent

                               1          2-3      4-5        6+       Total

1871 Patentees with
       1 Patent       Number   64             18    5         12        99
                      Row %    65             18    5         12
                      Col. %   36             37   29         52        37

       2-3 Patents    Number   73             17    6         10        106
                      Row %    69             16    6          9
                      Col. %   41             35   35         43        39

       4+ Patents     Number   43             14    6         1         64
                      Row %    67             22    9         2
                      Col. %   24             29   35         4         24

       Total          Number   180            49   17         23        269
                      Row %    67             18   6          9

1891 Patentees with
       1 Patent       Number   79             24    3         10        116
                      Row %    68             21   3          9
                      Col. %   35             23   10         26        29

       2-3 Patents    Number   66             31   14         19        130
                      Row %    51             24   11         15
                      Col. %   30             30   48         50        33

       4+ Patents     Number   78             50   12          9        149
                      Row %    52             34    8          6
                      Col. %   35             48   41         24        38

       Total          Number   223        105      29         38        395
                      Row %    56         27       7          10

1911 Patentees with
       1 Patent       Number   137            35   23         9         204
                     Row %        67    17    11    4
                     Col. %       48    27    37   21   39

       2-3 Patents   Number       83    32    13   3    131
                     Row %        63    24    10   2
                     Col. %       29    25    21   7    25

       4+ Patents    Number       64    61    27   30   182
                     Row %        35    34    15   16
                     Col. %       23    48    43   71   35

       Total         Number       284   128   63   42   517
                     Row %        55    25    12   8


Notes and Sources: See Table 2.
                                         TABLE 5

DISTRIBUTION OF ASSIGNED PATENTS BY CORRESPONDENT TYPE AND BY
          PROPORTION OF PATENTEE’S FIVE-YEAR PATENTS
                  THAT WERE ASSIGNED AT ISSUE


                                Inventor,
 Proportion   Registered       Assignor, or    Unregistered
of Five-Year Patent Agent       Assignee       Third Party      Unknown           Total
   Patents
Assigned at          Row               Row             Row             Row             Col.
    Issue     No.     %         No.     %       No.     %      No.      %      No.      %

    1871
0               10      13.7    17     23.3     20     27.4     26     35.6 73         46.5
0+ to 0.2        0       –       3     30.0      4     40.0      3     30.0 10          6.4
0.2+ to 0.4     11      29.7    19     51.4      6     16.2      1      2.7 37         23.6
0.4+ to 0.6      5      29.4     5     29.4      7     41.2      0      –    17        10.8
> 0.6           10      50.0     4     20.0      6     30.0      0      –    20        12.7
Total           36      22.9    48     30.6     43     27.4     30     19.1 157


    1891
0               40      28.4    57     40.4     33     23.4     11      7.8 141        27.6
0+ to 0.2        9      25.7     4     11.4     16     45.7      6     17.1 35          6.9
0.2+ to 0.4     14      28.6    12     24.5     19     38.8      4      8.2 49          9.6
0.4+ to 0.6     20      37.7     8     15.1     15     28.3     10     18.9 53         10.4
> 0.6          134      57.5    21      9.0     56     24.0     22      9.4 233        45.6
Total          217      42.5   102     20.0    139     27.2     53     10.4 511


    1911
0               26      44.8    10     17.2     20     34.5      2      3.5 58          9.3
0+ to 0.2        4      33.3     4     33.3      4     33.3      0      –    12         1.9
0.2+ to 0.4      8      57.1     0      –        4     28.6      2     14.3 14          2.2
0.4+ to 0.6     17      73.9     2      8.7      3     13.0      1      4.4 23          3.7
> 0.6          275      66.6    19      4.6     66     16.0     53     12.8 520        82.9
Total          330      52.6    35      5.6     97     15.5     58      9.3 627


Sources: See Table 2.

Notes: The unit of analysis in this table is the patent. For each patent, the proportion of
five-year patents assigned at issue was calculated by subtracting from the patentees’ five-
year total the patent originally sampled from the digest of assignment contracts and then
computing for the remaining patents the proportion assigned at issue.
                                         TABLE 6

                  ASSIGNMENT OF PATENTS AT ISSUE, 1870-1911


                                            1870-71           1890-91           1910-11

Number of Patents                            1,563            2,031              2,512

% of Patents Assigned                         18.4              29.3               31.1

% of Assignments to Group Including
  Patentee                                    52.1              41.5               25.4

% of Assignments in Which Patentee
  Assigned Away All Rights to
  Unrelated Individuals                       24.7              11.1               10.4

% of Assignments in Which Patentee
  Assigned Away All Rights to a
  Company                                     23.6              47.1               64.2

% of Assignments in Which Patentee
  Assigned Away All Rights to a
  Company with the Same Name
  as the Patentee                              5.6              11.8                9.2


 Sources and Notes: The table is based on three random cross-sectional samples of
 patents drawn from the Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents for the years 1870-
 71, 1890-91, 1910-11. The three samples total slightly under 6,600 patents, including
 those granted to foreigners. The table includes only patents awarded to residents of the
 United States. The category “% of Assignments to Group Including Patentee” consists of
 patents assigned to one or more individuals including the patentee, an individual with the
 same family name as the patentee, or an individual specifically designated as an agent for
 the patentee. Patents assigned to companies with the same last name as the patentee were
 included in the general category of patents assigned to companies, as well as in the
 particular category of companies with the same name as the patentee. It is, of course,
 also possible that patentees had an ownership stake in companies that did not bear their
 name.
                                        TABLE 7

         DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON THE CAREERS OF PATENTEES
                          IN THE “B” SAMPLE

                               1870-71        1890-91      1910-11        Total

                                          Means Computed Over Patentees
Not Assigned at Issue
   Ave. No. of Patents            8.0             10.0        6.4          7.9
   Length of Career (Yrs.)       13.2             14.7       11.1         12.7
   Career Assign. Rate (%)        8.3             11.5        9.2          9.6
   Number of Patentees            121              117        178          416
   Percent of All Patentees      84.6             63.9       75.7         74.2

Share Assignment
   Ave. No. of Patents            5.4             11.1        2.6          6.9
   Length of Career (Yrs.)       10.6             13.5        8.1         11.0
   Career Assign. Rate (%)       67.1             75.3       87.5         76.7
   Number of Patentees             13               19         14           46
   Percent of All Patentees       9.1             10.4        6.0          8.2

Full Assign. to Individual
    Ave. No. of Patents           5.3             29.0        3.0         12.1
    Length of Career (Yrs.)      12.0             18.3        5.3         11.9
    Career Assign. Rate (%)      52.1             74.1       76.4         66.7
    Number of Patentees             7                6          6           19
    Percent of All Patentees      4.9              3.3        2.6          3.4

Full Assign. to Company
    Ave. No. of Patents          30.0             23.7       32.6         28.0
    Length of Career (Yrs.)      25.5             21.7       23.5         22.6
    Career Assign. Rate (%)      62.1             70.7       80.9         75.2
    Number of Patentees             2               41         37           80
    Percent of All Patentees      1.4             22.4       15.7         14.3


                                           Means Computed Over Patents
Not Assigned at Issue
   Ave. No. of Patents           20.0             39.7      38.2          33.7
   Length of Career (Yrs.)       21.5             28.2      26.0          25.6
   Career Assign. Rate (%)       14.2             23.5      22.0          20.4
   Number of Patents              900             1264      1053          3217
   Percent of All Patents        80.0              50.1     43.8          53.1

Share Assignment
   Ave. No. of Patents             19.3           40.5           24.4           30.7
   Length of Career (Yrs.)         20.7           27.5           25.6           25.4
   Career Assign. Rate (%)         39.9           66.5           62.8           59.4
   Number of Patents                 75            156            108            339
   Percent of All Patents           6.6             6.2           4.5            5.6

Full Assign. to Individual
    Ave. No. of Patents            27.3           76.5           39.2           58.6
    Length of Career (Yrs.)        26.1           30.6           28.3           29.2
    Career Assign. Rate (%)        40.3           77.0           70.9           67.9
    Number of Patents                82            224             74            381
    Percent of All Patents          7.3             8.9           3.1            6.2

Full Assign. to Company
    Ave. No. of Patents            35.9           62.5          135.6          101.8
    Length of Career (Yrs.)        26.6           32.9           35.1           33.9
    Career Assign. Rate (%)        53.3           78.0           85.5           81.3
    Number of Patents                73            880           1168           2121
    Percent of All Patents          6.5           34.9           48.6           35.0

Sources and Notes: The table is based on a longitudinal data set constructed by selecting
all of the patentees in the cross-sectional samples (see Table 6 for a description) whose
family names began with the letter “B” and collecting information from the Annual
Reports of the Commissioner of Patents on the patents they received during the twenty-
five years before and after they appeared in the samples. This data set contains
information on 6,057 patents granted to 561 “B” inventors. The top panel treats each
patentee as a single case, based on the patent that appeared in the cross-section. The
bottom panel analyzes each patent obtained by the patentee separately. Patentees are
divided into categories depending on whether the patent in the original cross-section was
assigned at issue or not and how that assignment was made. The career assignment rate
includes only assignments at issue.
