                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CHILD LABOR: THE ROLE OF INCOME VARIABILITY AND ACCESS TO CREDIT
                           ACROSS COUNTRIES


                                           Rajeev H. Dehejia
                                             Roberta Gatti


                                          Working Paper 9018
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9018


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We thank Jagdish Bhagwati, David Dollar, and Alan Krueger for helpful conversations, Kathleen Beegle,
Maria Solededad Martinez Peria, Antonio Spilimbergo and seminar participants at the World Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank for useful comments, and Sergio Kurlat for excellent research assistance.
All errors are our own. Dehejia thanks the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Industrial
Relations Section, Princeton University, for their kind hospitality. Address correspondence to
rd247@columbia.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the World Bank or its member countries.


© 2002 by Rajeev H. Dehejia and Roberta Gatti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Child Labor: The Role of Income Variability and Access to Credit Across Countries
Rajeev H. Dehejia and Roberta Gatti
NBER Working Paper No. 9018
June 2002
JEL No. J22, G1, O16



                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper examines the relationship between child labor and access to credit at a cross-country
level. Even though this link is theoretically central to child labor, so far there has been little work done
to assess its importance empirically. We measure child labor as a country aggregate, and credit constraints
are proxied by the extent of financial development. These two variables display a strong negative
relationship, which we show is robust to selection on observables (by controlling for a wide range of
variables such as GDP per capita, urbanization, initial child labor, schooling, fertility, legal institutions,
inequality, and openness, and by allowing for a nonparametric functional form), and to selection on
unobservables (by allowing for fixed effects). We find that the magnitude of the association between our
proxy of access to credit and child labor is large in the sub-sample of poor countries. Moreover, in the
absence of developed financial markets, households appear to resort substantially to child labor in order
to cope with income variability. This evidence suggests that policies aimed at widening households’
access to credit could be effective in reducing the extent of child labor.




Rajeev Dehejia                                                     Roberta Gatti
Department of Economics and SIPA                                   Development Research Group
Columbia University                                                The World Bank, MC3-353
420 W. 118th Street, Room 1022                                     1818 H Street, NW
New York, NY 10027                                                 Washington, DC 20433
and NBER                                                           rgatti@worldbank.org
rd247@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

Child labor is a troubling phenomenon. It has been a concern of policy since at least the
19th Century (see Basu (1999), Section 2.2), and the debate on which policies should be
employed to reduce it − ranging from legislative bans on child labor, to trade sanctions
against countries that use child labor, to schooling subsidies for children − is long-
standing. As troubling as child labor is per se, it is essential to investigate its economic
determinants in order to inform policy choices and identify their welfare implications.
       The evidence and existing literature suggest a strong link between child labor and
poverty (Krueger (1996)). In 1995 there were an estimated 120 million children engaged
in full-time paid work (see ILO (1996)). In the same year, the incidence of child labor
was 2.3% among countries in the upper quartile of GDP per capita, and 34% among
countries in the lowest quartile of GDP per capita. If this link is causal and there are no
market inefficiencies, we would expect promoting general economic development to
reduce child labor. However, other mechanisms can also account for the observed
relationship between child labor and poverty. In particular, market failures – which are
arguably more common where poverty is widespread – or externalities might be the
actual cause of child labor. For example, if private returns to education are lower than
social returns, child labor can be inefficiently high. In this case, government intervention
in the specific market where the inefficiency occurs is to be preferred (Grootaert and
Kanbur, (1995)).
       The work in this paper goes in this direction. We explore the nexus between child
labor and one possible source of inefficiency − the presence of borrowing constraints. By
providing evidence that child labor arises in response to a particular form of inefficiency,
this work indicates that the issue of child labor can be in part addressed independently of
solving the (more complex) problem of general economic development.
       At the household level, child labor arises from an inter-temporal trade-off. By
entering the job market at an early age, an individual can make an immediate contribution
to household income and perhaps gain labor market experience. This addition to earnings
potentially carries a long-term cost to the extent that the time children spend working
could be used instead in activities that build up their long-run human capital. The nature



                                             1
of this cost depends on the alternatives to child labor, such as schooling or time spent in
play (which also contributes to cognitive development). The key economic variable that
allows households to make this trade-off optimally is access to credit − households can
borrow against future income and can also smooth earnings shocks without recourse to
child labor. 
        Even though access to credit is central to child labor theoretically, there has been
little work done to assess its importance empirically (see Brown, Deardorff, and Stern
(2001)). In this paper, we pursue a cross-country strategy. We measure child labor as a
country aggregate, and credit constraints are proxied by the extent of financial
intermediation. These two variables display a strong negative (unconditional) relationship
(see Figure 1). Of course to determine the strength of the relationship we must control for
other important variables. The existing literature on child labor provides some guidance.
As noted in most empirical studies on child labor, income is a crucial variable, since
regardless of access to credit child labor is strongly associated with poverty. Likewise,
the literature suggests that schooling, fertility patterns, ruralization, and openness might
be important determinants of child labor. Our results show a strong link between child
labor and access to credit even when these factors are accounted for and a range of
estimation techniques is used. This relationship appears to be particularly sizeable in the
sample of poor countries, which have both less developed financial markets and greater
child labor and, as such, are in general of greater policy interest. Moreover, we find that
income variability has a sizeable impact on child labor in countries where financial
markets are underdeveloped, suggesting that households resort to their children’s work to
cope with income shocks. This is not the case though when financial markets are
developed, which suggests that access to credit might effectively cut households’
demands on children’s time.
        The importance of this result is twofold. First, it establishes the empirical
relevance of a significant strand of the theoretical literature on child labor. Second, it
clearly points at a policy mechanism that might help alleviate the problem of child labor.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature.
Section 3 describes the data and presents our results. Section 4 examines the robustness
of our results. Section 5 concludes.


                                             2
2. Review of the Literature


The empirical literature on child labor is vast (see Brown, Deardorff, and Stern (2001)),
and the more recent theoretical literature is also substantial (see Basu (1999)). In this
section, we highlight the papers that are essential to our empirical strategy.


2.1 The Modeling Framework


         Basu (1999) partitions the theoretical literature into two groups − papers that
examine intra-household bargaining (between parents, or parents and children) and those
that examine extra-household bargaining (where the household is a single unit and
bargains with employers). Both frameworks are potentially valid for our analysis, and
suggest different factors that might influence child labor.
         In the intra-household bargaining framework, child labor is the outcome of a
bargaining process between members of the household, for example parents and children
(see Bourguignon and Chiappori (1994) and Moehling (1995)) or the father and the
mother (who is assumed to care for the children more than the father, see Galasso
(1999)). The weight that each member receives can depend upon his or her contribution
to the family’s resources. Collectively, child labor may be desirable because it contributes
to the family income, and it may be desirable to the child because it increases his or her
weight in the family decision function. Within this framework the key variables are those
that determine the relative bargaining strength of different members of the household.
This could include wealth, the number, age, and gender of children, and earnings (wages)
if an individual were to work (regardless of whether this is observed or not).
         The extra-household bargaining framework considers each household as a unitary
entity (see, amongst others, Becker (1964) and Gupta (1998)). The motivation behind this
approach is that children’s bargaining power is inherently very limited, so that parents
determine to what extent a child works without necessarily considering the child’s
welfare.1 The parents and the employer bargain about the child’s wage and the fraction of


1
  However, if parents are altruistic, they face a meaningful trade-off between the benefit of child labor and
its cost. We will discuss this mechanism in detail in Section 2.2.


                                                     3
that wage to be paid as food to the child. Within this framework the key variables are
those that determine the relative bargaining strength of the household vis à vis the
employer. These also include household wealth variables as well as access to credit.


2.2 The Role of Access to Credit


        The role of credit markets in determining the extent of child labor has been
addressed by a recent strand of the theoretical literature (Parsons and Goldin (1989),
Baland and Robinson (2000), Ranjan (1999, 2001) and Rosati and Tzannatos (2000)).
Analytically this question is closely related to the literature on bequests within altruistic,
unitary models of the family à la Becker (1974). That literature has highlighted that the
non-negativity constraint in bequests can lead to an inefficient allocation of resources
within the family (see for example Becker and Murphy (1988)). In particular, if parents
care about their children but bequests are at a corner, child labor is not generally efficient.
The basic intuition is that child labor creates a trade-off between current and future
income. Putting children to work raises current family income, but by interfering with
children’s human capital development, it reduces future income. This future income is, of
course, realized by the children and not the parents. Thus, if there are positive bequests,
parents can compensate themselves for foregone current income by reducing bequests.
Conversely, if bequests are at a corner – which is more likely to occur for poorer
households – parents will tend to draw on child labor too heavily.
        Even if conditions exist for an efficient allocation of child labor from an
intergenerational perspective (i.e., bequests are positive), parents might still choose an
inefficiently high level of labor for their children if they cannot borrow to smooth their
consumption over time, i.e. if the intragenerational allocation of resources is constrained.
The following model, adapted from Baland and Robinson (2000), illustrates this point
analytically.
        Consider a two-period model where the parent and the child live
contemporaneously. In each period the parent supplies labor inelastically, earning income
A. In period 1, the parent decides how much to save for the following period, s, as well as
the extent to which his child will work, l c ∈ [0,1] . When working in period 1, the child



                                              4
earns lc, which the parent can appropriate completely. In period 2, the child, now an
adult, will supply one unit of labor, which will earn her an income of h(1 − lc ) , where h is
the human capital accumulated in period 1. h(·) is decreasing in lc and is strictly concave,
with h(0)=1.
       We assume that the parent is altruistic. He cares about his own consumption in
periods 1 and 2, c 1p and c 2p respectively, and, to the extent λ, about the child’s utility.

Because of altruism, in period 2 the parent might want to leave a bequest b to the child.
       For simplicity, parental utility is additively separable and there is no intertemporal
discount. The child is selfish and cares only about her own consumption cc (for further
simplicity, the child only consumes in period 2).
       The parent’s utility function is
                                W   p   = u ( c 1p ) + u ( c 2p ) + λ W c ( c c )

where Wc (c c ) is the child’s utility function and u(·) and Wi(·) are concave and well-
behaved functions.
       The parent’s budget constraints in periods 1 and 2 are:
                                                  c1p = A + lc − s

and
                                                  c 2p = A − b + s .

The child’s budget constraint is
                                                cc = h(1 − lc ) + b .
       In order to illustrate how inefficiently high child labor might emerge if individuals
cannot borrow, we focus on the case where s ≥ 0 .2 The first order conditions are as
follows:


       (1) with respect to b                u ' (c 2p ) = λWc' (cc )                if b>0

       (2) with respect to s                u ' (c 1p ) ≥ u ' (c 2p )               if s>0

       (3) with respect to lc               u ' (c1p ) = λWc' (c c )h' (1 − lc )




                                                      5
         In this setup, the chosen level of child labor is efficient when the marginal return
to time spent in school equals its marginal cost (the opportunity cost of child labor). Here
the return to education is h(1 − lc ) and the opportunity cost of child labor is lc. Efficient

child labor is therefore defined by h' (1 − lc ) = 1 . Conversely, child labor is inefficiently

high if h' (1 − lc ) > 1 . Baland and Robinson (2000) show that if s=0 (i.e. if the borrowing
constraint is actually binding), the parent will choose to make his child work too much. If
in period 1 the parent wished he could borrow but cannot do so, his consumption will be
lower and its marginal utility higher than optimal, u ' (c 1p ) > u ' (c 2p ) . Substituting for

u ' (c 2p ) from (1) and u ' (c 1p ) from (3), it easily follows that h' (1 − lc ) > 1 . Intuitively, if the

parent cannot smooth consumption between period 1 and 2 through borrowing, he will
use child labor to increase consumption in period 1 at the expense of his child’s human
capital accumulation.
         This model suggests that the availability of credit should be a factor that predicts
the incidence of child labor. Moreover, if such an effect is found, it will provide evidence
that the child labor we observe is in fact inefficient. Since our empirical work is at the
aggregate level, we will use the degree of development of financial markets in a country
as a measure of the credit constraints that individuals face.


2.3 Empirical Work


         At the level of micro data, there is a range of empirical studies that examine the
causes of child labor. In a recent volume, Grootaert and Patrinos (1999) review findings
from Côte D’Ivoire, Colombia, Bolivia, and the Philippines. Other authors have
examined child labor in Ghana (Canagarajah and Coulombe (1997)) and Vietnam
(Edmonds and Pavcnik (2001)). A consistent finding is that child labor is associated with
poverty. This, of course, is what we would anticipate, and it underlines the necessity of
controlling for income in our empirical analysis. Among other determinants of child labor

2
  For simplicity, we allow only transfers from the parent to the child and derive first order conditions under
the assumption that b>0.


                                                      6
at the individual level are the child’s age and gender, education and employment of the
parents, and rural versus urban location. From this list, it is of course difficult at the
aggregate level to control for household-specific attributes such as gender composition
and age, but we can control for education and the degree of urbanization of a country.
       At the cross-country level, much work has gone into creating a uniform definition
of child labor. Two significant efforts in this direction are Ashagrie (1993) and Grootaert
and Kanbur (1995). These previous analyses are more concerned with measuring the
extent of child labor than with estimating the effect of various country characteristics on
the degree of child labor. Krueger (1996) establishes a strong negative relationship
between the prevalence of child labor and national income, a finding which is confirmed
in the present study. Krueger also shows that there is little evidence (at least in the United
States) that the support for banning imports made with child labor is linked to the
potential benefits to domestic rent seekers (i.e., unskilled labor, who might benefit from
such a ban).
       Although (to our knowledge) the link between access to credit and child labor has
not been examined directly, it has been examined indirectly in two ways. First, the
literature on the causes of child labor has noted a link between household assets and child
labor (see Grootaert and Patrinos (1999) and Brown, Deardorff, and Stern (2001)). To the
extent that assets can serve as collateral for borrowing, this link suggests that access to
credit might play a role. Of course, the evidence is indirect, and might also be picking up
wealth effects. Second, there are some significant papers that examine the link between
credit and schooling choices. Jacoby and Skoufias (1997) examine the completeness of
credit markets in a dataset of six Indian villages. They find that households are not fully
able to insure themselves against unanticipated idiosyncratic income shocks, and as a
result reduce schooling. Jacoby (1994), using data from Peru, finds that children in
households with lower levels of income and durable goods (consequently, presumably
with a lower access to credit) are more likely to repeat grades at school. Flug,
Spilimbergo, and Wachtenheim (1998) examine the effect of financial development on
schooling using cross-sectional country data, and find a negative and significant effect.
These papers are complementary to the present study, because – as shown by Ravallion




                                              7
and Wodon (1999) for data from Bangladesh – schooling and child labor are not one-for-
one substitutes.


3. Data, Specification, and Results


The availability of child labor data (see below) allows us to build a panel for 172
countries for the years 1950-60, 70, 80, 90, 95. For this dataset we first estimate a
parsimonious specification where we control for some basic determinants of child labor.
We then add to this specification our variable of interest (a proxy for the availability of
credit within a country), and investigate whether access to credit is effective in
dampening risk by adding to the specification a measure of income volatility. In the next
section, we perform a number of robustness checks, which include estimating our
specification without outliers, adding to the regression a number of other variables that, if
not accounted for, might generate an omitted variable problem, and allowing for fixed
effects and flexible functional form.


3.1 Data description


       We measure the extent of child labor (CHILDLAB) as the percentage of the
population in the 10-14-age range that is actively engaged in work. These data were
compiled by the ILO and are available at ten-year intervals starting from 1950 for 172
countries. “Active population” includes people who worked (for wage or salary, in cash
or in kind as well as for family unpaid work) for at least one hour during the reference
period (ILO (1996)). The structure of the data does not allow us to infer the intensity of
child labor, so that we cannot distinguish between light child work (that some might
argue to be beneficial for adolescents) and full-time labor that might seriously conflict
with human capital accumulation. Moreover, like most official data on child labor, these
data are likely to suffer from underreporting, as work by children is illegal or restricted
by law in most countries and children are often employed in the informal sector. These
problems notwithstanding, the ILO data has the advantage of being adjusted on a basis of




                                             8
the internationally accepted definitions, thereby allowing cross-countries comparisons
(Ashagrie (1993)).
         As a proxy for the absence of credit constraints we use the ratio of private credit
issued by deposit-money banks to GDP (the variable CREDIT, which we refer to
interchangeably as “access to credit” or “financial development”). This variable isolates
credit issued to the private sector (as opposed to credit issued to governments and public
enterprises) and captures the degree of activity of financial intermediaries that is most
relevant to our investigation: the channeling of savings into lending (Beck, Demirguc-
Kunt, and Levine (1999)). Using data on nearly 3,000 small and medium firms and 48
countries from the World Business Environment Survey dataset, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt
and Maksimov (2002) show that this credit variable is negatively and significantly
correlated with the degree of firms’ financing constraints (a correlation of -0.20,
significant at 1%).3 To the extent that small and medium enterprises face financing
problems similar to those of households, this lends support to our use of this proxy.
However, it also underlines the fact that financial intermediation has an effect not only on
households, but also on the producer side of the economy. As such our access to credit
proxy embodies both of these effects, and can be interpreted more broadly as capturing
the effect of financial development (see King and Levine (1993) and Rajan and Zingales
(1998)).
         Figures 2 and 3 graph, respectively, the incidence of child labor in different
regions of the world and the evolution of child labor and credit over time. The two
variables are plotted in Figure 1. To proxy for economic volatility we follow Flug et al.
(1999) and construct the standard deviation of annual per capita income growth rates in
the previous 5 (and 10) years. We expect that more children enter the labor force when
economic volatility is high, all the more so if financial institutions are underdeveloped
and credit cannot be used by families to smooth consumption over time.
         The various specifications account for a number of other controls, including linear
and squared log GDP per capita (LRGDPPC and LRGDPPC2), percentage of rural
population (RURAL), continent dummies, share of imports (IMP) and exports (EXP) of


3
  More precisely, it is correlated with enterprise managers’ perceptions about how large an obstacle
financing issues are for their business. For more details, see Beck et al. (2002).


                                                     9
GDP, fertility (FERTILITY), the ratification of the 1973 Geneva convention on child
labor (RATIFY), origin of the legal system (LEGAL ORIGIN), and income inequality
(GINI). All of the variables and their sources are described in the Appendix. In Section
4, we discuss in detail the possible bias that excluding each variable might generate in the
estimated coefficient on credit. Tables 1 and 2 report averages of and correlations among
the variables.


3.2 Basic Specification


        The empirical literature on child labor uniformly indicates that income is the
single most important household-level predictor of child labor (in general, the children of
poor families are more likely to work). It seems reasonable to expect that income is an
important determinant of child labor at the aggregate level as well. To control for this
effect we include in our specification (the log of) per capita income and allow for linear
and quadratic terms (LRGDPPC and LRGDPPC2).
        Child labor is highly correlated over time. The correlation between child labor in
1950 and child labor in 1980 is around 0.9. Consequently it is important to control for
initial conditions, and we include the level of child labor in 1950 (CHILD50) in our
specification. In some sense, including child labor in 1950 amounts to controlling for a
country-specific effect, and purges to some extent the spurious cross-sectional correlation
that is often problematic in cross-country regressions. (In Section 4.2 we address this
issue more directly, by allowing for fixed effects.) We also include in the equation the
percentage of rural population to control for the fact that in developing countries (and
also historically in developed countries) child labor is strongly associated with
agricultural work. Finally, we allow for a time trend.
        The baseline specification is therefore:


        Child laborit = f(constant, time trendt, log real GDP per capitait, log real GDP per
capita2it, percentage of rural populationit, child labor in 1950i)




                                              10
We first estimate the equation using OLS. The results are reported in Table 3, column (1).
Both income terms are highly significant, with child labor reaching a minimum at a per
capita income of $2,891. As anticipated, initial child labor is highly significant. Rural
population turns out to be significant only at the 10 per cent level. Finally, the time trend
is negative and significant.
         One important feature of data on child labor is the presence of a substantial
proportion of zeros. Of the 703 data points used in column (1), over 20 percent are zero.
The OLS assumption of linearity (and implicitly normality for the standard errors) might
not be appropriate in this context. Thus, we also present results for a Tobit estimate. In
column (4), we see that the sign of the coefficients is the same, but the magnitude of the
impacts differ somewhat. Since the Tobit specification accounts for the mass point in the
outcome distribution and is potentially less sensitive to outliers in the data, the Tobit
specification seems to be more appropriate. As a robustness check, we present both sets
of estimates throughout the paper.


3.3 The availability of credit


         We now introduce our measure of credit availability into the basic specification.
The OLS results for the estimation in the full sample are presented in Table 3, column
(2). Credit enters with the expected sign (negative – as the aggregate availability of credit
increases, the prevalence of child labor decreases), and is statistically significant, even
after controlling for income, initial child labor, rural population, and a time trend. When
using a Tobit specification, the coefficient on credit is more than twice as large as OLS
and strongly significant.4
         As a test of robustness we exclude outliers from the regressions. With 474
observations and 135 countries, extreme observations might in principle be quite
influential. We employ the Hadi (1992) selection criterion for outliers in multivariate
regressions.5 Four countries (Myanmar, Hong Kong, Switzerland, and Zaire) are


4
  Throughout the paper , we report marginal coefficients for Tobit.
5
  Hadi’s (1992) technique is particularly useful to identify outliers in a multivariate regression setting and is
based on a procedure that recursively defines distance of an observation from a cluster of observations in
the model.


                                                      11
identified as outliers in this context. We rerun the OLS and Tobit specifications without
these outliers. For OLS the magnitude of the coefficient of credit increases by 30%, and
the estimate is even more significant. For the Tobit, the magnitude and significance of the
marginal coefficient are unaffected.
         We then estimate our specification for the sub-samples of rich and poor countries
(where we split the data by mean GDP per capita). This is a natural dimension along
which to search for heterogeneity in the effect of credit. We would imagine the effect to
be greater for poorer countries, where improvements in access to credit are presumably
extending the basic infrastructure of financial markets. Instead the effect of access to
credit in richer countries is presumably higher-order and less likely to affect households.
This is confirmed by our results in Table 4, for both the OLS and Tobit specifications.
The effect of credit is significant in both sub-samples but is several orders of magnitude
larger in poor countries than in rich countries.
         The magnitude of the estimated coefficient in the full sample is small, relative for
example to the effect of GDP per capita. For the OLS estimates, a one standard deviation
increase in access to credit is associated with a decrease of five per cent of a standard
deviation in child labor. For Tobit, a one standard deviation increase in access to credit is
associated with more than ten per cent of a standard deviation decrease in child labor. In
contrast, the magnitude of the effect of GDP per capita is much larger. If a country were
to move from the 5th to the 10th percentile of GDP per capita in 1995 (i.e., from $504 to
$618), child labor would decrease by 3 to 5.5 percentage points, on a base prevalence of
child labor of 39% for that level of income. In contrast, moving between the same
percentiles of access to credit would lead only to a 0.05 to 0.1 percentage point decrease
in child labor. Nonetheless, it is plausibly easier to increase household access to credit
than to induce general economic development, so it might be reasonable to consider
larger increases in the level of access to credit.6 For example, a move from the 25th to the
75th percentile of access to credit would bring about a 1 to 2.4 percentage point decrease
in child labor.



6
 More precisely, though it is also difficult to increase the level of financial development of a country, it is
presumably easier to increase household access to credit, which is the underlying variable of interest, for
example by targeting credit to poorer households with children.


                                                     12
        Moreover, for the countries of greatest policy interest – poorer countries, which
have both a lower level of financial development and higher child labor – the magnitude
of the effect is much larger. A move from the 25th to the 75th percentile of access to credit
in a poor country is associated with a 4.2 percentage point decrease in child labor.7


3.4 The effect of income variability


        Our results confirm that the availability of credit – as proxied by financial
development – plays a significant role in explaining child labor. However, there are
several pathways through which this effect could operate. Table 3 does not shed light on
which mechanisms are empirically relevant. Access to credit obviously has an effect
economic growth and long-run income, but by controlling for the level of GDP per
capita, we are accounting for this effect to some extent. In Table 5, we explore another
possible mechanism − smoothing income shocks.
        As outlined in Section 2, families might resort to sending their children to work to
help them cope with negative income shocks. Nonetheless, if credit is widely available,
households can borrow to smooth income variability and might not need to disrupt their
children’s education (or leisure time). When we introduce our measure of income
volatility (SDGROW5, the standard deviation of annual GDP growth in the previous 5
years) into the specification, we see that the estimated coefficient is large and highly
significant, suggesting that households indeed use child labor to cope with income
volatility.8 In principle, though, the variability of income should affect child labor mostly
in those countries where credit is not accessible. To investigate this possible effect, we
split the sample into high and low credit groups, using the mean as the cutoff. In Table 5,
column (2) (column (5), for Tobit), we see that for the low credit group, income
variability enters the specification significantly and the magnitude of the coefficient is




7
  Not surprisingly, when we split the sample by level of income, quadratic income loses its significance in
three out of four specifications. The size and significance of the coefficient on CREDIT remain virtually
unchanged if we exclude the quadratic term in income and control only for linear income.
8
  Results are virtually the same when instead of SDGROW5 we use SDGROW10, the standard deviation of
annual GDP growth in the previous 10 years.


                                                    13
substantial. Instead, for the high credit group (columns (3) and (6)), the effect of income
volatility on child labor is small and not significantly different from zero.9


4. Robustness checks


A significant concern regarding our results in Section 3, and more generally a concern
regarding all cross-country regressions, is whether the effect of credit availability on
child labor is truly causal. To be confident of identifying a causal effect we must control
for factors – both observed and unobserved – that influence selection into a particular
level of credit availability. Because of the interrelatedness of macro-level variables, this
is an inherently difficult condition to satisfy. We extend the empirical framework in
three directions to check for the robustness of our results. First we consider additional
control variables (hence examine sensitivity to selection on observables). Second, we
consider fixed-effects models (hence examine sensitivity to selection on unobservables).
Third, we consider propensity score estimates (a nonparametric estimator which
considers sensitivity to functional form selection).


4.1 Additional Controls


           We now subject our result to a battery of additional controls. Our interest is not to
interpret the additional coefficients causally, since some of the variables we add are
potentially endogenous with respect to child labor. The additional controls are intended
instead to confirm that the significance of credit is not simply attributable to omitted
variable bias. Estimates are reported in Table 6 (for OLS) and Table 7 (for Tobit).
           First, we add continent dummies. When estimated with OLS, the magnitude of the
credit variable decreases, and it is no longer statistically significant at the conventional
level, while the magnitude and significance of credit are not substantially affected in the
Tobit estimation (Tables 6 and 7, column (1)). In both the OLS and Tobit estimates, the
coefficient on the Sub-Saharan Africa dummy is positive and significant, suggesting that
the high prevalence of child labor in this region is due to factors (cultural, institutional)

9
    These estimates do not appear to be sensitive to outliers.


                                                        14
other than income level, prevalence of rural population, and development of financial
markets. As an additional robustness check (results not reported), we reestimate the
relationship, excluding countries from Sub-Saharan Africa, and find that the credit
coefficient remains significant.10
        We then control for primary and secondary (female) school enrollment (Tables 6
and 7, columns (2) and (3)). At the household level there is a close connection between
the prevalence of education and child labor. Over the long run, the availability of
education gives rise to an important inter-temporal trade-off in the time allocation of
children. Time spent in schoolwork may displace time spent in work, but also creates a
stream of future returns to education. Of course, schooling is not a full-time activity, so
this tradeoff may not be very extreme – schooling and child labor might co-exist at the
expense of leisure activities (see Ravallion and Wodon (1999)). Presumably for
secondary schooling the trade-off is more substantial. The empirical results bear out this
reasoning. Primary enrollment enters the specification negatively (more schooling, less
child labor), but is only marginally significant. Instead, secondary enrollment is negative
and highly significant. Because of potential endogeneity problems in the specification
with enrollment, these coefficients should not be interpreted causally. Our interest is in
the robustness of the credit coefficient. Here we find that the OLS coefficient on credit is
smaller (though still significant). The Tobit coefficient is much more robust to the
inclusion of schooling controls.
        We next control for the level of fertility. Fertility is strongly tied to child labor.
Larger, poorer families might need to send their children to work to help support the
family. On the other hand, couples might want to have more children if they think that the
children can bring a net increase in family income and if child labor is a widespread
phenomenon in their community. When fertility is included in the regression, the
magnitude of the coefficient on credit in the OLS decreases, and in fact is no longer
statistically significant. However, five outlier countries drive this result.11 Once these



10
   We also check for robustness to the exclusion of countries from Eastern and Central Europe, because of
potential measurement error problems with child labor in former Soviet-bloc countries.
11
   These countries (Myanmar, Hong Kong, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, and Zaire) are selected using Hadi’s
(1992) methodology.


                                                   15
countries are excluded, the t-statistic on the credit variable increases to 2.13. Finally, the
Tobit estimates of the credit coefficient are robust to the inclusion of fertility.
           A potential source of spurious correlation for the credit estimates are legal
institutions, which both influence the development of financial intermediation and the
enforcement of child labor laws. We proxy for this effect by including dummy variables
that identify the historic origins – British, French, etc. – of the countries’ legal systems.
None of these dummies is significant, individually or jointly. The OLS estimate of the
credit variable is marginally weakened while the Tobit coefficient is virtually unaffected
(Tables 6 and 7, column (5)).
           In order to control more directly for a country’s commitment to fight against child
labor, we include in the specification a dummy (RATIFY) indicating whether the country
has ratified the 1973 ILO convention against child labor – also known as the Minimum
Age Convention – which specifies fifteen years of age as the cutoff age for participating
in economic activity.12 Note that only 93 out of the 207 countries originally in our sample
have ratified the convention (the US, for example, is not a signatory to the convention).
When RATIFY is included in the regression, the significance of the credit variable is
weakened in the OLS specification. However, when four outlier observations are
excluded, the credit variable is again significant (at the 10% level)13. Moreover, its
significance is unaffected in the Tobit specification (Tables 6 and 7, column (9)). The
dummy itself is not significant.
           We also consider variables measuring the openness of the economy (exports and
imports as percentages of GDP). If “all good things go together”, the prevalence of child
labor might simply reflect openness of the economies, while, at the same time, more open
countries might also be those with more developed financial markets. Moreover, recent
microeconomic evidence from Vietnam suggests that “greater market integration appears
to be associated with less child labor” (Edmonds and Pavcnik (2001)). Interestingly,
import and export shares are not significant. The credit variable remains significant in
both sets of estimates.



12
     Convention concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment no.138, 1973, ILO, Geneva.
13
     Outliers are identified by Hadi’s (1992) methodology.


                                                  16
        Finally, the degree of income inequality (as measured by the Gini coefficient)
could be an important source of spurious correlation in the regression (for example, the
correlation table highlights that the Gini coefficient displays a significant unconditional
correlation with both child labor and credit). Accounting for inequality does not appear to
affect estimate and significance of the coefficient on credit.
        Overall, we find that the credit variable is robust to the inclusion of a wide range
of controls. Although the magnitude and the significance of the OLS coefficient are
sensitive to some of the controls (in particular Sub-Saharan Africa dummy, fertility, and
the ratification dummy), estimates from the Tobit specifications are uniformly stable.


4.2 Selection on Unobservables


        In this section we examine the sensitivity of our estimates to the possibility of
selection on unobservables. Because of the panel-data structure of the dataset, we can
control for selection on unobservables by including fixed (random) effects in our linear
regression (Tobit) model. The fixed effect allows us to control for time-invariant
selection effects. We, of course, remain exposed to time-varying omitted variables. Table
8 presents the results.
        In column (1) we see that using a fixed-effects model the estimated coefficient of
credit in fact changes sign; it is positive and statistically significant. This qualifies our
result that increased availability of credit causes a reduction in the prevalence of child
labor. In Tables 3 and 7 we noted that the Tobit is less sensitive to changes in
specification, because the mass point at zero child labor anchors the estimates. In Table 8,
the same holds true. Considering a random-effects Tobit model, the effect is negative for
the entire sample period, though smaller in magnitude and not statistically significant.
        As in Table 4, it is instructive to consider the estimated effect of credit for the
subsamples of poor and rich countries, splitting the sample at mean GDP per capita. The
poorer countries are in general of greater policy interest, since they have both less
developed financial markets and greater child labor. In Table 8 we see that allowing for
fixed (random) effects the estimated effect is negative and significant for the sub-sample
of poor countries for the OLS (Tobit) specification, though the magnitude is smaller. The



                                             17
effect is positive for richer countries in the OLS specification, and negative and
insignificant for the Tobit specification.
       Thus, though our result is not robust for richer countries, for poorer countries,
which is the group of greater policy interest for child labor issues, the result is robust to
the inclusion of country-specific effects.


4.3 Sensitivity to Functional Form Assumptions: Nonparametric Estimates


       In this section we consider the implications of relaxing the functional form
assumptions that are implicit in our regression models. Though we considered higher-
order terms of some variables, such as log real GDP per capita, in general one must be
cautious about functional form issues, especially when, as in our case, estimates are
extrapolated across a highly heterogeneous group of countries. Propensity score
estimation (Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983); see also Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd
(1997,1998), Dehejia and Wahba (1999, 2002), and Lechner (2002)) offers a
nonparametric means to address this concern. Propensity score estimation assumes that
there is a discrete (initially binary) treatment, and that selection is based on observable
variables. We first estimate the probability of assignment to a “treated” country (i.e., a
country with well-developed financial markets) conditional on the observables. Then the
Propensity Score Theorem establishes that, within groups that are homogeneous on the
propensity score, the entire distribution of covariates is balanced across the treated and
untreated groups. In particular, we use kernel propensity score matching (Heckman,
Ichimura, and Todd (1997,1998)), in which each treated country is matched to the
untreated countries according to propensity score distance, weighted using a Gaussian
kernel. The results are presented in Table 9.
       In the first column, we use our base specification from Table 3 but exclude initial
child labor. In the second column we control for initial child labor (in 1950). In the third
column we control for lagged child labor. The estimator in the third column is most
comparable to fixed effects, more particularly to a first-differences estimator. However,
rather than first differencing, by controlling for lagged child labor we consider “quasi-
differences”. The estimated effect on child labor is negative and statistically significant in



                                                18
all three columns. The fact that the quasi-differenced propensity score estimate in column
(3) is negative is noteworthy because of its affinity with the fixed effects estimator − by
(quasi-) differencing it allows for unobservables, but it also controls for observables
flexibly via the propensity score. This suggests that our result is robust to both selection
on observables and unobservables, when we control for the observables sufficiently
flexibly.
        The order of magnitude of the estimate is similar to the estimates in Table 3. In
Table 3, the estimated OLS coefficient is –0.033. If we think of moving from low credit
to high credit as moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of access to credit, then this
corresponds to an effect of -0.01 on child labor. In Table 9 the estimates for the binary
treatment range from –0.0093 to –0.013.
        A limitation of the results in Table 9 is that they assume a binary treatment,
whereas access to credit is a continuous variable. The propensity score methodology can
be extended to discrete, multi-valued treatments (see Imbens (2000) and Lechner (2001)).
In Table 10 we apply propensity score matching to a multi-valued treatment, with
treatment 1 to treatment 4 corresponding to the quartiles of the access to credit variable.
The notion of being “treated” is now more nuanced. For example, if a country is initially
under treatment 2, greater access to credit corresponds to being exposed to treatments 3
or 4 or a reduced access to credit corresponds to being exposed to treatment 1. Thus in
Table 10, the columns correspond to the treatment to which countries are currently
exposed, and in the rows we consider the treatment levels to which they could –
counterfactually –be assigned.
        A priori we imagine that the treatment effects below the diagonal should be
negative, since these correspond to moving from a lower- to a higher-credit country.
Likewise, above the diagonal, treatment effects should be positive. Inspecting Table 10,
we note that this pattern holds: all of the below-diagonal estimates are negative, and all of
the above-diagonal estimates are positive. In general the above-diagonal estimates are not
precisely estimated; none of the estimates is statistically significant. Among the below-
diagonal terms the largest magnitudes and most significant effects are in row 4. Moving
up to the highest level of access to credit has a negative and significant impact on child




                                             19
labor. Likewise moving from the second to the third level of access to credit also has a
negative and significant impact.
       Thus propensity score matching methods confirm the robustness of our result.
Even when we allow for a flexible functional form, the effect of credit on child labor is
negative and significant. Overall, our robustness checks confirm that this effect is not an
artifact of selection on observables, selection on unobservables, nor naïve functional form
assumptions.


5. Conclusion


In this paper we have investigated the relationship between child labor and access to
credit across countries. The theoretical literature has highlighted the importance of this
relationship, suggesting that, in presence of credit constraints, (inefficient) child labor
might arise whenever parents are prevented from trading off resources intertemporally.
Our empirical results confirm the existence of a significant association between child
labor and the share of private credit issued by banks to GDP, which we interpret as a
proxy of access to credit. This relationship appears to be particularly large in the sample
of poor countries, which have both less developed financial markets and greater child
labor and, as such, are of greater policy interest. We also provide evidence that strong
financial markets dampen the impact of income variability on child labor, which would
otherwise be sizeable.
       As with most work on cross-country data, caution must be used in interpreting the
estimated coefficients causally. There are many potential sources of spurious correlation
and selection. We subjected our result to a wide array of robustness checks, including
adding a range of controls (linear and squared income, share of rural population,
continent dummies, fertility, primary and secondary school enrollment, import and
exports shares, and ratification of the 1973 ILO convention on child labor), considering
fixed effects, and allowing for a nonparametric choice of functional form. The
relationship remains strong under all of these alternatives.
       These results are important for two reasons. First, they confirm the empirical
relevance of a recent strand of the theoretical literature on child labor. Second, these



                                             20
results open an important policy window on alleviating the problem of child labor.
Increasing household access to credit can be an effective tool in reducing the extent of
child labor, and has distinct advantages over other remedies. Compared to legal
restrictions and direct bans, it can decrease child labor without lowering household
welfare, and it is arguably simpler and can have a more immediate impact than general
economic development.




                                          21
REFERENCES


Ashagrie, Kebebew (1993). “Statistics on Child Labor,” Bulletin of Labor Statistics, No.
3. Geneva: International Labor Organization.


Baland, Jean-Marie, and James Robinson (2000). “Is Child Labor Inefficient,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108, 663-679.


Basu, Kaushik (1999). “Child Labor: Cause, Consequence, and Cure with Remarks on
International Labor Standards,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1083-1119.


Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine (1999). “A New Database on
Financial Development and Structure,” World Bank Policy Research Paper No. 2146.


Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Vojislav Maksimov (2002). “Financing
Patterns around the World; the Role of Institutions,” mimeo., The World Bank.


Becker, Gary (1964). Human Capital, New York: Columbia University Press.


--- (1974). “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 82, 1063-93.


--- and Kevin Murphy (1988). “The Family and the State,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 31, 1-18.


Bhagwati, Jagdish (1995). “Trade Liberalization and ‘Fair Trade’ Demands: Addressing
the Environment and Labor Standards Issues,” World Economy, 18, 745-759.


Bourguignon, Francois, and Pierre-Andre Chiappori (1994). “The Collective Approach to
Household Behavior,” in The Measurement of Household Welfare, Richard Blundell, Ian
Preston, and Ian Walker, eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                           22
Brown, Drusilla, Alan Deardorff, and Robert Stern (2001). “Child Labor: Theory,
Evidence, and Policy,” School of Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 474, University of
Michigan.


Canagarajah, Roy and Harold Coulombe (1997). “Child Labor and Schooling in Ghana,”
Human Development Technical Report (Africa Region), The World Bank, Washington.


Central Intelligence Unit. The World Factbook 1995-96. Washington: Brassey’s.


Collingsworth, Terry, William Goold, and Pharis Harvey (1994). “Time for a New
Global Deal,” Foreign Affairs, 73, 8-13.


Dehejia, Rajeev, and Sadek Wahba (1999). “Causal Effects in Non-Experimental Studies:
Re-Evaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 94, 1053-1062.


------ and ------ (2002). “Propensity Score Matching Methods for Non-Experimental
Causal Studies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 151-161.


Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire (1996). “A New Dataset Measuring Income Inequality,”
World Bank Economic Review, 10, 565-91.


Edmonds, Eric and Nina Pavcnik (2001). “Does Globalization Increase Child Labor?
Evidence from Vietnam,” mimeo., Darmouth College.


Flug, Karnit, Antonio Spilimbergo and Eric Wachtenheim (1999). “Investment in
Education: Do Economic Volatility and Credit Constraints Matter?” Journal of
Development Economics, 55, no. 2.


Galasso, Emanuela (1999). “Intra-Household Allocation and Child Labor in Indonesia,”
mimeo., Boston College.



                                           23
Grootaert, Christian, and Ravi Kanbur (1995). “Child Labor: An Economic Perspective,”
International Labor Review, 134, 187-203.


Grootaert, Christian, and Harry Patrinos (1999). The Policy Analysis of Child Labor: A
Comparative Study, New York: St. Martin’s Press.


Gupta, Manash (1998). “Wage Determination of a Child Worker: A Theoretical
Analysis,” forthcoming Review of Development Economics.


Hadi, Ali (1992). “Identifying Multiple Outliers in Multivariate Data,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B, 54, 761-771.


Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra Todd, “Matching as an Econometric
Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme,” Review of
Economic Studies, 64, 605-654.

---------, ---------, and ---------, “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation Estimator,”
Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261-294.


ILO (1996). Economically Active Population: Estimates and Projections, 1950-2010.
Geneva.


Imbens, Guido (2000). “The Role of the Propensity Score in Estimating Dose-Response
Functions,” Biometrika, 87, 706-710.


Jacoby, Hanan (1994). “Borrowing Constraints and Progress Through School: Evidence
from Peru,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 76, 151-160.


------, and Emmanuel Skoufias (1997). “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital in a
Developing Country,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 311-335.



                                            24
King, Robert, and Ross Levine (1993). “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
Right,” American Economics Review, 108, 717-737.


Krueger, Alan (1996). “Observations on International Labor Standards and Trade,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 5632.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
(1998). “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
15, 222-279.


Lechner, Michael (2001). “Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects of Multiple
Treatments under the Conditional Independence Assumption,” in: Lechner, M., Pfeiffer,
F.     (eds.),   Econometric   Evaluation   of    Labour   Market   Policies,   Heidelberg:
Physica/Springer, pp. 43-58.


------ (2002). “Some practical issues in the evaluation of heterogeneous labour market
programmes by matching methods,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A,
165, pp. 59-82.


Moehling, Carolyn (1995). “The Intra-household Allocation of Resources and the
Participation of Children in Household Decision-Making: Evidence from Early Twentieth
Century America,” mimeo., Northwestern University.


Parsons, Donald, and Claudia Goldin (1989). “Parental Altruism and Self-Interest: Child
Labor Among Late Nineteenth-Century American Families,” Economic Inquiry, 24, 637-
659.


Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (1998). “Financial Dependence and Growth,”
American Economic Review, 88, 559-586.




                                             25
Ranjan, Priya (1991). “An Economic Analysis of Child Labor,” Economics Letters, 64,
99-105.


--------, ------ (2001). “Credit Constraints and the Phenomenon of Child Labor,” Journal
of Development Economics, vol.64.


Ravallion, Martin, and Quentin Wodon (1999). “Does Child Labor Displace Schooling?
Evidence on Behavioral Responses to an Enrollment Subsidy,” World Bank Working
Paper No. 2116.


Rosati, Furio Camillo and Zafiris Tzannatos (2000). “Child Labor in Vietnam,” mimeo.,
The World Bank.


Rosenbaum, P., and D. Rubin, “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70, 41-55.


Sianesi,   Barbara.   (2001).    “Propensity    Score      Matching,”   available   from
http://ideas.uqam.ca/ideas/data/Papers/bocusug0112.html.


Srinivasan, T.N. (1996). “International Trade and Labor Standards from an Economic
Perspective,” in Challenges to the New World Trade Organization, Pitou van Dijck and
Gerrit Faber, eds. The Hague: Kluwer.


Summers, Robert and Heston, Alan. (1991). “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An
Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, 327-368.


The World Bank (2001). World Development Indicators, Washington DC.




                                           26
APPENDIX: Data Description and Sources



CHILDLABOR              Share of the active population between age 10 and 14 over
                        total population between 10 and 14. Active population
                        includes people who, during the reference period,
                        performed “some work” for wage or salary, in cash or in
                        kind. The notion of “some work” is interpreted as work for
                        at least 1 hour during the reference period. Source: ILO.

CREDIT                  Private credit by deposit money banks to GDP. Source:
                        Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1999).

Ln(GDPPC)               Natural logarithm of real GDP per capita in constant
                        dollars, chain Index, expressed in international prices, base
                        1985. Source: Summers-Heston, years 1960-1990.

RURAL                   Rural population, as % of total population. Source: World
                        Development Indicators, World Bank.

SDGROW5                 Standard deviation of per capita GDP growth over the
                        previous 5 years.

SCH_PRIF                Gross primary female school enrollment (%). Gross
                        enrollment ratio is the ratio of total enrollment, regardless
                        of age, to the population of the age group that officially
                        corresponds to the level of education shown. Source: World
                        Development Indicators, World Bank.

SCH_SECF                Gross secondary female school enrollment (%). Gross
                        enrollment ratio is the ratio of total enrollment, regardless
                        of age, to the population of the age group that officially
                        corresponds to the level of education shown. Source: World
                        Development Indicators, World Bank.

FERT                    Fertility rate, total births per woman. Total fertility rate
                        represents the number of children that would be born to a
                        woman if she were to live to the end of her childbearing
                        years and bear children in accordance with prevailing age-
                        specific fertility rates. Source: World Development
                        Indicators, World Bank.

EXP                     Share of exports on GDP. Source: World Development
                        Indicators, World Bank.




                                     27
IMP            Share of imports on GDP. Source: World Development
               Indicators, World Bank.

RATIFY         Dummy variable taking value of 1 if a country has ratified
               the ILO’s Minimum Age convention (Convention no.138,
               ILO, Geneva, 1973).

LEGAL ORIGIN   Origin of a country’s legal system. These dummies classify
               the legal origin of the Company Law or of Commercial
               Code of each country. The identified origins are five: (1)
               English Common Law; (2) French Commercial Code; (3)
               German Commercial Code; (4) Scandinavian Commercial
               Code; (5) Socialist/Communist laws. Source: La Porta et al.
               (1998), extended from “Foreign Laws: Current Sources of
               Basic Legislation in Jurisdictions of the World” and CIA
               World Factbook.


GINI           Ten-year average of the Gini coefficient over the period
               (e.g. 1960 is the average of 1951-1960; 1970 is the average
               of 1961-1970, etc.). Source: Deininger and Squire (1996).




                            28
                                     Figure 1: Child Labor and Access to Credit

                          NPL
                 .631
                           BTN
                                 MLIBFA
                             NPL
                             BTN
                              MLI

                           BDIBFA
                              BDI
                                BDI
                                NERBDI
                               ETH NPL NER
                          UGA
                         HTI ETH      SEN
                                    NER
                          UGA NER KENGMB   NPL
                                            KEN
                                            GMB
                        RWA   ETH       KEN                  SEN
                           RWA
                          HTIRWAETHMDG      KEN
   Child labor




                           SOM   GMB
                                TCDSLB     MDG
                           GNB  MWI
                            TCD MDG   CMR
                          SOM
                           ZAR MDG   ZWE
                             MWI       GAB GNQTGO  SEN
child




                              BGD
                               SDN
                                SDN          CIVCMR
                               CAF
                          ZAR SDN     MOZSLB
                                  HTI       BGD
                           MMR
                             SDN
                           CAF   ZWE
                                 DOM
                                LBR    SEN
                         ZARNGA        THA    TGO
                         SDN IND
                         BOL
                        ZAR
                        LAO      NGA  GAB
                                        TGO
                                           ZWEBGD
                          AFG
                            MMRLSO HTI COG                   CIV
                               NGA
                               BEN
                               PAK
                               LAO   PNG
                                    COG           CMR
                          MMR   COG
                                  MAR
                                  BWA COG
                              NGA
                              DOM
                               CMR   LBR
                                   IND
                                    HTI  EGYPAK THA MRT
                           KHM
                            MMR
                              GTM GTM  DOM
                             HNDLSO EGY PAKMRT
                                      GAB LSO
                            SLEMAR
                            BOL   PHLMARCIV IND         NAM CIVPRT
                                                      PNG
                               BWA
                              SLE    ECU    IRNPAK                         THA
                               IRQ
                                 BRA
                               PRY
                              IDN  DOM
                                  BOLGTM
                                      HND                      NIC
                              GAB GTM  EGYBRA
                                         PHL  SLV
                                             SLV
                                             PAK
                           SLEZMBPRY
                                   BWA
                                 COL    BOL SWZ SLV
                                           SLV IND
                         GHA
                         NIC IRQ
                             ZMB
                               GHA
                                SYR GTM
                                   TUR
                                   ECUDOM          BRA                                           THA
                          SLE      GRC  SWZ CRI SLV                                            CHN
                            GHA   PRY
                                   COL HND     INDPHL           BOL
                            SYR
                            GHAIDN
                             LBY              EGYIRNNIC
                                            SWZ                              PRT
                           MEX COLTUR              EGY IDN                                 CHN
                             MEX
                             MYS        CRI
                                        PHL
                                        VEN                  CYP IDN
                              SYRPRY
                                 PANECU
                                    MEX   GRCHND
                                               CRI
                              LKAFJIMEXARG URY
                                          HND
                                        MYS
                                       ARG PRY PAN     PHL
                                                       MYS
                                                        ESP DZA                         PRT
                              URY
                                ECUPERCRI
                                    ARG  COLIRN MEX    AUT
                                 SYR
                                  LKA
                                PER
                                       VEN
                                      CRI  MUS
                                             ECU
                                           FJI
                                            MUS   MAR CYPDNKPAN ESP
                             SAU
                            PER GUY       IRN
                                         ARG
                                           FRA
                                         LKA      GRC
                                                VEN URY
                                                     MUS
                                                       IRL    PAN
                                                               JOR    CYP        MYSITA
                          PER                      URY        SGP
                                                             DZA AUT                 PANMYS
                               BEL
                              CHL
                               TTO  GUY
                                   PER
                                     ISR LKA
                                          NLD  LKA    BLZ
                                                    IRLFRA DEU
                                                          BLZ    MUSZAF JPN
                                                                   PRT
                            DZA   GUY
                                  MNG
                              VEN SUR
                                      VENCAN
                                           AUS
                                         TTO
                                       JAM
                                        BEL
                                              URY
                                              CAN
                                               AUS
                                             MLT  ISR  NLD
                                                      ISL
                                                      IRL
                                                        FIN  USA
                                                             ZAF
                                                            SWE MLTISL
                                                                BRB
                                                               DNK    LUXUSA
                                                                         ITAPRT
                                                                           LUX  SGP JPN
                                                                               JOR
                                                                               DEU
                                                                                JOR
                        HRV
                         UKR
                         POL
                           MDA
                            ARMRUS
                             BLR  POL
                                 BGR
                                 KAZNZL
                                  NZL
                                   LVA
                                    EST
                                    LBNGBR
                                      LTU  TTO
                                         JAM
                                           JAM
                                          GBR
                                          SAU
                                        GRC
                                        NZL
                                         GRC
                                           LUXJAM
                                             HUN
                                            GUY SVK
                                              SVN
                                               ISL SUR
                                                   CHL
                                                 JAM
                                                 SAUIRL
                                                  BEL
                                                 GBR
                                                 LUXTTO
                                                  TTO
                                                  AUS
                                                  BRB
                                                    NOR
                                                    BHS  KOR
                                                         NOR
                                                        NOR
                                                       BRB
                                                     BHR
                                                     DNK
                                                       FJI
                                                       IRLSWE
                                                        BHS
                                                        BHR
                                                         BELFIN
                                                          BRB
                                                           DNK
                                                           BHRSWE
                                                            SWE
                                                             FJISUR
                                                              CAN
                                                              CHLHUN
                                                                 ANT
                                                               ISL
                                                                 FINITA
                                                                  ISL
                                                                  CHL
                                                                   KOR
                                                                    CAN
                                                                    ISR ITA
                                                                      DNK
                                                                       ZAF
                                                                       TUN
                                                                        ISR
                                                                        TUN
                                                                        KOR
                                                                          NOR
                                                                          BHS
                                                                           NZL
                                                                           CZE
                                                                           SWE
                                                                            MLT
                                                                            CYP
                                                                             CAN  FIN
                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                NOR
                                                                                USA
                                                                                ZAF
                                                                                 AUS
                                                                                  ISR
                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                    ESP
                                                                                     LUX
                                                                                      USA
                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                      FRAMLT
                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                         DEU
                                                                                          SGPJPN
                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                              FINDEU
                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                              SGPAUTNLD
                                                                                                   FRA
                                                                                                    AUT CHE
                                                                                                      DEUCHE GBR
                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                               JPN   HKG    CHECHE
                   0
                       .00029                                                                                              1.6715
                                                                                  credit




                                                                           29
     percent of active population in the age range
                                       10-14
                  ea
                      st


                             0
                          0.05
                           0.1
                          0.15
                           0.2
                          0.25
                           0.3
                          0.35
                           0.4
                          0.45




        su               /c
            b-              nt
               sa              le
      m            h a             ur
       id              ra
          -e              n
             as              af
                t,              ric
                   no               a
        la              rth
           tin               af
               am               ric
                    er              a
                        .&
                             ca
                                 rib
                                     .




30
                     so
                         ut
           ea               h
               st              as
                  as               ia
                      ia
                         &p
                             ac
                                 ifi
                                    c

                oe
                     cd
                                                     Figure 2: Child labor across regions of the world




                              1990
                              1960
                              1950-95
       Figure 3: Child labor and access to credit over time


 0.4
0.35                                                 0.34
                                           0.32
 0.3
                               0.27
0.25
                     0.22                                   avg child labor
 0.2       0.2
           0.19
                     0.17                                   avg credit
0.15                           0.14
                                           0.12      0.11
 0.1
0.05
  0
       1960       1970      1980      1990        1995




                                      31
                             Table 1: Data Description
Variable           Observations Mean       Std. Dev.      Min.     Max.

Child labor            860        0.15        0.17         0        0.79

Credit                 482        0.28        0.25       0.00029    1.67

Standard               631        0.04        0.04       0.00059    0.79
deviation of
income growth

log real GDP           705        7.76        1.06        5.41     10.58
per capita

Percent rural          857       54.58        24.94        0        98.2
population

Share of exports       630        32.6        24.38       1.19     215.38
of GDP

Share of imports       634       37.27        24.74        1.9     223.65
of GDP

Primary female         654       81.19        32.84        0.6     170.9
school
enrolment

Secondary              639       43.57        35.5         0       151.3
female school
enrolment

Gini coefficient       302       39.22        10.11       19.5     62.87




                                         32
                                             Table 2: Correlations Among the Variables
Variable                       CHILD LABOR CREDIT SDGROW5 LRGDPPC RURAL          EXP     IMP SCH_PRIF SCH_PRIF        GINI FERTILITY

Child labor                        1

Credit                            -0.46     1

Standard deviation of income
growth                            0.16     -0.27      1

log real GDP per capita           -0.81    0.62     -0.23      1

Percent rural population          0.75     -0.45     0.13     -0.82      1

Export share of GDP               -0.24    0.14      0.16     0.18     -0.27      1

Import share of GDP               -0.13    0.07      0.14     0.03     -0.11     0.9       1

Primary female school
enrolment                         -0.49    0.23      0.06     0.48     -0.34     0.15    0.08       1

Secondary female school
enrolment                         -0.78    0.57     -0.22     0.84     -0.71     0.13    0.01      0.48       1

Gini coefficient                  0.31     -0.33     0.31     -0.38     0.26     0.04    0.11      0.11      -0.46      1

Fertility                         0.81    -0.5396   0.1952   -0.8433   0.6710   -0.1746 -0.0299   -0.5618   -0.8370   0.4523   1.0000




                                                                33
                 Table 3: Base Specification (dependent variable: child labor)
                                   OLS                                               TOBIT
Variables            Basic         with          without               Basic           with          without
                                 CREDIT          outliers                            CREDIT          outliers
                       (1)          (2)            (3)                   (4)            (5)            (6)
Credit                            -0.033          -0.04                                -0.08          -0.08
                                  (-1.99)        (-2.48)                              (-2.95)        (-2.98)

Year trend           -0.002        -0.002         -0.002               -0.003          -0.003         -0.003
                    (-11.91)      (-10.51)       (-10.84)             (-14.35)        (-12.17)       (-12.27)

log real GDP          -0.32         -0.40          -0.44                -0.17          -0.20           -0.24
per capita           (-7.63)       (-7.00)        (-8.44)              (-4.03)        (-3.38)         (-4.11)

log real GDP          0.02          0.02           0.03                0.008            0.01           0.01
per capita2          (7.30)        (6.82)         (8.18)               (3.13)          (2.81)         (3.47)

Percent rural       0.00022       0.00036        0.00032             0.0000642        0.00033        0.00031
population           (1.24)        (1.68)         (1.48)               (0.29)          (1.25)         (1.19)

Child labor in         0.69         0.63           0.62                 0.76            0.69            0.68
1950                 (23.27)      (14.99)        (14.98)               (27.10)        (18.29)         (18.06)

Constant               5.73         5.44           5.63                 6.84            6.30            6.45
                     (13.46)      (12.86)        (13.68)               (14.39)        (12.66)         (13.04)
N                      703           474           469                  703             474            469
R2                   0.9276        0.9164         0.9191                 .               .              .

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity and clustering within
countries. Marginal coefficients are reported for Tobit estimates.




                                                      34
            Table 4: Splitting by Income Levels (dependent variable: child labor)
                                              OLS                                  TOBIT
              Variables               Low             High                 Low             High
                                    income          income               income          income
                                       (2)             (3)                  (5)             (6)
              Credit                 -0.14           -0.024               -0.13           -0.035
                                    (-2.63)         (-2.22)              (-2.41)         (-2.64)

              Year trend            -0.002          -0.001               -0.002          -0.0015
                                    (-7.00)         (-5.57)              (-7.36)          (-7.18)

              log real GDP          -0.069           -0.56                -0.08             0.06
              per capita            (-0.35)          (-3.6)              (-0.43)           (0.34)

              log real GDP          0.0023           0.03                 0.003          -0.0047
              per capita2           (0.16)          (3.58)                (0.25)          (0.44)

              Percent rural         0.0008          0.00006               0.003            0.0001
              population            (1.59)           (0.36)               (1.73)           (0.78)

              Child labor in          0.74           0.45                 0.74             0.33
              1950                   (14.8)         (5.76)               (14.76)           (7.9)

              Constant               4.43            5.31                 4.72              4.78
                                     (4.8)          (5.25)                (5.1)            (2.82)

              N                       209            265                   209              265
              R2                    0.8813           0.69                   .                .


Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity and clustering within
countries. Marginal coefficients are reported for Tobit estimates. The sample is split at the mean level of log-
income (7.75)




                                                        35
         Table 5: The Effect of Income Variability (dependent variable: child labor)
                                     OLS                                            TOBIT
                                      low           high                              low            high
                                    CREDIT         CREDIT                           CREDIT          CREDIT
                         (1)           (2)           (3)                 (4)           (5)            (6)
Credit                  -0.03                                           -0.08
                       (-1.82)                                         (-3.00)

Standard                0.19           0.21          0.07               0.20           0.18            0.07
deviation of           (2.63)         (2.83)        (0.61)             (2.68)         (2.40)          (1.00)
income growth
Year trend             -0.002         -0.002        -0.001            -0.0026         -0.002          -0.001
                       (-9.83)       (-10.68)       (-3.93)           (-11.56)        (-1.42)         (-5.36)

log real GDP            -0.40          -0.27         -0.70              -0.20          -0.20           -0.21
per capita             (-7.13)        (-4.52)       (-4.79)            (-3.34)        (-3.18)         (-2.57)

log real GDP            0.02           0.02          0.04               0.01           0.01            0.01
per capita2            (6.98)         (4.27)        (4.76)             (2.78)         (2.77)          (2.32)

Percent rural          0.0004        0.00058       0.00033            0.00031        0.00043         0.00029
population             (1.73)         (2.01)        (1.38)             (1.21)         (1.44)          (1.57)

Child labor in           0.64          0.72          0.29              0.69             0.75           0.20
1950                   (14.40)       (20.57)        (3.59)            (17.86)         (20.90)         (5.14)

Constant                 5.44          5.36          5.62              6.07             5.72           7.17
                       (12.47)       (11.91)        (5.14)            (12.04)         (12.20)         (4.98)
N                        457           301           156                457            301             156
R2                     0.9182         0.9270        0.9304               .              .               .

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity and clustering within
countries. Marginal coefficients are reported for Tobit estimates.




                                                      36
                 Table 6: Robustness Checks (OLS, dependent variable: child labor)
                      (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)          (8)        (9)
Credit             -0.024    -0.029       -0.027       -0.020     -0.035      -0.031      -0.033     -0.032       -0.02
                  (-1.51)    (-1.83)      (-1.76)      (-1.43)    (-1.64)     (-1.82)     (-1.90)    (-1.92)     (-1.35)
Year trend         -0.002    -0.002       -0.001       -0.001     -0.002      -0.002      -0.002     -0.001      -0.002
                 (-10.51)    (-7.88)      (-4.75)      (-5.90)    (-7.75)    (-10.47)    (-10.49)    (-5.56)     (-7.77)
log real GDP        -0.38      -0.40        -0.48        -0.38      -0.40       -0.41      -0.41       -0.52      -0.42
per capita
                  (-6.05)    (-6.80)      (-8.33)      (-7.23)    (-6.75)     (-6.64)     (-6.73)    (-7.35)     (-6.09)
log real GDP         0.02       0.02         0.03         0.02       0.02        0.02      0.02         0.03      0.025
per capita2
                   (5.98)     (6.56)       (8.13)       (7.09)     (6.48)      (6.48)     (6.58)      (7.23)     (5.88)
Percent rural    0.00036    0.00037      0.00033      0.00032    0.00042     0.00037     0.00037    0.00028      0.0004
population
                   (1.64)     (1.75)       (1.56)       (1.55)    (1.71)      (1.69)      (1.68)     (0.98)      (1.46)
Child labor in       0.62       0.60         0.57         0.59       0.64        0.63      0.63         0.50       0.58
1950
                  (13.23)   (12.60)      (11.18)      (13.37)    (13.67)     (14.95)     (14.95)      (8.76)     (13.2)
East Asia and       0.003
Pacific
                   (0.32)
Eastern and          0.02
Central
                   (1.24)
Europe
Latin America      0.02
and Caribbean
                  (1.65)
Mid-East and      0.001
North Africa
                  (0.08)
South Asia         0.02
                  (0.94)
Sub-Saharan        0.04
Africa
                  (2.39)
Primary                     -0.00034
female school
                             (-1.63)
Secondary                                -0.00053
female school
                                          (-3.04)
Fertility                                               0.01
                                                       (3.40)
Legal origin                                                        Yes
dummies
Export share                                                                 0.00758
of GDP
                                                                              (0.77)
Import share                                                                              0.011
of GDP
                                                                                          (1.16)
Gini                                                                                                0.00051
coefficient
                                                                                                     (1.15)
Ratified ILO                                                                                                     -0.0067
Convention
                                                                                                                 (-0.865)
Constant           5.77      5.07          4.56        4.39         5.39        5.66       5.70       4.71         6.53
                 (12.28)    (9.71)        (7.97)      (8.25)      (10.19)     (12.48)    (12.54)     (9.77)       (9.62)
N                  474       414           408         472          471         451        455         243         338
R2               0.9217     0.9221        0.9249      0.9205      0.9177      0.9142     0.9149      0.8970        0.90

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity and clustering within
countries.




                                                           37
                Table 7: Robustness Checks (Tobit, dependent variable: child labor)
                     (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)
Credit             -0.07     -0.08      -0.06       -0.05       -0.09       -0.08      -0.08      -0.07   -0.09
                 (-2.77)    (-2.82)    (-2.51)     (-2.37)    (-3.17)     (-2.77)    (-2.91)    (-2.47)   (-2.76)
Year trend        -0.003    -0.002     -0.002      -0.002      -0.002      -0.003    -0.003     -0.002     -0.003
                (-12.38)    (-9.58)    (-6.21)     (-8.79)   (-10.23)    (-11.98)   (-12.14)    (-6.15)    (-8.07)
log real GDP       -0.16     -0.22      -0.28       -0.21       -0.21       -0.21      -0.21      -0.27     -0.11
per capita
                 (-2.54)    (-3.52)    (-4.80)     (-3.67)    (-3.25)     (-3.11)    (-3.23)    (-3.54)    (-1.49)
log real GDP       0.008     0.01       0.02        0.01         0.01        0.01       0.01       0.01     0.004
per capita2
                  (2.15)    (2.94)     (4.24)      (3.18)      (2.72)      (2.58)     (2.71)     (3.06)    (0.88)
Percent rural   0.00034    0.00034    0.00029     0.00028    0.00053     0.00032    0.00030    0.00031     0.0004
population
                  (1.38)    (1.30)     (1.23)      (1.11)      (1.79)      (1.24)    (1.19)     (0.90)      (1.1)
Child labor         0.67     0.66       0.61        0.66         0.68        0.69       0.70       0.56      0.65
in 1950
                 (16.66)   (15.94)    (14.71)     (17.39)     (16.95)     (18.23)   (18.33)    (12.50)    (15.77)
East Asia         -0.002
and Pacific
                 (-0.12)
Eastern and        -0.04
Central
                 (-1.16)
Europe
Latin            0.007
America and
                 (0.61)
Caribbean
Mid-East        -0.009
and North
                (-0.75)
Africa
South Asia       0.004
                 (0.18)
Sub-Saharan       0.03
Africa
                 (1.88)
Primary                    -0.00019
female
                            (-1.00)
school
Secondary                             -0.00090
female
                                       (-4.75)
school
Fertility                                          0.009
                                                   (3.42)
Legal origin                                                    Yes
dummies
Export share                                                             0.00011
of GDP
                                                                          (0.71)
Import share                                                                        0.00016
of GDP
                                                                                     (1.27)
Gini                                                                                           0.00069
coefficient
                                                                                                (1.34)
Ratified ILO                                                                                               -0.004
Convention
                                                                                                           (0.44)
Constant          6.13       5.99       4.86        5.41        5.89       6.50       6.61       5.25       7.43
                (12.38)     (9.94)     (7.92)      (9.70)     (10.72)    (12.32)    (12.43)     (7.59)      (8.3)
N                 474        414        408         472         471        451        455        243        338

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity and clustering within
countries. Marginal coefficients are reported.




                                                       38
                           Table 8: Fixed-Effects OLS and Random-Effects Tobit Models
Variable                        Fixed-Effects         Fixed-     Fixed-Effects     Random-        Random -        Random -
                                    OLS            Effects OLS    OLS High-      Effects Tobit   Effects Tobit   Effects Tobit
                                                   Low-Income       Income                       Low-Income      High-Income
                                                    Countries      Countries                      Countries       Countries

Credit                              0.0204           -0.062         0.015           -0.019          -0.077          -0.010
                                    (1.99)          (-1.980)       (1.780)          (-1.42)        (-2.910)        (-1.050)

Year trend                           -0.002          -0.003         -0.001         -0.0026          -0.001          -0.001
                                    (10.02)         (-7.790)       (-6.010)        (20.05)         (-3.520)       (-10.230)

log real GDP per capita              -0.21            0.086         -0.370          -0.083          0.207           -0.003
                                    (-6.02)          (0.690)       (-4.220)         (-3.28)        (1.560)         (-0.020)

log real GDP per capita2            0.013            -0.006         0.022           0.0045          -0.017          -0.001
                                    (6.18)          (-0.680)       (4.310)          (2.71)         (-1.770)        (-0.130)

Percent rural population            0.0014            0.001         0.001           0.0006          0.003            0.002
                                    (4.84)           (1.900)       (4.540)          (3.79)         (8.050)         (13.610)


             Notes: t-statistics in parentheses.




                                                                  39
      Table 9: Propensity Score Estimates of the Effect of Credit on Child Labor
           Estimated                Base Model             Controlling for     Controlling for
           Treatment Effect                              Initial Child Labor   Lagged Child
                                                                                   Labor

           1960–1995                   -0.0133               -0.01156             -0.00926
                                      (-2.0826)              (-2.1573)            (-1.9835)



Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. The treatment effects are estimated through kernel propensity score
matching, with standard errors estimated via a bootstrap using Sianesi (2001). The estimates in column (1)
control for log real GDP per capita, log real GDP per capita2, percent rural population, and age-dependency
ratio. In column (2) we also control for child labor in 1950. In column (3), we control for lagged child
labor.




                                                    40
             Table 10: Dose-Response Estimates of the Effect of Credit on Child Labor
                                                                       Current   Treatment
                                              1                    2                     3                     4

                    1                         x                 0.0072                0.0064                0.0056
                                                                (0.986)               (0.744)               (0.528)

                    2                      -0.0022                 x                  0.0020                0.0049
Counterfactual                             (-0.344)                                   (0.313)               (0.613)
Treatment
                    3                      -0.0078             -0.0144                   x                  0.0079
                                           (-1.345)            (-3.000)                                     (1.145)

                    4                      -0.0216             -0.0207                -0.0158                  x
                                           (-4.154)            (-4.814)               (-5.097)

      Notes: t-statistics in parentheses (computed via a bootstrap). Treatments 1 to 4 correspond to quartiles 1 to
      4 of credit. The cell corresponding to row i and column j corresponds to the estimated effect on child labor
      of moving from treatment i to treatment j. The propensity score controls for the variables in the basic
      specification, Table 3.




                                                          41
