NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION AND CHANGING PATTERNS IN THE INTERNATIONAL
TRANSMISSION OF SHOCKS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

Michael D. Bordo
Antu Panini Murshid

Working Paper 9019
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9019

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank/World Bank conference on “Asset Price Bubbles:
Implications for Monetary, Regulatory and International Policies,” Chicago, IL, April 22-24, 2002. The
authors are indebted to Marc Weidenmier for providing much of the data covering the pre-World War I era
and for comments on an earlier paper, on which this paper builds. The authors are also indebted to the
conference participants, and in particular, Ashoka Mody, for comments and suggestions. In addition, the
authors would like to thank Eugene White and Hugh Rockoff for comments on earlier related research. We
are grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the World Bank or
its member countries.

© 2002 by Michael D. Bordo and Antu Panini Murshid. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Globalization and Changing Patterns in the International Transmission
of Shocks in Financial Markets
Michael D. Bordo and Antu Panini Murshid
NBER Working Paper No. 9019
June 2002
JEL No. F20, F31, N20

ABSTRACT
In this paper we compare various characteristics of the cross-country transmission of shocks in
the financial markets of both advanced and emerging countries during two periods of globalization -- the
pre-World War I classical gold standard era, 1880-1914, and the post-Bretton Woods era, 1975-2000.
Based on principal components analysis on monthly spreads on long-term sovereign bond yields and on
an EMP measure of currency crises, an index of global stress, and impulse response functions from VARs
estimated using weekly data on short-term interest rates, we conclude that financial market shocks were
more globalized before 1914 compared to the present. We postulate that this difference in systemic
stability between the two eras of globalization reflects factors such as strong cross-country
interdependence fostered through links to gold, the growing financial maturity of advanced countries, and
the widening of the center to include a more diverse group of countries spanning several regions.

Michael D. Bordo
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
bordo@cac1.fas.rutgers.edu

Antu Panini Murshid
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Department of Economics
Bolton Hall 856
Milwaukee, WI 53211
amurshid@uwm.edu

1.

Introduction

This paper contrasts the pattern of transmission of shocks under the pre-World War I
classical gold standard, between 1880 and 1914, with that in the post-Bretton Woods era,
between 1975 and 2000.
The international transmission of financial distress and financial crises is not new
(Kindleberger 1978), but the propensity for shocks to be communicated across countries
and the manner in which they have been transmitted has changed. This may reflect
among other factors, differences in the exchange rate regime, the extent of financial
integration, and the development of financial institutions. Thus a contrast of the pattern
in the transmission of shocks then versus now helps us understand the consequences of
these changes in the international monetary system.1
We compare the recent period to the pre-1914 era because it was the previous era of
international financial globalization. The extent of international financial integration
before World War I according to several metrics was comparable to today (Bordo 2002,
Obstfeld and Taylor 2002). Moreover along with globalization, the incidence of financial
crises, especially currency crises involving emerging countries was comparable to today
(Bordo et al 2001).
Although there were similarities in the economic environments of the two eras of
globalization there were also several key differences which could explain the differences
in the patterns of transmission of shocks that we find in this study.
First, most countries in the pre-1914 era, adhered to the fixed exchange rates of the
classical gold standard. In the absence of gold flows, in today’s era of managed floating
and soft pegs, transmission would occur via other channels.
Second, prior to World War I, the commercial and financial centers of the world were
concentrated in a few countries in Western Europe, while the emergers consisted
primarily of countries of new settlement (the U.S., Canada, Australia and Argentina) and
1

Recently a number of studies have attempted to develop these contrasts. See for instance, Bordo et. al.
(2001), Mauro et. al. (2002), Murshid (2001), Neal and Weidenmier (2001) and Eichengreen (2001).

3

the European periphery. This implied that there were naturally strong ties between these
satellite countries and the center. Today a more diverse group of countries spanning
several regions constitute the advanced countries. Similarly diverse are the emerging
countries. Consequently today’s emerging counties are subject to varied influences, from
a more diverse set of advanced countries. The center-periphery relationships that existed
in the pre-1914 era, can be thought of in terms of a model of an atom; a single nucleus
with orbiting electrons. It is less clear that such an analogy could be extended to describe
the relationships between today’s advanced and emerging countries.
Finally, the pre-1914 advanced countries had not completely developed the tools to
provide financial stability, such as an effective lender of last resort, moreover adherence
to gold convertibility and the attendant imperative to protect gold reserves dominated all
other objectives (Eichengreen 1992); as a consequence, shocks in the past had harsher
repercussions (Bordo et. al. 2001). The severity of the downturns which accompanied the
negative shocks to financial markets, amplified their cross-border impact. Today better
policies and improved financial systems limit the severity of shocks and minimize their
international impact.
Our analysis is divided into three parts. First using principal components analysis, we
examine the international co-movement in monthly long-term government bond yield
spreads and exchange market pressure indices. Spreads can be viewed as evidence of
stress in financial markets, while exchange market pressure (EMP) indexes are often used
as a measure of currency crises (see for instance Eichengreen et. al. 1996, Kaminsky and
Reinhart 1999). Our narrow treatment of crises, which emphasizes currency crises as
opposed to banking crises, reflects the difficulties that are involved in constructing a
metric of banking crises similar to an exchange market pressure index.
Second, we develop a global crisis index as the common or shared component in
exchange market pressure across countries. Using simple frequencies and extreme value
methods, we are then able to estimate the likelihood of a global crisis during each era.

4

Finally we estimate a number of VARs using weekly data on short-term interest rates,
and use impulse response functions to identify the direction and impact of financial
shocks between individual countries.
Our principal findings are the following:
• There is strong evidence of international co-movement in spreads during both eras,
however in recent years this correspondence is concentrated more within groups,
separated into advanced and emerging categories.
• The international co-movement in EMP indices is weaker than the pattern found for
spreads. Across the two periods however, there is stronger global co-movement in the
pre-1914 era. In contrast today there is strong co-movement within the group of
advanced countries, and within the emerging countries there is strong intra-regional
co-movement.
• The likelihood of a global crisis was higher in the pre 1914 era, although the
probability of international crises within the advanced countries is about as high today
as it was in the past.
• Financial shocks before 1914 were largely transmitted in one direction—from the
advanced countries of Europe (especially the U.K.) to the emergers. Today while
shocks are transmitted internationally within advanced countries, evidence of
transmission from advanced to emerging countries is weaker than in the pre-1914 era.
A number of implications follow from our results.

First, during both eras, tight

integration fostered strong interdependence in financial variables between nations. Under
the classical gold standard, the degree of this dependence increased over time as countries
became more integrated and as global trends in price levels sparked a decline in spreads.
Moreover the pattern of co-movement observed suggests that shocks were often
communicated across regions and across the groups of advanced and emerging countries.
In contrast, in recent years, advanced- and emerging-country-spreads have reacted
differently to outbreaks of instability. Perhaps as a consequence of de-leveraging and

5

wake-up-call effects, crashes in asset prices in emerging markets have spilled over far
beyond their epicenters, affecting capital market access for emerging countries as a
group.

However, advanced countries have been largely insulated from these

disturbances. These results based on a sample containing both advanced and emerging
countries contrast somewhat with those found by Mauro et. al. (2002) in their analysis of
emerging market spreads in historical perspective, which suggests that financial stress
between emerging countries has increased today compared to the pre-1914 era.
Second, the world is generally a more stable place today; crises are less likely to have
global reach relative to the pre-1914 era. This is perhaps not a surprising finding. The
pre-1914 gold standard was characterized by a system of fixed exchange rates, a
concentration of financial and commercial power in a handful of European countries, and
relatively weak financial markets even in the advanced countries. Hence, countries were
neither insulated from shocks nor capable of accommodating these shocks.
Second, although today’s advanced countries have developed the tools to provide greater
financial stability, shocks have still been communicated through the fixed exchange rates
of the European Monetary System, and through other channels. Thus speculative attacks
on currencies have not been avoided, however we posit that today’s advanced countries
are better-able to accommodate these shocks, consequently the output-effect of these
crises have been smaller (Bordo et. al. 2001). In contrast, in the pre-1914 era, banking
and currency crises often gave rise to virulent twin crises. These sharp negative shocks to
the center then sent impulses through the gold standard world wreaking havoc at the
periphery.
Third the regional pattern of crisis-transmission within the emerging countries seems to
suggest the importance of trade channels (Glick and Rose 1999) however it also
underscores the vulnerability of emerging countries to financial shocks. This inability of
emerging countries to insulate their economies from negative shocks reflects not just the
failure of macro-policies, but weaknesses in the banking and financial structure. Yet,
while financial distress exhibits a common pattern across emerging countries (Mauro et.
al. 2002), emerging-country crises are overwhelmingly regional. An explanation may be

6

that when international capital markets tighten, as measured by the volume, cost and
maturity of funds, their impact is most acute in the region in which the crisis originates
(Eichengreen et. al. 2001), consequently whether or not strong intra-regional linkages
between emerging countries can be identified, crises are likely to be regional
(Eichengreen 2001).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we discuss the data and
our empirical methodology. Section 3 examines the evidence in the cross-country comovement in bond yield spreads and an index of exchange market pressure. In section 4,
we present estimates on the likelihood of a global currency crisis under the classical gold
standard and more recently in the post-Bretton Woods era. In section 5, we use vector
autoregressions to trace the impact of innovations in interest rates in one country on
another. Finally, in section 6, we provide some conclusions.

2.

Data and Methodology

2.1. Data
We utilize data on short-term interest rates, long-term government bond yields and bond
yield spreads, as well as data on exchange rates and reserves. These data were available
at a monthly frequency, and in some instances at a weekly frequency.
For the pre-World War I period, we utilize data, although not necessarily for each series,
for 15 countries, including five advanced countries—Belgium, France, Germany,
Netherlands and the UK—and ten emerging countries—Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Chile,
Denmark, Italy, Japan, Russia, Spain, and the US.2
Our data on short-term interest rates, which are open market rates on three month bills,
are available for the European countries and the US. These data, which are available at a
2

As in Bordo and Schwartz (1996), we classify the US as an emerging country however this classification
is borderline at best. While the US was a net borrower during the first half of the gold standard era, by the
turn of the century the US had become a net creditor. Though still lacking a lender of last resort, financial
markets in the US were highly developed. Moreover per capita income levels were higher than those in the
UK. However, for our purposes it does not matter whether we treat the US as an advanced country, or as
an emerging country, in as much as our results are qualitatively unaffected.

7

weekly frequency, were compiled from various issues of the Economist Magazine by
Neal and Weidenmier (2001). In addition, our interest rate data includes a monthly series
on open market rates for Argentina. In most instances these data span a 34 year period
from 1880 to 1914.
Our data on long-term sovereign bond yields and their spreads over UK consols,3 as well
as our data on exchange rates, are available for the majority of the countries in our
sample, including the Latin American countries, and in most instances span the period of
investigation. However, our data on reserves, collected from the Economist Magazine,
are only available for six countries—Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, the UK and the
US.
For the post-Bretton Woods period the sample includes 23 countries. This includes five
of the G7 countries—France, Germany, Japan, the UK and the US—as well as Greece,
Portugal and Spain, and 15 emerging countries—Argentina, Brazil, the Czech Republic,
Chile, Hungary, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland, Singapore, the
Slovak Republic, Thailand, and Venezuela.
With some exceptions, data on exchange rates, short-term interest rates (call money rates
where available, discount rates otherwise), and reserves, observed at a monthly
frequency, are available from 1975 to 2000.4 Our weekly data on short-term interest rates
are typically available only for the 1990s.5 Moreover our data on emerging market bond
yield spreads (over long-term—30-year—US Treasuries), are very limited, along both
cross-sectional and time dimensions. Our sample includes six emerging countries—
Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela, Nigeria and Poland—for which data are available
from October 1994 onward. In addition, we have data on long-term government bond

3

These data were obtained from Batley and Ferguson (1999), Neal and Weidenmier (2001), and Global
Financial Data: http://www.globalfindata.com. As yields were typically not reported, they were calculated
by dividing the price of the bond by its coupon.
4
These data were taken from the International Financial Statistics, CD ROM version.
5
These data, which are available from Global Financial Data: http://www.globalfindata.com are domestic
interbank Eurocurrency rates with a maturity of 1-3 months.

8

yields for four advanced countries—France, Germany, Japan, and the UK—for which we
compute spreads over US Treasuries.6

2.2. Methodology
We employ a variety of techniques including principal components analysis, cluster
analysis, extreme value methods, and vector autoregressions, to examine the strength of,
and patterns in the transmission of shocks, and currency crises. Each approach brings
with it a different angle from which we can view the data. When brought together we can
hope for a panoramic perspective that reveals some of the many facets of “transmission,”
which either directly or indirectly relates to the international transmission of financial
crises.
Below we discuss the various techniques that we employ in greater detail.

2.2.1. Examining the Extent of, and Patterns in, Dependence:
Principal Components Analysis7
Using principal components analysis and monthly data, we examine the cross-country comovement in bond yield spreads and an index of exchange market pressure (the
construction and significance of this index is discussed below).
In essence, principal components analysis linearly transforms a set of correlated variables
into a smaller subset of uncorrelated variables, in a manner that aims to capture most of
the variation in the data.

For any given p variables, we can extract p principal

components. However, all p principal components are rarely reported. The p principal
components are ordered by the fraction of the total variance that they explain. When a
set of variables are highly correlated, we can expect that the bulk of the variation in the
data can be attributed to the first principal component alone. Hence the fraction of the
variance that can be attributed to the first principal component provides a good measure
of the overall degree of co-movement in the data.

6

The Data for the advanced countries are available in International Financial Statistics, CD ROM version.
For the emerging countries these data can be obtained from Datastream.
7
Throughout we use the term “dependence” loosely, associating measures of linear association with
dependence.

9

While the first principal component is usually interpreted as a measure of overall comovement, the “higher-order” principal components often provide evidence of
dependence within groups.

To identify these groups we plot the factor loadings

corresponding to the first three principal component vectors. These are simply the
correlations between the variables and the principal components.8
In Figure 1, we plot the factor loadings from a hypothetical example. Three distinct
groups are apparent.

Group one sets itself apart by virtue of its strong positive

association with the first principal component, while group two is differentiated from
group one, through a strong correlation with the second principal component. Finally
group-three-membership entails high correlations with the third principal component.
In our hypothetical example the divisions between the three groups are clearly visible. In
practice, the separation across groups may not be so obvious.

Thus we employ a

clustering algorithm to categorize countries into different clusters.9

This works by

minimizing the “distance” between members of a group, while maximizing the distance
across separate groups. That countries are clustered together may suggest a pattern of
dependence that is common to that group. At the same time, it is important to realize that
countries may be clustered into a group, not because they are strongly correlated with
each other, but because the common element within that group is a weak or negative
association with the rest of the sample. It is therefore important to examine the strength
of correlations within each group with each of the principal components, rather than
conjecturing as to a likely pattern of behavior based on cluster membership alone.

8

An often used strategy for identifying separate groups, or factors, involves rotating the axes so as to
emphasize differences across groups. This is not a strategy that we pursue here since the differences across
groups are usually clear in a plot of the un-rotated factor loadings. When they are not, we employ a
clustering algorithm to isolate the various groups (see discussion below). Moreover, our goal is more than
simply to identify various groups. Additionally we wish to understand the salient characteristics in the
pattern of behavior within each group. To this end, the un-rotated factor loadings themselves contain useful
information that can be exploited.
9
The use of cluster analysis takes some of the arbitrariness out of the task of identifying patterns in comovement. However, the method is not without its drawbacks. In particular, the number of clusters needs
to be defined a priori—in this case countries were always divided into three separate clusters. As a
consequence the clustering algorithm may force a separation of countries into different groups even when
there are no significant differences between them.

10

2.2.2. Constructing an Index of Exchange Market Pressure
To provide some evidence on crisis-transmission, we construct, for each country, a
measure of currency crises, and examine the degree of, and patterns in, the co-movement
of this variable. Our measure of currency crises is an index of exchange market pressure,
which has been widely used in the literature (see for instance Eichengreen et. al. 1996,
Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999).10 We estimate an exchange market pressure index for
each country as a weighted average of movements in the exchange rate, the foreign
interest rate differential and reserves.11 The exchange rate and the foreign interest rate
differential are measured relative to a center country. For the pre-World War I period,
the UK was chosen as this center country, and for the recent period, the US was the
natural choice.
The weights are based on the reciprocal of the standard deviation of each series, divided
by the sum of the reciprocal of the standard deviations of all three series. Thus the
weights are assigned in a manner such that no one series dominates the index and so as to
ensure that the weights sum to one. The resulting index was then normalized to have a
mean of zero and standard deviation of one.12

2.2.3. Estimating the Probability of Crises: Extreme Value Methods
As a complement to our analysis of the degree of global dependence in financial
variables, we estimate the probability of a global currency crisis. As in Murshid (2001),
we identify global currency crises as extreme values of an index which captures the
degree of exchange market pressure that is common to all countries.13 Specifically this

10

The original exchange market pressure model, due to Girton and Roper (1977), was suggested as a
measure of money market disequilibrium.
11
The availability of data dictated whether all three variables could be utilized to construct this index. For
some countries the index for the prewar period was constructed using data on the interest rate and exchange
rate movements only and not on reserve changes, due to a lack of reserves data at a monthly frequency.
12
In those countries that had experienced hyperinflations, normalizing by the historic mean and standard
deviation, limited the usefulness of the EMP-index during periods of more moderate inflation. To avoid
this problem Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) suggest separating periods of high and low inflation, and
constructing EMP indexes for each sub-period. This approach was modified to allow for the volatility of
inflation rates by standardizing the EMP index using a rolling mean and standard deviation.
13
In Mody and Taylor (2002), the common component in exchange market pressure is interpreted as a
measure of contagion, where the term “contagion” is used in a broad sense, as a “catch-all” of the crosscountry dependence in exchange market pressure.

11

index is the first principal component of the exchange market pressure data. Some
sensitivity analyses using Kalman filtering techniques yielded similar results.
To obtain estimates of the probability of global crises, we used two different
methodologies. First, the probability of a global crisis was estimated as simply the
frequency of global crises, where exceedances by our index, over a particular threshold,
were associated with global crises.
The second approach involved fitting the appropriate distribution to the right tail of the
global stress index by using extreme value methods. This involved using a six-month
window to de-cluster the observations,14 and then selecting the maxima within these
windows with which we estimate the distribution of extreme values in the global crisis
index for both regimes.15 See Murshid (2001) for details and references cited therein.

2.2.4. Examining Cross-Country Inter-Linkages: VAR Analysis
While principal components analysis sheds light on the patterns in cross-country
interdependence, it does not account for all of the complex dynamics and interrelationships that may exist between countries. To better understand these relationships,
we estimate vector autoregressions using data on short-term interest rates.
By estimating impulse response functions from these VARs, we were able to trace the
impact of a shock in one country on another, and thus shed light on the direction of
shocks and the degree to which they impacted on other countries.
The difficulty with estimating impulse response functions however is that it necessarily
requires that we impose an ad hoc assumption regarding the order in which shocks are
communicated across countries. This can have a significant bearing on our results.
However, the ordering of the variables is more likely to be an issue when the data is of a
lower frequency and there are a large number of variables in our system. Thus we limit
our system to no more than six countries, and use weekly data, in order to sidestep these
difficulties.
14

By “de-clustering” we mean to remove or lessen the serial dependence across observations over time.
Specifically, we use the method of maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of a generalized
extreme value distribution to the data, (see Embrechts et. al. 1996).

15

12

3.

Patterns in Crisis Transmission: The Co-Movement in
Spreads and Exchange Market Pressure

In this section, we apply principal components analysis to examine the extent of crosscountry dependence, in spreads on sovereign debt and proxies for currency crises,
observed at a monthly frequency. We present our results in two sets of figures.
The first set of figures is simply a plot of the variance attributed to the first three principal
components. The second set of figures, plot the factor loadings corresponding to the first
three principal component vectors.

3.1. Analysis of Spreads
Our analysis of spreads for the prewar period from 1880-1914, covers a sample of
thirteen countries.16 The corresponding analysis for the recent period focuses on a sample
of ten countries over a narrower window from October 1994 to October 2000.17 Below
we summarize the main findings of our analysis and then conjecture as to their
implications.

3.1.1. Main Findings
A simple time series plot suggests a strong pattern of global co-movement in spreads in
both the pre-1914 era and more recently (Figures 2A and 2B). In both samples the first
principal component captures approximately 60% of the total variation in the data (see
Figure 3). This has two implications. First, the degree of co-movement is roughly
similar across the two periods. Second, the bulk of the variation that we observe in
spreads can be attributed to global factors, although this does not preclude the possibility
of important influences on spreads, which are either specific to countries or a subset of
countries.

16

Specifically our sample includes four advanced countries—Belgium, France, Germany, and the
Netherlands—and nine emerging countries—Austria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy, Portugal, Russia,
Spain, and the US.
17
The countries in our sample include four advanced—France, Germany, Japan and the UK—and six
emerging countries—Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela, Nigeria, and Poland.

13

The findings for the pre-1914 era however mask significant differences between the first
and second half of that period. The period, from 1880 to 1896 was characterized by
global deflation.

During that episode cross-country associations in spreads were

relatively weak. In contrast in the subsequent period from 1897 to 1914, characterized by
global inflation, there is a clear convergence in spreads across both advanced and
emerging countries. These shifting patterns implied stronger dependence in the latter half
of the gold standard era, when compared to the period as a whole (Figure 3).
As noted above, much of the co-movement in spreads during either era can be attributed
to the first principal component however there is still a significant degree of “residual”
co-movement, which is captured by principal components two and three. For the pre1914 sample there are no clear patterns to this co-movement (see Figure 4A and 4B). In
contrast, in the 1990s, sharp distinctions between advanced and emerging countries vis-àvis the pattern in co-movement in spreads are apparent. This is evident from Figure 2B,
which plots the spreads data for the recent period, and from Figure 4C, which plots the
factor loadings from principal components analysis.
Within the group of emerging countries, the salient characteristics have been sharp global
spikes in spreads in the aftermath of emerging market crises. However, the advanced
countries have been largely insulated from these events; instead spreads have followed a
downward trend. These contrasting experiences effectively split the sample cleanly into
two groups, with the first principal component capturing the highly volatile response of
emerging-market spreads during crisis episodes, and the second and third principal
components capturing the long-run patterns in advanced-country spreads. An implication
of this is that the degree of co-movement within either the group of advanced or the
group of emerging countries is understated in a broader sample that includes both. Thus
the conclusion in Mauro et. al. (2002), that spreads were more tightly correlated in the
1990s, compared to the pre-1914 era, reflects their focus on emerging countries.

3.1.2. Summary and Implications
Both in the past and more recently yield spreads on sovereign debt have depicted a
pattern of tight international co-movement, however while the degree of co-movement

14

has been roughly similar across the two periods, the pattern of co-movement across the
two periods has differed.
In the prewar era, in particular from 1897 to 1914, the dominant characteristic was a
worldwide decline in the mean and variance of spreads (see Figure 2A). This reflected
both tighter co-movement across countries made possible through greater financial
integration (Bordo and Rockoff 1996, Neal and Weidenmier 2001), and an easing of
sovereign debt burdens consequent upon the global increase in price levels (Flandreau et.
al. 1998).
Though observed over a shorter period, a similar pattern of declining spreads is evident in
today’s advanced countries.

These nonstationary or trend components in the data

underlie the strong long-run associations in advanced-country-spreads.
In contrast, no trends are evident in emerging-market-spreads; instead the bulk of the
variation in the data can be attributed to sharp spikes, corresponding to a tightening of
international capital markets, in the aftermath of crises. Hence what underlies the strong
correspondence in emerging-market-spreads is the tendency for financial distress to
explode across emerging markets as a whole, when risk perceptions shift in the face of
financial disturbances. Motivating these discrete shifts in risk perceptions is imperfect
information, which itself can reflect both institutional weaknesses in financial systems in
emerging countries, as well as the type of capital inflows that emerging countries are
attempting to attract.
The explosive pattern of financial distress in emerging countries has been interpreted as
providing evidence for the global scope of, possibly contagious, financial crises. But it is
important to emphasize that the pattern of transmission of financial stress, as captured by
the international co-movement in spreads, should not be thought of as equivalent to the
pattern in crisis-transmission, which in turn represents more severe reactions to foreign
shocks. While the ability of emerging countries to withstand these shocks may be
questionable, it needs to be remembered that the tightening of international capital
markets which accompany periods of stress are often short-lived.

Indeed recent

experience suggests that spreads in emerging countries will usually return to their pre-

15

crisis levels relatively quickly as will private capital flows, especially in regions which
have been unaffected by crises (Eichengreen et. al. 2001). In order to better understand
the pattern of crisis-transmission, below we present evidence on the cross-country
dependence in EMP indexes.

3.2. Analysis of Exchange Market Pressure
Both the pre-1914 and post-Bretton Woods samples include ten countries, with a similar
mix, consisting of four advanced countries and six emergers. 18

3.2.1. Main Findings
In relation to the extent of global dependence in the spreads data, the associations across
countries, measured vis-à-vis the degree of exchange market pressure, are far weaker,
however, the degree of co-movement is greater for the pre-1914 era (Figure 5).
During both periods the pattern of co-movement varies across advanced and emerging
countries (Figure 6A). In the pre-1914 era, a plot of the factor loadings separates the two
groups. But we need to be careful as to what distinguishes the group of advanced
countries from the group of emerging countries.

Importantly both advanced and

emerging countries exhibit strong correlations with the first principal component, which
in turn implies positive correlations across these groups.

The distinguishing

characteristic is that the group of emerging countries is negatively correlated with the
second principal component, which with the exception of the Netherlands, is not a
characteristic shared by advanced countries. This could be picking up the effect of crises
within emerging countries that did not filter through to the core countries of Europe, or
the channel could have also operated in reverse, with minor localized disturbances
affecting the advanced nations of Europe, but not reaching the periphery.
The evidence for the recent period suggests a more pronounced pattern of separation
between advanced and emerging countries. The key characteristic of the advanced group
is a strong positive correlation with the first principal component, which indicates not
18

The advanced countries in our pre-1914 sample are Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands and
the six emerging countries are Austria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Japan, and the US. For the post-Bretton
Woods sample the advanced countries are France, Germany, Japan and the UK and the emerging countries
are Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.

16

only that there was strong co-movement within this group, but that overall a larger
proportion of the variance in the EMP indices can be attributed to the advanced countries
than to any other group. However, advanced-emerging country associations are not
completely absent.

In particular, the Asian countries exhibit weak, but positive,

correlations with the first principal component (Figure 6B).

Hence there is some

evidence to indicate that crises affecting the advanced countries may have had
repercussions for the Asian countries. In contrast however there is little indication of a
pattern of dependence between the advanced countries and the Latin American countries.
In addition, the pattern of dependence within today’s emergers, suggests intra-regional
co-movement (Figure 6B, see also evidence in Hartmann et. al. 2002) picked up by the
second and third principal components.19

3.2.2. Summary and Implications
During both periods, the extent of cross-country dependence in a proxy for currency
crises is significantly lower than what is observed for spreads. Thus while financial
stress has spilled over relatively easily, financial crises have not. Of the two eras, the
extent of crisis-transmission has been somewhat greater in the pre-1914 era. Despite
some differences in their patterns of dependence, the co-movement of advanced and
emerging country EMP indices suggests the presence of inter-linkages across these two
groups. The underlying theme seems to have been one of “muted” global, rather than
regional, co-movement across countries. In contrast, the association between advanced
and emerging countries in recent years has been far weaker. Moreover, emerging market
crises have rarely been global and have suggested instead a pronounced regional pattern.

4.

Incidence of Global Crises

In this section, as a complement to our earlier analysis, we examine the incidence of
global currency crises in the two periods. In addition, we group countries into advanced
and emerging, and examine the incidence of international crises within these groups.
19

We observe similar patterns in samples differing in size, in the period of investigation, and in the
composition of countries.

17

We use a global-crisis index (see section 2.2.3, and Figures 7A and 7B) to estimate the
probability of these events over any six month period. Our (global) crisis-index, which is
simply the first principal component of the EMP data,20 aims to capture the common or
shared-element in exchange market pressure across the countries in our sample.21 To
examine the incidence of shared or common crises within particular groups of countries,
we construct, in a similar fashion, a crisis-index for each group.
Global crises were defined in terms of our global-crisis index. Specifically values in
excess of ten—the total variance in our sample—were defined as global crises. For the
purposes of comparison across regimes, however, the actual value of the threshold is
unimportant and we continue to use ten as our crisis-threshold for the smaller samples.22
The incidence of global crises was then obtained as simply a frequency of “exceedances”
above this crisis-threshold. Additionally, we used extreme value methods to fit the
appropriate distribution to the right tail of our global-crisis index (see Murshid 2001 for
details).
The results are presented in two tables. Table 1 reports the incidence of global crises for
both periods, while Table 2, reports the incidence of international crises within each of
the sets of advanced, and emerging, countries.
However we measure the incidence of global crises, we find that the probability of a
global crisis in recent years has been considerably lower than that during the earlier
period. In particular, the probability of a global crisis over any six-month period, during
the prewar era, was more than three times as high as the probability of observing similar
values of stress in the more recent period.
This result contrasts with that obtained by Eichengreen (2001), who estimated the
incidence of international crises in a sample of 21 countries for the pre-1914 era and in a
20

Several software packages report standardized principal components. Within the current context
however, standardizing the principal components would not be particularly useful.
21
We continue to use the same sets of countries as in the previous section.
22
A comparison across groups comprised of differing numbers of countries is complicated by the fact that
the overall variance in the larger sample is greater. Hence, all else equal the variance of the crisis index for
the larger sample will also be greater. To allow a better comparison across groups, the global crisis indexes
were appropriately re-scaled.

18

sample of 56 countries for the post-Bretton Woods period and concluded that the
incidence of international crises has been greater since 1971 than it was before 1913.
However his approach, in contrast to that taken here, does not differentiate between
coincident crises in a number of countries in any given year and “connected crises,” i.e.
crises that were transmitted through various channels or inter-linked through common
shocks. Eichengreen’s approach is based on the conclusion from Bordo et. al. (2001) that
the incidence of crises, as distinct from global crises as defined here, was higher in the
post-Bretton Woods era relative to the last era of financial integration. Consequently the
frequency estimate of the incidence of international crises in Eichengreen (2001), where
international crises are defined as crises in some minimum number of countries in any
given year, should suggest a higher incidence in the post-Bretton Woods era.
Our approach, similar to that in Mody and Taylor (2002), is different, in that international
crises are defined in terms of a measure of the dependence across the elements of a
multivariate vector, which captures the degree of exchange market pressure in each
country. To this end our reliance on monthly data as opposed to annual data, as in
Eichengreen (2001), is crucial. Hence in our approach, international crises are distinct
from coincident but otherwise unconnected crises, whose repercussions are localized.
Our aggregate result, that the incidence of international crises was higher in the pre-1914
era, masks significant differences across the advanced and emerging countries. From
Table 2, we find that the likelihood of an international crisis within the advanced
countries is just as great today as it was in the past. The key difference across the two
periods is in the incidence of crises across the set of emerging countries, which has been
significantly lower in the recent period (for similar evidence see Hartmann et. al. 2002).
The high incidence of international crises within the four pre-1914 European advanced
countries is what we might expect, given their strong ties through a system of fixed
exchange rates, and possibly linkages through commerce. By similar reasoning the high
incidence of international crises within today’s advanced countries should not be
surprising, since our sample is comprised mainly of European countries, which over
much of the post-Bretton Woods period practiced various forms of exchange rate

19

targeting. Moreover, our results from the previous section did suggest evidence of strong
co-movement within the advanced countries.
Separating the pre-1914 era from today is the higher incidence of international crises
within the pre-1914 emergers. The implication of this might be that there were strong
linkages within these countries, either directly through their ties to gold, or indirectly
through their ties to the center countries of Europe. The latter interpretation is supported
by the results in Table 1, namely that there was a high incidence of global crises across
the entire sample of pre-1914 countries. In contrast a significantly lower incidence of
international crises in recent years, whether we examine the sample as a whole, or restrict
our attention to the emergers, has two very different implications for the pattern of crisistransmission today in comparison with the earlier era.
First, the inter-linkages between the emerging countries as a whole are weak. This
reflects the mixed composition of our sample which spans two regions. Thus while
emerging-country-crises may be regional, affecting either just the Asian countries, or just
the Latin American countries, they are rarely inter-regional.23 Second, unlike the pre1914 era, the inter-linkages between advanced and emerging countries seem to have been
weaker in recent years. This is suggested by both the low incidence of international
crises within the set of emerging countries, as well as across the full sample of countries.
Thus our findings in this section have implications for the role of advanced countries in
communicating crises in the past, in comparison to the role they play today. To get at
this issue, in the next section we attempt to isolate the international implications of
shocks to various countries.

5.

Inter-Linkages between Advanced and Emerging
Countries: Evidence from VAR Analysis

Our earlier analysis suggested that the relationship between the advanced and emerging
countries has changed between the first era of globalization before 1914 and today.
23

See the evidence in the previous section and in Murshid (2001), which examines the incidence of crises
within regional groups, as well as Hartmann et. al. (2002).

20

Perhaps not unrelated to this, we observe a change in the pattern of crisis-transmission:
crises today are less likely to be global and instead more likely to be regional. The
divisions that exist today between advanced and emerging countries, and across regions,
are underscored in a broad set of correlations in financial variables; the divisions that
existed in the past are at best blurred. The implication being, that the inter-relationships
between the advanced and emerging countries, and between countries across different
regions, were likely stronger in the past than they are today.
These distinct patterns of behavior give rise to a number of questions. How have the
inter-linkages that existed under the classical gold standard, between the industrialized
core and the non-industrialized periphery changed? What are the inter-relationships
across countries from the same region? In particular, do they explain the recent patterns
in crisis-transmission?
To this end, we estimate a number of vector autoregressions using weekly data on interest
rates. VARs provide a framework through which we can analyze the complex dynamics
that exist between any two variables in a system, by isolating the impact of a shock in one
variable on another. By examining impulse response functions, we can obtain a sense of
these dynamics, and shed light on the extent of transmission effects across pairs of
countries.
For the prewar period we examine a sample of six European countries, consisting of three
advanced—France Germany and the UK—and three emerging countries—Austria,
Denmark and Italy—observed over a 34-year period from 1880 to 1914.24 As the US was
the only non-European country for which we were able to obtain high frequency data, it
would be difficult to draw any conclusions as to the importance of inter-regional
linkages, hence our focus on the European countries.
In contrast the time series for the recent period, while relatively short, covered countries
from several regions. For the recent period, we estimate three separate systems:

24

Weekly discount rates were also available for Portugal, Russia and Spain. Rotating these countries into
our sample did not qualitatively affect our results, however as the discount rate changed only infrequently
in these countries, we excluded these nations from our analysis.

21

First we estimate a VAR comprised of six European countries with an even split between
advanced—France, Germany and the UK—and emerging—the Czech Republic,
Hungary, and the Slovak Republic—thus approximating the makeup of our pre-1914
sample of countries.25 Our analysis is carried out over a 6-year period from 1995 to 2001.
A characteristic distinguishing the countries from the prewar era, were their ties to gold
and hence their adherence to fixed exchange rates. To better understand the role of fixed
exchange rates in communicating shocks we examine the relationships between member
nations of the European Union over a seven-year period beginning in 1994. While the
sample could no longer be split into advanced and emerging, the countries were chosen
so as to emphasize differences in per capita income. Thus at one end of the spectrum we
have France, Germany and the UK, and at the other end we have Greece, Portugal, and
Spain.26
Finally, we examine the scope of inter-linkages within the class of Asian emerging
countries as well as the impact of the US and Japan on these countries. Specifically, we
estimate a VAR for the US, Japan, Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore and Thailand. Our data
covers a period from 1994 to 2002.
The output from our VAR analysis is presented in four separate figures in the appendix.
Figure A1 presents the impulse response graphs for the pre-1914 period, while Figures
A2-A4 present the analysis for the recent period. The impulse response functions trace
out the time profiles of the effects of a one standard deviation innovation to interest rates
in each country in our sample.

5.1. Main Results
Below we summarize the main conclusions that emerge from each set of regressions:

25

The selection of countries was also based on the length of the time series for each country.
With the exception of the UK the countries in our sample explicitly targeted the exchange rate.
However, our data starts in 1994, by which point the exchange rate bands had been widened to +/- 15%.
The exchange rate arrangements subsequently went through a change in January 1999, which effectively
amounted to a hardening of the exchange rate pegs. This undoubtedly had implications for the manner in
which shocks were communicated to these countries however this is not an avenue that we explore.

26

22

Pre-1914 Period. In the pre-1914 period, shocks to the advanced countries, in particular
shocks to the UK and Germany, had a strong and statistically significant impact on the
other European countries, both advanced and emerging. In contrast shocks in emerging
countries did not spillover, although Austria is an exception to this pattern.
Recent Period, European Countries. With shocks communicated from Germany to
France, and from the UK to France and Germany, there is evidence of inter-linkages
within the set of advanced countries. In addition, we find evidence of linkages between
the three transitional nations.

In particular Hungary plays an important role in

communicating shocks to its neighbors. Thus while relationships within either the group
of advanced or transitional countries are evident, there is no indication of any interlinkages between these two groups.
Recent Period, European Union. Within the European Union, Germany appears to be
the dominant country, with shocks to Germany being communicated to the other member
nations—Greece being the only exception. In contrast shocks to France in particular, but
also the UK, have a limited effect. While there appears to be some evidence of interlinkages between these big-three nations of Europe, it is clear that the driving force is
Germany.

Within the smaller three—Spain, Portugal and Greece—there is some

evidence of spillovers. However, the big three countries remain insulated from these
shocks. Thus the association between the advanced and emerging countries is largely
unidirectional.
Recent Period, Asian Countries.

The evidence of inter-linkages in our sample

consisting of Asian emergers, Japan and the US, is far weaker than what we observe for
the European nations. Over the period of investigation, the currencies of the Asian
emerging countries were, to varying degrees, linked to the dollar. Consequently we
would expect, and do observe some evidence of transmission from the US to these
countries. In particular, we find that shocks to US interest rates are communicated to
both Japan and Hong Kong and to a much lesser extent to Korea also. Although Japan
was the dominant economic power in that region, shocks to Japanese interest rates were
not communicated to the neighboring Asian countries, or for that matter the US. Within

23

the sample of emerging countries, we observe little evidence of cross-border
transmission, except in the case of Korea.
A number of conclusions emerge from our analysis, which we summarize below:

5.2. Implications
Inter-Linkages between Advanced Countries. Both in the past and more recently,
inter-linkages within the advanced countries have been evident. Consistent with the
evidence in Lindert (1969), we find that the UK was the dominant country through which
shocks were communicated under the pre-1914 gold standard, although the relationship
was mutually reinforcing, as e.g. shocks to Germany also impacted on the UK.27 Today
we observe a similar pattern of inter-linkages within the advanced countries of Europe
and also evidence of transmission from the US to Japan.
Inter-Linkages between Emerging Countries. The evidence of spillovers within the
class of emerging countries is weaker than what we observe for the advanced countries,
although not completely absent. In particular, in the pre-1914 era, shocks originating in
Austria appear to have spilled over affecting advanced and emerging countries alike.
More recently cross-border transmission within the transitional countries of Europe is
also evident.
Inter-Linkages between Advanced and Emerging Countries. The evidence of interlinkages between advanced and emerging countries is mixed and needs to be qualified.
In the first instance, the relationships between advanced and emerging countries are often
unidirectional. Thus in the pre-1914 era, a shock to the UK had a ripple effect on all the
other countries in our sample, however, the UK was insulated from shocks in emerging
countries. While in recent years, shocks to Germany have had a similar effect on the
European Union but shocks to the smaller European nations have not had a significant
influence on Germany. There have obviously been exceptions to this pattern, with pre1914 Austria being a notable example.

27

Also see Tullio and Walters (1996).

24

Second, evidence of inter-relationships between the advanced and emerging countries is
weaker outside of the European Union. While there is some evidence of cross-border
transmission from the US to the Asian countries which maintained pegs with the dollar,
this evidence is weak. Moreover, there is no evidence of transmission from Japan to the
Asian countries.
Inter-Linkages within Regions.

Our analysis of the pre-1914 European nations

suggests that regional transmission may have been an important factor through which
financial shocks were communicated. However, it is difficult to separate the importance
of regional ties, over the other influences, such as the exchange rate regime, without a
benchmark as to the pattern of behavior. We will however note that in a system which
includes the US, there was evidence of transmission from the UK to the US and from the
US to the UK.28
In the recent period, we do find evidence of regional transmission within Europe and
Asia. Again it is difficult to isolate the importance of regional ties. However, within the
Asian emergers, the evidence of regional patterns is far weaker.

6.

Conclusions

In this paper we have attempted to examine the pattern of dependence in financial
variables using a number of different approaches, from which we are able to arrive at a
number of conclusions.
• First, tight patterns in co-movement in bond yield spreads across all countries are
evident during both the pre-1914 era and the 1990s. However, in the recent era, the
co-movement is less global and more concentrated within each of the advanced and
emerging countries treated as separate groups.
• Second, the incidence of global crises in the pre-1914 era was higher than what is
observed today. This reflects a lower incidence of international crises within the

28

We do not report these results. However, they are available upon request.

25

emerging countries, where crises have tended to be regional. In contrast, within the
advanced countries, the incidence of international crises today has been just as high as
it was in the past.
• Third, before 1914, financial shocks were largely transmitted in one direction—from
the advanced countries of Europe (especially the U.K.) to the emergers. Today,
shocks are transmitted internationally within advanced countries however evidence of
transmission from advanced to emerging countries is weaker.
The evidence of strong co-movement in spreads is not unexpected. An implication of
increased financial and trade integration has been stronger interdependence between
nations. Under the classical gold standard, the degree of this dependence increased over
time as countries became more integrated and as global trends in prices sparked a decline
in spreads. Moreover the inability in the pre-1914 era to distinguish distinct patterns in
co-movement within subsets of countries, suggested the possibility of inter-linkages
across regions and between advanced and emerging countries. In recent years, though we
observe similar levels of co-movement in spreads, the correspondence is largely within
groups, separated into advanced and emerging categories. This reflects the divergent
experiences across these two groups in the aftermath of the recent crises.
The higher incidence of crises in the pre-1914 era is perhaps also not surprising. There
were a number of important factors which helped to define the nature of crises in the past.
First shocks and crises were communicated through gold flows. Second, adherence to
gold convertibility implied subordinating all other policy objectives. The peg to gold
therefore acted like “golden fetters” amplifying the effects of a negative shock
(Eichengreen 1992). Moreover, even the advanced countries from that era, had not
completely developed the tools to provide financial stability. Third, prior to World War
I, financial power was concentrated in a handful of Western European countries, which
were the major creditors of that era. In addition to exporting capital, these countries also
provided export markets to the emergers. A crisis at the center therefore exposed the
periphery to reinforcing shocks on the current and capital accounts (Eichengreen 1996).
Consequently, as our VAR evidence suggests, in the past there were strong inter-linkages

26

between advanced and emerging countries. In contrast today, a large diverse group of
countries now constitutes the center. Consequently emerging markets are subject to
various influences and are less prone to disturbances in any one part of the center.
The high incidence of crises within today’s advanced countries reflects in part the
composition of countries in our sample, which includes primarily member countries of
the European Union. This is consistent with our VAR evidence, which has suggested the
presence of strong inter-linkages between advanced countries; in particular shocks to
Germany are communicated strongly throughout Europe. The pattern is weaker for
advanced countries in general, but is not inconsistent with the possibility of a tight
correspondence in macroeconomic fundamentals associated with an international
business cycle. Clearly advanced countries, in particular countries of the European
Union, have not been immune to speculative attacks, however, importantly today’s
advanced-country-crises have had a more limited effect on output relative to earlier crises
(Bordo et. al. 2001). Consequently their propensity to spill over into global crises has
diminished.
Within today’s emerging countries, crises have suggested an overwhelmingly regional
pattern (see also evidence in Glick and Rose 1999, Hartmann et. al. 2002). Perhaps this
is indicative of trade linkages (Glick and Rose 1999). However, as was implied from our
VAR analysis, the evidence of a tight intra-regional correspondence in fundamentals
between emerging countries is somewhat weaker than for advanced countries.
What then explains the pattern of emerging-market crises? Weaknesses in financial
systems and a lack of transparency in emerging financial markets, has possibly
heightened their vulnerability to shocks and increased the possibility of contagion. The
regional pattern in emerging-market crises then simply corresponds to an unbalanced
pattern in financial distress. Recent experience suggests that the reversal of capital flows
that accompany crises is often most acute in the region where the crisis originates
(Eichengreen et. al. 2001). For other countries, the crisis typically represents only a
discrete interruption in capital-market access. Hence a cross-regional pattern in crisistransmission is typically not observed (Eichengreen 2001).

27

Following a brief lull behind barriers to international capital movements under the
Bretton Woods system, international financial crises have again begun to reassert
themselves (Bordo et. al. 2001). Thus the restrictions on capital account transactions (as
well as those on current account transactions prior to 1958), are key to understanding
why crises were contained under Bretton Woods (Bordo et. al. 2001, Eichengreen 2001,
Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999). But even when comparing two eras of globalization,
sharp contrasts in both the scope and manner in which shocks and crises were
communicated are evident. Our analysis cannot provide definitive answers as to what
underlies the greater stability across financial markets in the last few decades relative to
the previous era of globalization. However, severing the links to gold, the adoption of a
managed floating regime, the growing financial maturity of advanced countries, and the
widening of the center, could be key to understanding the reduced incidence of global
crises.

28

References
Batley, Richard, and Niall Ferguson. 1999. “Event Risk and the International Bond
Market in the Era of the Classical Gold Standard.” Mimeo. Oxford University.
Bordo, Michael D. 2002. “The Globalization of International Financial Markets: What
Can History Teach Us?” In Leonardo Auernheimer ed. International Financial
Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz. 1996. “The Operation of the Specie Standard:
Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990.” In Jorge Braga de
Macedo, Barry Eichengreen, and Jamie Reis, eds. Currency Convertibility: The
Gold Standard and Beyond. New York: Routledge: 11-83.
Bordo, Michael D., and Hugh Rockoff. 1996. “The Gold Standard as a ‘Good
Housekeeping’ Seal of Approval.” The Journal of Economic History, 56 (2):
389-428.
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingbiel, and Maria Soledad MartinezPeria. 2001. “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy,
32: 53-82.
Bordo, Michael D., and Antu P. Murshid. 2001. “Are Financial Crises Becoming
Increasingly More Contagious? What is the Historical Evidence?” In Stijn
Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial Contagion. London:
Kluwer Academic Publishers: 367-406.
Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
1929-1933. New York: Oxford University Press.
__________. 1996. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
__________. 2001. “International Financial Crises: Is the Crisis Problem Growing?”
Mimeo. University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz. 1996. “Contagious Currency
Crises.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 98(4): 463-84.
Eichengreen, Barry, Galina Hale, and Ashoka Mody. 2001. “Flight to Quality: Investor
Risk Tolerance and the Spread of Emerging Market Crises.” In Stijn Claessens

29

and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial Contagion. London: Kluwer
Academic Publishers: 129-56.
Embrechts, Paul, Claudia Kluppelberg, and Thomas Mikosch. 1996. Modelling Extremal
Events. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Flandreau, Marc, Jacques Le Cacheux, and Frederic Zeumer. 1998. “Stability Without a
Pact? Lessons from the European Gold Standard, 1880-1913.” Economic
Policy, 26: 117-62.
Girton, Lance, and Donald Roper. 1977. “A Monetary Model of Exchange Market
Pressure Applied to Postwar Canadian Experience.” American Economic
Review, 67(4) 537-48.
Glick, Reuven, and Andrew K. Rose. 1999. “Contagion and Trade: Why are Currency
Crises Regional?” Journal of International Money & Finance, 18 (4): 603-17.
Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Rienhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review,
89(3): 473-500.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1978. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial
Crises. Third Edition. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons.
Lindert, Peter H. 1969. Key Currencies and Gold, 1900-1913. Princeton Studies in
International Finance, no. 24. Princeton: Princeton University press.
Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman, and Yishay Yafeh. 2002. “Emerging Market Spreads:
Then versus Now.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(2): 695-733.
Mody, Ashoka, and Mark P. Taylor. 2002. “The Contagiousness of Currency Crises.”
Mimeo. University of Warwick, incomplete.
Murshid, Antu P. 2001. “Echoes From the Past: Are Global Financial Crises Reasserting
Themselves?” PhD dissertation chapter. Rutgers University.
Neal, Larry and Marc Weidenmier. 2001. “Crises in The Global Economy from Tulips to
Today: Contagion and Consequences.” To appear in Michael D. Bordo, Alan
M. Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson, eds. Globalization in Historical
Perspective. University of Chicago Press: (forthcoming).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan Taylor. 2002. “Globalization and Capital Markets.” National
Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 8846.

30

Tullio, Guiseppe, and Jurgen Wolters. 1996. “Was London the Conductor of the
International Orchestra or Just the Triangle Player? An Empirical Analysis of
Asymmetries in Interest Behavior During the Classical Gold Standard, 18761913.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 43(4): 419-43.
.

31

Table 1 Incidence of Global Crises over a Six-Month Period, 1880-1914 and 19752000
Prewar

Post Bretton Woods

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Frequency
EVMa
Frequency
EVMa
0.12
0.09
0.02
0.02
a
Probability estimates were obtained by fitting a generalized extreme value distribution to the semi-annual
maxima of the global crisis index.

Table 2 Incidence of International Crises over a Six-Month Period, Within the Set of
Advanced Countries and within the set of Emerging Countries, 1880-1913 and 19752000
Prewar
Post Bretton Woods
Advanced
Emerging
Advanced
Emerging
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Freq.
EVMa
Freq.
EVMa
Freq.
EVMa
Freq.
EVMa
0.21
0.18
0.10
0.14
0.23
0.24
0.02
0.03
a
Probability estimates were obtained by fitting a generalized extreme value distribution to the semi-annual
maxima of the global crisis index.

Figure 1. Interpreting a Plot of Factor Loadings
Group One

Group Two

Group Three

32

Figure 2A. Spreads Over UK Consols: 1880-1914a
800

700

600

500

400
spreads (basis points)
300

200

100

0
Belgium, France,
Germany, Netherlands
-100
1880
argentina

a

1882 1884

1886

austria

1888

1890 1892

russia

1894

usa

1896

1898

belgium

1900 1902

france

1904

1906

germany

1908 1910

1912

netherlands

Spreads for selected countries.

Figure 2B. Spreads Over 30-Year US T-Bonds: 1994-2000
300

3000

200
2500
100

France, Germany,
0
Japan and UK

2000

-100
advanced-country spreads
(basis points)

emerging-country
1500
spreads (basis points)
-200

1000

-300

-400
500
-500

0
Oct-1994
argentina

brazil

-600
Oct-1995
mexico

Oct-1996
venezuela

Oct-1997
nigeria

33

Oct-1998
poland

Oct-1999
france

germany

uk

japan

Figure 3. Overall Co-Movement in Spreads: 1880-1914 and 1994-2000
% of variance attributed to first principal component
% of variance attributed to first tw o
principal components
% of variance attributed
to first three principal
components
100
80
% of 60
variance
explained 40
20
Prew ar
18971914
Post
BW
19942000

Prew ar
18801896

Prew ar
18801914

0

Figure 4A. Factor Loadings, Spreads Data, 1880-1914

Emerging
Ag -- Argentina
Au -- Austria
Br -- Brazil
Ch -- Chile
It -- Italy
Jp -- Japan
Sp -- Spain
Ru -- Russia
US -- USA

Key
Advanced
Be -- Belgium
Fr -- France
Ge -- Germany
Nl -- Netherlands

34

Figure 4B. Factor Loadings, Spreads Data, 1897-1914

Figure 4C. Factor Loadings, Spreads Data, 1994-2000

Emerging
Ag -- Argentina
Br -- Brazil
Mx -- Mexico
Ng -- Nigeria
Po -- Poland
Vn -- Venezuela

Key
Advanced
Fr -- France
Ge -- Germany
Jp -- Japan
UK -- United King.

35

Figure 5. Overall Co-Movement in EMP: 1880-1914 and 1975-2000
% of variance attributed to first
principal component
% of variance attributed to
first tw o principal components
% of variance attributed
to first three principal
components
60
50
% of 40
variance 30
explained 20
10
Prew ar

Post
Bretton
Woods

0

Figure 6A. Factor Loadings, EMP, 1880-1914

Emerging
Ag -- Argentina
Au -- Austria
Br -- Brazil
Ch -- Chile
Jp -- Japan
US -- USA

36

Key
Advanced
Be -- Belgium
Fr -- France
Ge -- Germany
Nl -- Netherlands

Figure 6B. Factor Loadings, EMP, 1975-2000

Emerging
Ag -- Argentina
Br -- Brazil
In -- Indonesia
My -- Malaysia
Mx -- Mexico
Th -- Thailand

Key
Fr -- France
Ge -- Germany
Jp -- Japan
UK -- United King.

Figure 7A. Global Crisis Index, 1880-1914

37

Figure 7B. Global Crisis Index, 1975-2000

38

Appendix
A.1. Impulse Response Function, Advanced and Emerging European Countries: 3/21/1885 1/02/19141
1. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the UK

2. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to France

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of UK to UK

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to UK

0.4
0.3

Response of UK to FRA
0.12

0.25

0.10

0.10

0.20

0.08

0.08

0.2

0.06

0.06

0.1

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.0
-0.1
20

40

60

80

0.00
-0.05

20

40

60

80

100

20

0.10

0.06

0.10

0.08
0.06

0.05

0.04
0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00
-0.02
60

80

100

0.08

0.06

0.06

100

20

40

60

80

100

Response of AUS to FRA
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

0.00
-0.02

-0.02
-0.04
20

0.08

80

0.04

40

60

80

100

-0.04
20

Response of DEN to UK

0.10

60

0.08

-0.04
40

Response of ITA to UK

40

Response of GER to FRA

0.12
0.10

20

0.05

0.00
-0.02

Response of AUS to UK

-0.05

0.10

0.00

Response of GER to UK
0.15

0.15

-0.02
100

0.20

Response of FRA to FRA

0.12

40

60

80

100

20

Response of ITA to FRA

40

60

80

100

Response of DEN to FRA

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.04
0.02

0.02
0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.02
20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

100

3. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Germany

20

40

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

4. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Austria

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of UK to GER

60

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to GER

Response of UK to AUS

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

Response of FRA to AUS
0.06
0.04

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

-0.02

0.02
0.00

0.00
-0.02

-0.02
20

40

60

80

100

Response of GER to GER
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1

-0.04
20

40

60

80

100

Response of AUS to GER

40

60

80

60

80

100

20

Response of GER to AUS
0.12
0.10

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.10

0.04

0.04

0.05

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

Response of ITA to GER

40

60

80

100

0.10

0.08

0.08

80

100

0.15

0.00
-0.05
20

Response of DEN to GER

0.10

60

0.20

-0.02
20

40

Response of AUS to AUS

0.10

100

0.06

40

0.12

-0.02
20

-0.02
20

40

60

80

100

20

Response of ITA to AUS

40

60

80

100

Response of DEN to AUS

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.06

0.04
0.04

0.02

0.00

0.02

0.00
-0.02

0.00
20

40

60

80

100

0.00

-0.02
20

40

60

80

100

5. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Italy

-0.02
20

40

0.05

0.06

0.04

100

Response of UK to DEN

0.02
0.00

0.03

0.06

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.01

0.02

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

20

Response of GER to DEN

0.04

0.00

-0.03
20

Response of AUS to ITA

0.02

-0.02

-0.02
20

Response of GER to ITA

100

0.00

-0.02
20

80

-0.01

0.00

-0.01

-0.04

60

0.01

0.00

-0.02

40

Response of FRA to DEN

0.08

0.03

0.04

20

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to ITA

Response of UK to ITA

80

6. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Denmark

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

0.08

60

0.08

-0.02

60

80

100

0.06

0.06

0.02

40

Response of AUS to DEN

0.04

0.04
0.00

0.02

-0.04

0.02
-0.02

-0.06
-0.08
20

40

60

80

100

-0.02
20

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

0.20
0.00
0.15
-0.02

0.05
-0.04
0.00
-0.06
20

40

60

80

100

0.14

0.03

0.12

0.02

0.10

0.01

0.08

0.00

0.06

-0.01

0.04

40

60

80

100

60

80

100

0.02

-0.03
20

40

Response of DEN to DEN

0.04

-0.02

-0.05

20

Response of ITA to DEN

0.02

0.10

-0.02
20

Response of DEN to ITA

Response of ITA to ITA
0.25

0.00

0.00

-0.04

0.00
20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

____________________
1
VAR estimated using eigh t lags. The number of lags was obtained by initially estimating a system with twelve lags and
then sequentially paring down the model through a set of nested hypothesis tests. The variables were ordered as follows:
UK, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Denmark.

A.2. Impulse Response Function, Advanced and Emerging European Countries: 10/26/1995
9/27/20011
1. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Germany

2. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to France

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of GER to GER
0.10

0.10

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04
20

40

60

80

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to GER

100

20

Response of UK to GER

40

60

80

Response of GER to FRA
0.08

0.02

0.06

0.01

0.04

0.00

0.02

-0.01

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

100

20

Response of HUN to GER

0.06

0.3

0.04
0.2
0.02
0.00

Response of FRA to FRA

0.03

40

60

80

100

20

Response of UK to FRA

40

60

80

100

Response of HUN to FRA

0.02

0.15

0.01

0.10

0.00

0.05

0.1

-0.02
0.0
-0.04
-0.06

-0.1
20

40

60

80

100

0.00

-0.02

-0.05

-0.03
20

Response of CZE to GER

-0.01

40

60

80

100

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.0

40

60

80

100

-0.8
40

60

80

100

-0.2

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
20

40

60

80

100

3. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the UK

-0.4
20

40

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04
40

60

80

100

80

0.00
-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

100

-0.04
40

60

80

100

0.3
0.2
0.1

-0.2
100

-0.02
20

Response of CZE to UK

40

60

80

100

0.6

0.8
0.6

0.4
0.2

-0.2
-0.4

0.0

-0.6

-0.2
20

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

60

80

100

0.1

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.1

-0.4

-0.2

100

40

Response of SLV to HUN

1.0

0.2

20

20

Response of CZE to HUN

0.4
0.2
0.0

0.0
20

Response of SLV to UK

1.0

100

0.00

-0.1

80

80

0.4
0.02

60

60

0.5

0.0

40

40

0.6

0.04

0.05

20

20

Response of HUN to HUN

0.06

0.1

-0.05

100

-0.03
20

Response of UK to HUN

0.2

0.00

80

0.01

0.00

-0.04
60

0.3

0.10

60

Response of FRA to HUN

-0.01

Response of HUN to UK

0.15

40

0.02

-0.03
40

20

Response of GER to HUN
0.01

20

Response of UK to UK

100

0.02

-0.04
20

80

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to UK
0.10

60

4. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Hungary

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of GER to UK
0.10

100

0.0

0.0

-0.6
20

80

-0.1

-0.4

-0.6

60

0.1

0.2

-0.2

-0.4

40

Response of SLV to FRA
0.2

0.0

-0.2

20

Response of CZE to FRA

0.6

0.2

-0.10
20

Response of SLV to GER

20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

5. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Czech Rep. 6. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Slovak Rep.
Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of GER to CZE

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to CZE

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

Response of GER to SLV
0.04

Response of FRA to SLV
0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04
20

40

60

80

100

-0.06
20

Response of UK to CZE

-0.04

-0.04

40

60

80

100

-0.06
20

Response of HUN to CZE

40

60

80

100

20

Response of UK to SLV

0.20

0.06

0.25

0.06

0.15

0.04

0.20

0.10

0.02

0.15

0.05

0.00

0.10

0.04
0.02

0.00

-0.02

0.00

-0.05

-0.04

0.00

-0.02

-0.10

-0.06

-0.05

20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

0.8

0.6

3

0.6

0.4

0.2
1

0.0

0

40

60

80

100

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

Response of SLV to SLV
1.6
1.2

0.0

0.8

-0.2

0.4
0.0

-0.6

-0.4
20

100

-0.4

-0.2

-1

80

0.2

0.4

2

40

Response of CZE to SLV

4

60

0.05

20

Response of SLV to CZE

Response of CZE to CZE

40

Response of HUN to SLV

0.08

-0.8
20

40

60

80

100

-0.4
20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

____________________
1
VAR estimated using seven lags. The number of lags was obtained by initially estimating a system with twelve lags and
then sequentially paring down the model through a set of nested hypothesis tests. The variables were ordered as follows:
Germany, France, UK, Hungary, Czech Republic, and Slovak Republic.

A.3. Impulse Response Function, European Union Member Nations: 10/27/1994-12/27/20011
1. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Germany

2. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to France

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of GER to GER
0.12
0.08

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to GER

Response of GER to FRA

Response of FRA to FRA

0.20

0.04

0.20

0.15

0.02

0.15
0.10

0.10

0.00

0.05

-0.02

0.00

-0.04

-0.05

-0.05

-0.06

-0.10

0.04

0.05

0.00
-0.04
20

40

60

80

100

20

Response of UK to GER

40

60

80

100

20

0.08

0.16

0.06

0.04

0.12

0.04

0.00

0.08
0.04

40

60

80

100

0.12

-0.04
-0.06

100

0.04
0.00

0.00

80

20

40

60

80

100

-0.04
20

Response of GRC to GER

40

60

80

100

20

Response of PRT to FRA

0.6

0.12

0.4

0.12

0.4

0.10
0.08

0.3

0.08

0.2

0.06

0.0

0.04
0.02

-0.2

0.00
-0.02

0.00
-0.04

-0.4
20

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

3. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the UK
Response of GER to UK

0.0

-0.2
-0.3
20

40

60

80

100

20

Response of GER to SPA

0.04

0.08

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.04

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.08

-0.03

Response of UK to UK

-0.04

-0.01

20

40

100

0.00

0.01
0.00

100

80

Response of FRA to SPA
0.04

80

60

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to UK
0.02

60

40

4. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Spain
0.03

40

100

0.1

0.12

20

80

-0.1

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

0.06

60

0.2

-0.04
20

40

Response of GRC to FRA

0.16

0.04

100

-0.02

-0.04
60

80

0.08

-0.12
40

60

0.02

-0.08

20

40

Response of SPA to FRA

0.00

Response of PRT to GER

20

Response of UK to FRA

Response of SPA to GER

-0.04

0.00

60

80

100

-0.06
-0.08
-0.10
20

Response of SPA to UK

40

60

80

100

20

Response of UK to SPA

0.12

0.10

0.04

0.08

0.05

0.02

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05

-0.02

40

60

80

100

Response of SPA to SPA
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

-0.04

-0.10
20

40

60

80

100

-0.04
20

40

60

80

100

Response of GRC to UK

Response of PRT to UK
0.10

0.4

0.05

0.2

0.00

0.0

-0.05

-0.2

-0.02
20

40

60

80

100

20

Response of PRT to SPA
0.08

40

60

80

100

Response of GRC to SPA
0.4

0.06
0.2

0.04
0.02

0.0

0.00
-0.02

-0.2

-0.04
-0.10

-0.4
20

40

60

80

100

-0.06
20

40

60

80

100

5. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Portugal.

-0.4
20

40

80

100

20

Response of GER to GRC

0.03

0.06

0.02

0.04

0.01

0.02

-0.02

0.00

-0.04

-0.04

0.00
-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.03

-0.06
20

40

60

80

100

Response of UK to PRT

0.04

0.12

0.02

0.08

0.00

0.04

-0.06
20

40

60

80

100

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

40

60

80

100

0.00

20

40

60

80

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

100

20

40

60

80

100

0.08

0.4

0.04

0.2

0.02

-0.04
40

60

80

100

60

80

100

80

100

1.0

0.02

0.5

0.00

-0.2
40

60

1.5

0.04

0.0

-0.02
20

40

Response of GRC to GRC
2.0

0.06

0.0

-0.04

20

Response of PRT to GRC
0.10
0.08

0.00

100

-0.02
20

Response of GRC to PRT
0.6

80

0.00

-0.02

Response of PRT to PRT

60

0.04

0.00

0.00

0.12

40

0.08

0.02

0.02

-0.02

20

Response of SPA to GRC
0.10

0.06

0.04
0.02

100

-0.08
20

Response of UK to GRC

Response of SPA to PRT

0.06

80

Response of FRA to GRC

0.08

0.00

60

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of FRA to PRT

0.04

-0.01

40

6. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Greece.

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of GER to PRT

60

-0.04
20

40

60

80

100

-0.5
20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

____________________
1
VAR estimated using eight lags. The number of lags was obtained by initially estimating a system with twelve lags and
then sequentially paring down the model through a set of nested hypothesis tests. The variables were ordered as follows:
Germany, France, UK, Spain, Portugal and Greece.

A.4. Impulse Response Function, Asian Emergers, Japan and the US: 3/10/1994-2/21/20021
1. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the USA

2. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Japan

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of USA to USA

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of JAP to USA

0.25

0.06

0.20

0.04

Response of USA to JAP

Response of JAP to JAP

0.12

0.10
0.08

0.08

0.15

0.02

0.10

0.06

0.00

0.05

0.04

0.04

-0.02

0.00

0.02
0.00

-0.05

-0.04

-0.10

-0.06
20

40

60

80

100

0.00
-0.04
20

Response of HK to USA

40

60

80

100

20

Response of SNG to USA

0.25

-0.02
40

60

80

100

20

Response of HK to JAP

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05

-0.05

-0.05

0.20

40

60

80

100

Response of SNG to JAP

0.15

0.00
-0.05
-0.10

-0.10
20

40

60

80

100

0.2

-0.10
20

Response of KOR to USA

40

60

80

100

0.3
0.2

0.1

-0.10
20

Response of THAI to USA

40

60

80

100

20

Response of KOR to JAP

40

60

80

100

Response of THAI to JAP

0.20

0.3

0.15

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.10

0.1

-0.1

-0.1

0.05

0.0

0.00

-0.1

0.1

-0.2
-0.2

-0.3

-0.3

-0.4
20

40

60

80

100

-0.05
20

40

60

80

100

3. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the HK

-0.2
20

40

Response of USA to HK

100

Response of USA to SNG

0.01

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.02

0.00
-0.02

-0.02

-0.06

-0.03
20

40

60

80

100

20

Response of HK to HK

40

80

100

0.01
0.00

60

80

-0.06

-0.01

-0.08

-0.02

100

20

Response of SNG to HK

40

60

80

100

20

Response of HK to SNG

0.4

0.20

0.8

0.8

0.3

0.15

0.6

0.10

0.2

0.4

40

60

80

100

Response of SNG to SNG

1.0

0.6

60

0.02

-0.04

-0.04

40

Response of JAP to SNG

0.06

0.02

0.02

20

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of JAP to HK
0.02

0.04

80

4. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Singapore

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

0.06

60

0.4

0.05
0.1

0.2

0.0

0.0
-0.2
40

60

80

100

-0.10
20

Response of KOR to HK

0.0

-0.05

-0.1
20

0.2

0.00

40

60

80

100

-0.2
20

Response of THAI to HK

40

60

80

100

20

Response of KOR to SNG

0.3

0.10

0.3

0.08

0.2

0.05

0.2

0.04

0.1

0.00

0.1

0.00

0.0

-0.05

0.0

-0.04

-0.1

-0.10

-0.1

-0.08

-0.2
20

40

60

80

100

-0.15
20

40

60

80

100

5. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to the Korea
Response of USA to KOR

60

80

100

-0.2
20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

6. Impact of a one standard deviation shock to Thailand

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

0.20

40

Response of THAI to SNG

0.12

Response to One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

Response of JAP to KOR
0.03

Response of USA to THAI

Response of JAP to THAI

0.05

0.04

0.00

0.02

0.02

0.15

0.01
0.10

0.00
-0.01

0.05

-0.02
0.00

-0.05

0.00

-0.10

-0.02

-0.03

-0.05

-0.04
20

40

60

80

100

-0.15
20

Response of HK to KOR

40

60

80

100

0.25

0.15

0.20
0.10
0.15
0.10

-0.04
20

Response of SNG to KOR

40

60

80

100

20

Response of HK to THAI

40

60

80

100

Response of SNG to THAI

0.10

0.15

0.05

0.10

0.00

0.05

0.05

0.05
0.00
0.00
-0.05

-0.05
20

40

60

80

100

0.00

-0.10

-0.05

-0.15
20

Response of KOR to KOR

-0.05

40

60

80

100

0.4

0.5

0.3

0.4

-0.10
20

Response of THAI to KOR

40

60

80

100

0.2

0.4
-0.1

-0.1
20

40

60

80

100

100

0.8

0.0

0.0

-0.1

80

0.0

0.1

0.0

60

1.2

0.1
0.2

0.1

40

Response of THAI to THAI
1.6

0.3

0.2

20

Response of KOR to THAI

-0.2
20

40

60

80

100

-0.4
20

40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

____________________
1

VAR estimated using two lags. The number of lags was obtained by initially estimating a system with
twelve lags and then sequentially paring down the model through a set of nested hypothesis tests. The
variables were ordered as follows: USA, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Korea, and Thailand.

