NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING HOME BIAS IN CONSUMPTION:
THE ROLE OF INTERMEDIATE INPUT TRADE

Russell Hillberry
David Hummels

Working Paper 9020
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9020

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

We wish to thank, without implication, Jack Barron, Tim Cason, Michael Ferrantino, John Ries, and seminar
participants at Purdue University for helpful comments; Cathy Buffington and Arnold Rezneck at the Center
for Economic Analysis for data assistance; and Purdue CIBER for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
U.S. International Trade Commission or any of its individual Commissioners.

© 2002 by Russell Hillberry and David Hummels. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Explaining Home Bias in Consumption: The Role of Intermediate Input Trade
Russell Hillberry and David Hummels
NBER Working Paper No. 9020
June 2002
JEL No. F12, F15, R3

ABSTRACT
We show that “home bias” in trade patterns will arise endogenously due to the co-location
decisions of intermediate and final goods producers. Our model identifies four implications of home bias
arising out of specialized industrial demands. Regions absorb different bundles of goods. Buyers and
sellers of intermediate goods co-locate. Intermediate input trade is highly localized. The effect of spatial
frictions on trade are magnified. These implications are examined and confirmed using a unique data
source that matches the detailed subnational geography of shipments to the characteristics of the shipping
establishments. Our results broaden the measurement and interpretation of home bias, and provide new
evidence on the role of intermediate inputs in concentrating production.

Russell Hillberry
U.S. Intl. Trade Commission
and Purdue University

David Hummels
Department of Economics
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu
Tel: 765-494-4495
Fax: 765-496-1778

I. Introduction
How does trade respond to geographic frictions? This question is distinct from,
but related to, work showing how much trade responds to frictions. For example, several
authors beginning with McCallum(1995) have demonstrated that nations trade far less
than simple models predict. Wolf (1999) shows that home bias occurs even within
national borders, as shipments within US states far exceed shipments across state
boundaries.
What explains the large degree of apparent home bias in consumption? In
answering this question, few papers step outside the simple gravity equation framework,
or address any phenomena other than the level of trade.1 Home bias itself is given
exogenously, determined either by preferences or by some hard to measure costs of trade.
This ignores the general equilibrium effect of frictions on firms’ location choices, and in
particular the geographic concentration of production.
In this paper we show how home bias might arise endogenously and derive
observable implications for production and absorption patterns, and the level and
composition of trade. We examine, and confirm, these hypotheses using data on
establishment-level shipments drawn from the private sample 1997 U.S. Commodity
Flow Survey (CFS) and the U.S. Census of Manufactures (CoM).
In our model, an extension of Krugman and Venables (1996), small trade costs
lead to co-location between firms producing intermediate goods and the firms that
intensively demand those intermediates. Consumers have identical preferences but
industrial demands fall more heavily on goods that are locally available. And they are
locally available because firms move to minimize trade costs. In this sense, demand
becomes endogenously “home biased” – home (consumer plus industrial) demand is
greatest for goods produced at home. This general equilibrium location response has
three observable effects. First, absorption varies over space in a manner related to the
structure of production. Second, frictions alter the composition of trade over space –
intermediate goods are traded locally, while final goods are shipped long distances.

1

Notable exceptions are Evans (2001) who augments the simple model with fixed costs of trade, and
Haveman and Hummels (2001), who consider home bias when home and foreign varieties are not
differentiated. These explanations provide, respectively, implications for the number of firms who export,
and the number of sources from which importers buy.

1

Third, trade barriers can have a far larger effect on trade than that supposed by the simple
models typically employed in the literature.
Our establishment-level data differ considerably from aggregate measures of
cross-border trade commonly employed in the home bias literature. They provide
tremendous detail on the commodity and geographic composition of shipments, and they
allow us to link this detail to the characteristics of the firms doing the shipping. The
tradeoff is that we cannot replicate certain exercises in the literature; in particular, we
cannot address the “true” magnitude of US-Canada border costs. We are able, however,
to examine joint hypotheses about production and trade within the United States that
provide insights into why we see home bias in shipment patterns.
In addition to the literature on home bias, this paper is related, and contributes, to
literatures on agglomeration economies and home market effects in trade. Of course, we
are not the first to suggest the existence of industrial agglomeration. Our emphasis lies in
showing how production concentration may help explain apparent home bias in
consumption and trade patterns. Further, most studies of agglomeration focus on
production location, while ignoring shipment implications. Our combined use of output
and shipment data provides unique empirical insights into the role that intermediate
inputs play in concentrating production.
Some of our insights are related to the literature on home market effects in trade,
which addresses the responses of output to locally idiosyncratic demand for goods.2
Unlike this literature, we endogenize demand variation, and provide related empirical
implications.
Finally, our work most directly contributes to the literature on trade barriers and
home bias. This literature typically addresses frictions through the lens of a gravity
model. Nations produce (or, equivalently, are endowed with) final goods that are
differentiated by origin. Trade barriers induce substitution between home and foreign
varieties in proportion to the size of the barrier, and the elasticity of substitution between
differentiated goods. Identifying these parameters has become a common focus of many
papers in the literature. Several authors attempt to identify the trade barriers that make

2

See Head and Ries (2001) and Davis and Weinstein (1999).

2

foreign goods, in a literal sense, much more expensive than domestic varieties.3 Other
authors provide econometric identification of substitution elasticities4 or show that
variation in substitutability helps to explain variation in measured border effects across
goods.5 By endogenizing production responses, we contribute to this literature in two
ways. First, we provide observable implications for phenomena other than trade levels.
Second, we show how typical estimation can overstate the magnitudes of barriers and
substitution elasticities.
Section II sketches a model of trade in intermediate and final goods that yields
predictions for the location of production and the shipment patterns that result. The
model also provides useful implications for the level and composition of home bias.
Section III describes our data. Section IV provides estimates. Section V concludes.
Section II. Theory
Our theoretical framework emphasizes the role of intermediate goods in
production location and trade. It extends the model in Krugman and Venables (1996),
which in turn nests the Krugman (1980) model of monopolistic competition and trade in
final goods.6 Since models of trade in final goods provide the theoretical baseline for
most of the work on home bias, we focus on departures from that baseline associated with
the presence of intermediate goods.
To briefly sketch model features, consumers have identical preferences that are
Cobb-Douglas over commodities and Dixit-Stiglitz over differentiated varieties within a
commodity group. Firms combine intermediate inputs, capital and labor to produce
differentiated goods. Depending on the input-output structure these goods may be used
as final goods, as intermediate inputs, or both. Capital and labor are mobile across
sectors within a region, but immobile across regions. Firms move across regions in order

3

Foreign exchange volatility, language ties, immigration, colonial relationships, information about foreign
markets, and shipping costs have all been suggested as potential explanations for barriers. See Anderson
and van Wincoop (2001b), Helliwell (1996), Head and Ries (1998), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000)
Rauch(1999).
4
Some examples include Clausing (2001), Head and Ries (2001), and Hummels (1999a).
5
Evans (2000).
6
The extension is to include two primary factors and to experiment with different forms of the input-output
matrix. Including capital is useful because it allows us to explore gradations of specialization, as opposed
to the complete concentration of production which tends to result from single factor models.

3

to maximize profits. We use this model to explore spatial variation in production,
absorption, shipment levels, and shipment characteristics. We describe the most general
model, and note restrictions that tie it to other models in the literature.
Throughout our discussion we suppress subscripts where possible. Subscripts i
and j identify region of origin and destination, respectively. Superscripts k and s
represent input and output commodities, respectively. For expositional purposes, we treat
the elasticity of substitution among varieties (σ), and shipping costs (g) as common
across sectors. We relax these restrictions in the estimating equations. We also assume
the fixed input requirement, a, and the unit input requirement, b, are constant across
sectors.
Manufacturers use fixed and marginal quantities of an input Z to produce their
variety q.7 Z is composed of capital, labor, and a vector of intermediate bundles.
(1) Z is = ( Capis )

s
µCap

( Lsi )

µ Ls

∏ s ( M iks ) ;
µ ks

s
µCap
+ µ Ls + ∑ k µ ks = 1

s
where Cap and L are the capital and labor employed in sector s, µCap
, µ Ls and µ ks are the

respective cost shares of capital, labor and sector k intermediates in the production of s,
and M is an intermediate bundle of varieties of k used to produce s. M takes the form
(2) M ks =

(∑

(mnk )θ
n

)

1

θ

; θ = 1 − 1/ σ ,

where mnk is the quantity of firm n’s output from sector k that is used in sector s.
Cost minimization implies that the industry s expenditure on intermediate k can
be written
(3) Pi k M iks =

µ ks
s
( wi Lsi + rCap
i
i ),
s
µ Ls + µ cap

where w is the wage, r is the return on capital, and P k is a price index. The sum of
factor payments is value added in sector s; dividing through by the expenditure shares on
capital and labor gives gross output, X.
Pi k M iks = µ ks X is

7

For notational simplicity we define Z in terms of input usage by all firms in a particular region and sector.
Since the firms are symmetric they will each employ an equal share of the total Z.

4

To get total expenditure on good k in region j, we sum over industrial demands
originating from each sector s plus consumer demands
(4) E kj = η k Y j + ∑ µ ks X is
s

Total absorption depends on the output mix (expressed in terms of sector s gross output),
input-output arrangements (which define η and µ ), and total household income Y.
Given that the upper-tier of the production and utility functions are Cobb-Douglas, total
absorption is invariant to prices.8
Prices do determine the distribution of purchases over potential suppliers. Region
j’s total intermediate demand for region i’s output is the sum of each sector’s
intermediate demands:
kD

(5) mij

(p g ) µ
=
∑
( P )
−σ

k
i

ij

k
j

1−σ

s
k

X is

s

where p is the factory gate price. Similarly, consumer demand for each variety is
k
ij

(6) c

(p g )
=
k
i

−σ

ij

η kY j ,

( P )

k 1−σ

j

where ηk is Cobb-Douglas expenditure share for industry k. Firms sell to both
consumers and to downstream firms. Summing (5) and (6) produces a characterization of
total demand in region j for the output of a firm in industry k, region i:
kD

(7) qij = cnjk + mnjk

(p g )
=
( P )
k
i

−σ

ij

k
j

E kj .

1−σ

The f.o.b. value of commodity k shipments from region i to j represents the
product of the number of industry k firms in region i (N), the region i price, and region j’s
demand per firm (7):
N ik ( pik )

(g )
( P )
1−σ

(8) T = N p q =
k
ij

k
i

k
i

k
i

ij

k
j

1−σ

−σ

E kj

.

8

We employ this setup so that absorption variation arises only through changes in the composition of
output. A more general upper level utility and production structure would allow expenditures to vary in
response to prices.

5

Summing i’s shipments over all destinations returns region i’s gross output in each sector.
Gross output can be represented N is pisV , where V is a function of exogenous parameters
s
) of total sales.
a,b, and σ. Labor (Capital) income is equal to the fraction µ Lk ( µCap

Thus, gross output can be related to value added as
(9) N ik pikV =

Yi k
k
µ Lk + µCap

where Y is industry k value added in region i. Substituting (9) and (4) into (8) we arrive
at the following bilateral trade prediction:

(10) Tijk = V −1

Yi k
k
µ Lk + µCap

−σ
 k
s
s
k
 η Y j + ∑ µ k X j  ( pi gij )
s


1−σ
k
P

( )

.

j

Note that the level of shipment is sensitive to the intermediate content of industry k in
region i, which may be related in equilibrium to trade frictions. This is assumed away in
models without intermediate goods. In those models a region’s shipments (a gross output
measure) are assumed to add up to its gross domestic product (a value added measure).9
The model is written to allow for the most general depiction of the input-output
structure. More familiar models are nested within this model. Much of the geography
k
literature abstracts away from factor substitution ( µCap
= 0 ). Krugman and Venables

(1993) assume industries demand only their own inputs ( µ kk > 0, µ ks = 0 for s ≠ k ). More

restrictive still is the multi-sector version of the Krugman (1980) model of monopolistic
competition, which contains no role for intermediates ( µ ks = 0, ∀s, k ). This final
restriction is of particular interest.
Consider the implications of setting intermediate shares to zero. The bilateral
trade prediction collapses to:
(11) T = V
k
ij

−1

Yi k (η k Y j )( pik g ij )

( )
Pjk

1−σ

−σ

.

9

Authors who attempt to square these measures typically gross up value added by a common economywide gross output/value added ratio. This is inappropriate when GO/VA varies over space, as we
demonstrate below.

6

Equation (11) is the gravity equation, and motivates much of the empirical literature on
bilateral trade patterns and home bias. Most typically it is implemented with an
aggregate equation, dropping commodity superscripts, and setting η = 1 . We focus on
the empirical implications of the more general model in which intermediate goods play a
role in production and trade.
The model is closed under the assumption that factor prices are equalized across
sectors within a region. Given particular characterizations of geography (the number and
size of regions, and shipping costs between them), endowments, preferences, and
technology (input-output relationships, and elasticities of substitution), one can
numerically solve for prices, the output and absorption mix, and the patterns of trade that
result. For example, under assumptions of extreme symmetry (two identical regions and
two equally-sized and identically parameterized sectors), Krugman and Venables (1993)
show that industries tend to agglomerate completely.10

We explore the empirical implications of agglomeration, and the endogenous
home bias it creates. Outcomes of interest include 1) the composition of regional demand,
2) the co-location of industry, 3) the characteristics of bilateral shipments, and 4) the size
of interregional trade flows.
Implication 1: The composition of absorption varies across states due to industrial
demands.

A well-known feature of U.S. manufacturing is production agglomeration, that is,
the output mix varies over regions.11 Since industries purchase different input bundles,
regional variation in the output mix should also imply regional variation in industrial
demands, with a corresponding effect on the composition of regional expenditures.
In our model, this is formalized in equation (4), which describes state i
expenditure on commodity k. Expenditures depend on intermediate demands, and
intermediate demands depend on a state’s output mix. If a state has a large auto sector, a
greater share of that state’s expenditure will go toward auto parts. Equation (4) nests the
10

There is one equilibrium in which the two industries evenly divide between the two regions. However,
this is a knife-edged solution that is not stable with respect to small perturbations.
11
See Krugman (1991) and Ellison and Glaeser (1997)

7

case of no intermediate demands, or µ sk = 0 ∀s, k . In this case, expenditures arise only
from consumer demands, and the expenditure share on k, η k , is uniform across states.

Implication 2: Trade costs induce co-location between buyers and sellers of
intermediates.

To demonstrate co-location we simulate a two-region, two-sector (autos, apparel),
two factor (capital, labor) version of the model. The regions are of similar size and have
very similar factor endowments, though region A is slightly more capital abundant. To
analyze the role of intermediate goods in this model we assume the technology in Table 1
Table 1. A simple input-output matrix

Inputs

Demands
Industrial
Consumer
Auto
Apparel ηk

Auto µ
Apparel 0
Labor 0.5 − 0.5µ
Capital 0.5 − 0.5µ

0
0
0.7
0.3

.5
.5
0
0

Consumer expenditure shares on the two goods are equal. Apparel uses no intermediate
inputs and is relatively labor intensive. The auto industry expends µ on auto industry
inputs (parts), with remaining gross output shares split evenly between labor and capital.
We vary the importance of auto industry inputs over a range (0, 0.45) in order to examine
how the strength of the agglomeration force depends on the intermediate shares.
We report four outcomes of the model: production concentration/uniformity,
absorption uniformity, co-location, and home bias. First, write the industry k share of
region i value-added as yik = Yi k / Yi , and the industry k share of region j absorption
(expenditure) as e kj = E kj / E j . For the 2x2x2 model employed here it is easy to describe
the extent of agglomeration by reporting the share of autos in region A value-added. For

8

models with higher dimensions (and the empirics that follow), we define more general
measures of production and absorption uniformity for each commodity as
Yk

(12) PU k = ∑ min  i k , yi 
i
Y


E

AU k = ∑ min  ik , ei 
j
 Ek


where nation-wide value-added in industry k is Yk = ∑ j Y jk , region i’s share in nationwide value-added is yi , and similarly for expenditures. These measures of uniformity are
bounded (0,1]. If all regions produce a good in exact proportion to their share of national
production, PU=1 for that good. A highly non-uniform distribution of production yields
a measure close to zero.
We define co-location as the propensity of e kj yik to be large when trade costs
between regions i and j are low. In the two-region model, this can be simply
represented as a correlation between e kj yik and an indicator variable that takes value 1 for
i=j. Finally, we measure home bias in terms of the share of total shipments that occur
within a state.
Table 2 reports the effects of changes in µ on trade and location patterns. At

µ = 0 there is no force for agglomeration, and production shows a small degree of
specialization according to comparative advantage. Region A, which is slightly more
capital abundant than B, adds just over half of the value in auto production economywide.
Absorption is completely uniform. Home bias is small, as trade costs induce some
substitution by consumers toward local varieties.
As µ increases, the auto industry begins to agglomerate. A’s initial endowmentbased cost advantage in autos becomes more pronounced, as the greater local availability
of auto parts lowers the cost of auto production in A. Note that our setup with two
primary factors produces less extreme specialization than a single factor model. If we set
capital shares to zero, as in Krugman and Venables (1996), auto production shifts entirely
to region A for very small values of µ. In the two-factor model, endowment similarity
between regions creates a tendency toward evenly distributed production. Agglomeration
only occurs if intermediate goods shares, and the corresponding effect on auto prices, are
sufficiently large.

9

As µ increases, absorption also becomes non-uniform, reflecting the rising
importance of (regionally biased) industrial expenditures. However, absorption always
remains more uniform than production, reflecting the fact that consumer expenditures
remain perfectly uniform over space. The combination of production and absorption
concentration is captured by our measure of co-location, which shows that auto
expenditures and production are (causally) rising together in region A. These effects
become very strong as the intermediate share approaches half of gross output in autos.
Production is almost completely specialized, and shipments now exhibit a greater degree
of home bias. The technology for shipping goods has remained constant throughout this
exercise, but shipments are concentrated locally due to the agglomeration effect.
The co-location effect is related to a phenomenon described in the literature on
home market effects. That literature predicts final goods output will respond more than
proportionally to large local demand for final goods. However, Davis (1998) has shown
that home market effects are very sensitive to the assumption of a costlessly traded
numeraire sector. Our result, based on a model with symmetric trade costs in two
increasing returns sectors, suggests that home market effects are quite robust. They
simply require trade in intermediate goods.
Table 2. Co-location and the intermediate goods share

µ

Region A share
of value-added
in autos

Production
Absorption
Share of own
Uniformity
Uniformity
region shipments
k k
Corr( e j yi ,Border)
in trade
Autos Apparel Autos Apparel
0.94
0.95
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.55
0.93
0.95
1.00
1.00
-0.01
0.55
0.93
0.94
0.99
0.99
-0.01
0.55
0.92
0.93
0.99
0.99
-0.02
0.55
0.91
0.92
0.99
0.98
-0.02
0.55
0.89
0.91
0.98
0.97
-0.03
0.55
0.87
0.88
0.98
0.96
-0.04
0.55
0.83
0.83
0.97
0.94
-0.06
0.56
0.74
0.72
0.95
0.89
-0.09
0.59
0.60
0.50
0.93
0.80
-0.16
0.66

0.00
0.56
0.05
0.57
0.10
0.57
0.15
0.58
0.20
0.59
0.25
0.61
0.30
0.63
0.35
0.67
0.40
0.76
0.45
0.90
Parameterization: LA = 100; LB = 100; K A = 110; K B = 100; g = 1.1; σ = 2; a = 1.1; b = 1.1

10

Implication 3: Co-location affects the intermediate / final composition of shipments.

Co-location affects not only the level of shipments, but also the composition of
shipments. Firms that produce intermediates locate proximate to concentrated industrial
demands in order to minimize shipping costs. This pattern is clear in the preceding
simulation. These results also imply that, in equilibrium, intermediate goods are shipped
short distances while final goods travel long distances. Discerning this effect empirically
is quite difficult, as many goods double as intermediate inputs and final consumer goods.
Nevertheless, it is still possible to derive observable implications in terms of plant and
shipment characteristics.
To demonstrate, we adapt our earlier simulation by splitting the auto sector into
two parts – parts and assembly. We explore the implications of changes in the cost share
of auto parts in assembly ( µ12 ) using the following input-output structure
Table 3. Input-output structure with multiple production stages
Demands
Industrial
Consumer
Inputs
Auto Auto
Apparel ηk
parts assembly
0
.2
Auto parts 0.2
µ12
Auto assembly 0
Apparel 0
Labor 0.4

0.2
0
0.4-0.5 µ12

0
0
0.6

.3
.5
0

Capital 0.4

0.4-0.5 µ12

0.4

0

This setup illustrates several conceptual issues. Auto parts and assembly
producers face both industrial and consumer demands. This is typical of input-output
relationships, which makes it difficult to split goods on an intermediate/final basis from
the industrial classification system alone. However, the input-output structure provides a
useful measure of the degree to which the good is mostly intermediate or mostly final.
Simply, sectors with a higher ratio of gross output to value added (factor payments)
embody a higher value of intermediates and are closer to final good status.
Consider the implications of aggregating auto parts and assembly into one
observable sector called autos. If we compare autos to apparel, autos will have a higher
11

aggregate gross output/value added ratio (GO/VA). There will also be differences in
establishments’ GO/VA ratios within the auto sector - assembly has a higher GO/VA
than parts. Co-location implies that intermediates will locate proximate to final demand
to reduce payments of transport/border costs. By implication most cross-region (export)
shipments will be in assembled autos. As the share of intermediate inputs in output rises,
the share of exports in assembly will increase relative to the share of exports in parts.
We simulate the model over various parameterizations of µ12 . Table 4 shows the
relationship between production staging and endogenous home bias. As µ12 rises, the
gross-output to value added ratio (GO/VA) for assembly increases relative to the GO/VA
for parts. Changes in µ12 have a similar effect on the internal share of shipments, which
rises for both parts and assembly. Two effects are at work here. First, auto parts
shipments become more local as a larger share of shipments go to an agglomerated
assembly sector. Second, the degree of agglomeration within each sector rises as
increases in µ12 intensify small location advantages – both assembly and parts sectors
shift even more production to region A. This geographic movement leads to increasing
local intensity of own-sector intermediate trade. The net result of these two effects is that
home bias rises in both sectors, but more quickly in the parts sector.
Table 4 also shows implications for the auto sector relative to the apparel sector.
As the intensity of staging rises, the GOVA ratio of autos rises relative to apparel. The
co-location of parts with assembly minimizes the need to export parts, and the own
region share of trade in the aggregated auto good rises with µ12 . Since all demand for
apparel is final, there is no endogenous home bias in apparel.12
The predictions developed here relate an establishment characteristic, plant-level
GOVA ratio, to an establishment’s propensity to export. One can also describe this
prediction in terms of a shipment characteristic, unit prices measured as the shipment’s
ratio of value over weight. The weight of assembly sector output is, at a maximum,
given by the combined weight of parts inputs. However, the value of the assembly sector
12

The slight increases in domestic share of apparel shipments are due to relative factor price movements.
By reducing factor demands in the capital intensive sector, we raise wages. Region B, which has a slight
comparative advantage in labor-intensive apparel, receives a larger share of income, and is able to
purchase a greater share of all final goods. Increased purchases of apparel by B is not home bias, as
typically defined, it reflects only a change in relative regional incomes.

12

includes the value of parts plus the value of labor and capital services. The unit prices of
assembled autos will then exceed unit prices of parts. Co-location implies that
assemblers are more likely to export, so unit prices of exports should exceed unit prices
of domestic shipments. The same logic applies in continuous space, unit prices should be
rising in distance shipped. We show in an appendix that, given standard formulations of
shipping costs, this result requires intermediate-final goods staging.
Table 4. Model Outcomes: Staging and Spatial Frictions

µ12

GO VAassembly Share of own region

GO VAautos Share of own region
shipments in
shipments in
GO VAapparel
GO VAparts
parts
assembly
autos
Apparel
0.05
1.07
0.59
0.57
1.30
0.58
0.52
0.10
1.14
0.63
0.59
1.34
0.61
0.52
0.15
1.23
0.68
0.60
1.38
0.64
0.53
0.20
1.33
0.69
0.61
1.43
0.65
0.53
0.25
1.45
0.70
0.61
1.47
0.66
0.53
0.30
1.60
0.71
0.61
1.52
0.67
0.53
0.35
1.78
0.73
0.61
1.57
0.67
0.53
0.40
2.00
0.74
0.62
1.62
0.68
0.53
0.45
2.29
0.75
0.63
1.69
0.70
0.53
Parameterization: LA = 100; LB = 100; K A = 110; K B = 100; g = 1.1; σ = 2

Implication 4: Co-location magnifies the effect of trade frictions on trade volumes.

A commonly used baseline model for predicting trade flows is the gravity
equation, which is frequently motivated by an appeal to the structural model in equation
(11). In that model, the elasticity of trade volumes (T) with respect to trade frictions (g)
is given by the elasticity of substitution between varieties (σ). However, the model in
equation (11) assumes that production location is not responsive to costs. If production
location is allowed to respond, the elasticity of trade with respect to frictions may be
much larger than σ.
In the more general model, trade frictions will affect trade volumes through two
channels as seen in equation (10). The direct effect occurs as frictions (g) change relative
prices, inducing substitution toward proximate varieties. This is the only effect captured
by models that ignore production location. The indirect effect occurs through colocation. Firms linked closely in the input-output structure locate nearby so as to

13

minimize trade costs. We previously defined co-location as a correlation between
e kj yik and trade frictions and demonstrated it as an outcome of our theoretical model.

Note that the expenditure and value-added shares are arguments in the shipment
equation (10). If the composition of output and absorption, e kj yik , is correlated with
frictions and is omitted from estimates of the shipment equation, trade barrier variables
will pick up direct and indirect effects of frictions. This magnification effect can be seen
very clearly in the preceding simulations. As the use of intermediate goods rises, colocation occurs, and an increasing share of shipments stay local. True trade costs remain
constant throughout the simulation, but their effect on trade flows is magnified by colocation.
In a sense, one can think of magnification in terms of omitted variables bias, as
omitting production and absorption measures biases the coefficient on trade barriers away
from their true values. It is not a spurious bias, in the sense that frictions ultimately cause
both direct and indirect effects. But magnification, if incorrectly interpreted, may lead
researchers to confuse big trade barrier coefficients for large price wedges between
locations.
We propose co-location effects as possible answers to several puzzles in the
gravity literature. National borders are only one of a serious of implicit barriers that seem
to have unusually large impacts on the geography of bilateral trade. Unexpectedly large
gravity model coefficients on currency unions (Rose and van Wincoop 2001) and
regional trade agreements (Frankel, Stein and Wei 1996) might well be explained by
estimation bias associated with the co-location of industry.
Co-location also serves as a potential explanation for a puzzle proposed by Head
and Mayer (2000), who find that European flows exhibit less home bias than North
American flows, even though trade frictions are thought to be higher in Europe. If high
trade frictions in Europe prevent co-location, as Krugman and Venables (1993) suggest,
our model would predict a smaller degree of home bias in European data, even though
trade costs were larger.

14

Section III. Data

In order to examine our theoretical implications we require geographically
detailed, commodity-level data on output, absorption, shipment levels, shipment
characteristics, and plant characteristics. The primary data source we use is the raw data
file from the 1997 U.S. Commodity Flow Survey. The CFS is collected every five years
by the U.S. Census Bureau, which chooses a stratified sample of U.S. mining,
manufacturing, and wholesale establishments. The sampled establishments report
characteristics of a random sample of their shipments. Each shipment record contains the
shipment’s weight, value and commodity classification,13 an establishment identifier, the
shipper’s (SIC) industrial classification, the zip code of the shipment’s origin and
destination and the actual shipping distance between them, a binary variable denoting
shipments bound for export, and the country of export to which export shipments are
bound, and the shipment’s sampling weight.14
These are the best available data documenting sub-national shipments, and are
substantially better for our purposes than the publicly available CFS data used by Wolf
(2000) and Anderson and van Wincoop (2001a), or the Statistics Canada data employed
by McCallum (1995) and subsequent authors. There are several advantages to using the
CFS raw data file. First, the data are drawn from stratified random samples of actual
shipments. This is in sharp contrast with the Statistics Canada data, which are imputed
from at least ten distinct data sources.15 Second, establishment identifiers in the CFS also
allow us to match shipments data to establishments in the Census of Manufactures
(CoM). We use this link to identify characteristics of the shipping establishments.
Third, the CFS data contain detail on the commodity shipped, geography of
shipments, and the SIC of the shipper. Studies of home bias typically employ aggregate

13

In 1997, the Census Bureau used the Standard Classification of Transported Goods (SCTG) classification
system, which can be concorded to 3-4 digit SIC. The SCTG system was developed by U.S. and Canadian
statistical agencies for use in studies of transportation. In our sample with five-digit commodity detail,
there are 504 commodity groups.
14
The value and weight of shipments are calculated by multiplying reported estimates by the inverse of the
sampling weight. Other reported information that goes unused in this study include a flag for shipments of
hazardous materials, and the shipment mode used to transport the good.
15
The Statistics Canada documentation of the imputation algorithm is 48 pages long.

15

data, which is inappropriate for examining the composition hypotheses that interest us.16
Zip-code level geographic detail is unprecedented in studies of this type, which usually
rely on province or state level data. This also allows a precise calculation of distance
shipped, unlike previous studies that must impute distances, using, for example, the
distance between states’ largest cities. Establishment-level SIC data also allow us to
distinguish wholesale shipments from producer shipments. This distinction is important
because wholesale shipments have a substantially different economic function than
shipments from manufacturers. As we show below, wholesale shipments exhibit quite
different spatial characteristics. Failing to separate these activities can result in a
misleading picture of trade costs.17
The U.S. Input-Output table (Bureau of Economic Analysis) is projected onto
CoM state output figures to predict a state’s intermediate demands. Combining the three
data sets (CFS, CoM, and input-output tables) requires some aggregation because each
data set uses a different classification system. In most cases, concorded data can be
reported at the 4-digit SIC level. In some manufacturing categories, 3-digit SIC is the
lowest level of aggregation that allows a reasonably consistent concordance. Mining and
agricultural shipments are reported at the two-digit level of SIC. In total, there are 290
sectors that remain after the aggregation necessary to ensure consistent concordances.
The zip-code to zip-code distances reported in the Commodity Flow Survey
provide excellent detail on internal shipment distances within the U.S. To estimate
distances traveled by export shipments, we add Hummels’ (1999b) estimates of the sealane distances between U.S. ports and ports in the country of destination to the CFS
figures documenting the distance from zip-code of origin to the port of exit.
Unfortunately, there is no information on internal distances within the importing country.
These distances are assumed to be small, relative to internal U.S. distances plus U.S. to
port of entry distances. This treatment is not appropriate for two countries, Canada and

16

Our data are also considerably more disaggregated than used in the few previous studies that use
moderately disaggregated data. See Helliwell (1998), Anderson and Smith (1999), and Hillberry
(forthcoming).
17
Wolf (2000) does not adjust public-use CFS data for the presence of wholesale shipments. Anderson
and van Wincoop(2001a) propose to eliminate wholesale shipments by scaling all shipment values down
uniformly so that total shipments equal manufacturers shipments. Because wholesale shipments are highly
localized this adjustment results in overstating short shipments and understating long shipments.

16

Mexico, so shipments bound for Canada and Mexico are excluded for most of the
analysis of international commodity movements.
Section IV. Econometric Specification and Results

The model in section II provides predictions in four broad areas: absorption, colocation, shipment levels, and shipment and plant level characteristics. We describe data
exercises for each prediction below.
Absorption

We provide two exercises. First, we document the degree to which production
and absorption are non-uniform over US states. Second, we attempt to explain
absorption levels for each commodity and state using data on technology and output.
Define total actual absorption of a commodity k in state j using the sum of all
CFS shipments (T) from all source states i, to absorbing state j (including i=j) in that
commodity.
cfs
(13) E cfs
jk = ∑ i =1 Tijk
50

Commodity k is defined as a 4 digit SIC category. We also define eCFS
as the share of k
jk
in j’s total absorption. Predicted absorption is taken from equation (4) of our model, and
is the sum of personal consumption expenditures of commodity k, plus industrial
demands for commodity k.
k
s
s
(14) E IO
jk = η Y j + ∑ s µ k X j

This is implemented by taking state-level data on personal income and value-added by
industry, and taking expenditures shares ( η , µ ) from the US input-output table. This
assumes that technology is identical across states, and across firms within an industry.
We define the degree of absorption and production uniformity for a given 4-digit SIC
commodity using the indices in equation (12). If we assume away intermediate demands
( µ ks = 0 ∀k , s ), production shares may vary over space, but absorption will be uniform

(AU=1). In contrast, the model with industrial demands allows non-uniformity in both
absorption and production, as related phenomena.

17

Figure 1 plots predicted absorption uniformity against actual absorption
uniformity for goods measured at the 4-digit SIC level. Actual absorption is not uniform.
Most of the observations lie below the forty-five degree line – actual absorption is less
uniform than one would predict given industrial demands described by the 4-digit input
output table. We interpret this as evidence that our input-output data are still too
aggregated, and that there is substantial within-industry heterogeneity in intermediate
input demands. This is consistent with recent work by Bernard and Jensen (1997)
documenting within-industry heterogeneity in factor demands.
The table accompanying Figure 1 reports summary statistics for our uniformity
measures. The results are intuitive. Neither production nor absorption are uniform, but
production is less uniform than absorption. This is consistent with our model, which
suggests that uniform personal consumption expenditures prevent absorption from
becoming too idiosyncratic. All three uniformity measures are positively correlated.
Commodities that we predict will be absorbed less uniformly are in fact absorbed less
uniformly; commodities that are produced less uniformly are also absorbed less
uniformly (using either measure).
Next, we regress the actual absorption of a (4-digit SIC) commodity k in state j,
measured as a share of j’s total absorption, on the predicted share of absorption (defined
in (14) above).
= β1e IO
(15) eCFS
jk
jk + ak + ε jk

The basic regression results are reported in the first column of Table 5. The second
column excludes personal consumption expenditures from the predicted absorption
equation, leaving only intermediate demands. The third and fourth columns repeat these
estimates after excluding wholesale trade from the CFS data. All regressions pool over
all commodities18 and include a commodity fixed effect.19

18

We also estimated equation (15) separately for each of 288 distinct 4 dig SIC sectors. Results are
qualitatively similar, though in general the coefficients were larger and the regression fit was somewhat
worse.
19
The fixed effect soaks up variation due to concordance problems in mapping the SCTG categories in the
CFS to the SIC categories used with the state output and IO table data.

18

Table 5. Predicting Commodity Absorption by State
Dep. Var
Indep. Var
β
Adj R2
# of
observations

All shipments
All
Industrial
expenditures
expenditures
0.554
0.329
(0.015)
(0.008)
0.67
0.68
16000
16000

Wholesale shipments excluded
All
Industrial
expenditures
expenditures
0.684
0.412
(0.020)
(0.012)
0.47
0.46
16000
16000

Commodity-specific fixed effects employed for each the 4-digit SIC category. All coefficients significant
at the 1% level.

Table 5 indicates that actual absorption shares closely match our predicted shares.
This result is in marked contrast to the literature on international shipments. Harrigan
(1995) finds no relationship between the commodity structure of a country’s imports and
the output mix of the country. We find that the production structure of US states, and
their resulting industrial demands, are strongly related to idiosyncrasies in the absorption
patterns of the states.
Co-location

Our theoretical model predicts that buyers and sellers of intermediates will colocate in order to minimize trade costs. To examine this, we test to see if production and
absorption shares are matched for a given state pair. We estimate
k
k
k
(16) ( eCFS
jk y j ) = β1 ln DISTij + β 2OwnStateij + β 3 ADJ ij + a + ε ij

The left hand side is constructed by taking all (ij) pairwise combinations of state j’s
actual absorption (from the CFS) and state i’s production shares for a particular
commodity k. If production and absorption are more likely to be matched for proximate
states, this is evidence of co-location. We regress our measure on barrier proxies,
including distance, and dummy variables for own-state (OwnState=1 when i=j), and
bordering state (ADJ =1 for i adjacent to j). This formulation differs from the literature
on home market effects, which takes demand variation as given exogenously, and
estimates the effect of that variation on output. Our model suggests that output and
absorption are determined endogenously, and we treat their product as the dependent
variable.

19

We also estimate equation (16) using CFS absorption data that excludes
wholesale shipments. Regressions pool over all 4-digit SIC commodities and include
commodity fixed effects. Coefficients are reported in terms of elasticities, evaluated at
the means of the left hand side variable.
Table 6 reveals that the closer are two states, the more closely matched is their
production and absorption structure. However, this effect operates primarily at very short
distances – distance is no longer statistically significant when own-state and adjacency
variables are included in the regression. Results are quite similar whether including or
excluding wholesale shipments from the absorption measure.
Table 6. Co-location over Space
Distance
Own State
Adjacent
# observations
Adj R2

All shipments
-0.085** -0.054*
-0.012
0.277*
0.421**
0.161*
303086
303086
303086
0.21
0.21
0.21

Wholesale shipments excluded
-0.091** -0.053
-0.017
0.332*
0.452**
0.140
271675
271675
271675
0.22
0.22
0.22

* significant at 1%
**significant at 5%

Co-location Effects on Shipment and Plant Characteristics
Section II shows that co-location effects appear not just in the output/absorption
mix and in shipment levels, but in the characteristics of the shipments themselves and the
plants doing the shipping. The simulation results shown in Table 4 display a particular
pattern of shipment characteristics. Because intermediate goods are demanded locally
and final goods are demanded in all locations, shipments of intermediate goods should be
more limited by distance. The model provides a useful guide for identifying how far an
establishment is along the production process: establishment gross-output to value-added
ratios, and shipment prices, will be rising in its stage of production.
We measure prices as the unit value-weight ratio for an individual shipment (s),
and regress the price on the distance it is shipped, and whether the shipment crossed an
international border.
(17) ln pijs = β1 ln Distij + BORDERij + ak + ε ijk
20

We include a vector of commodity specific fixed effects so that our identification comes
entirely within a commodity classification. While this might miss some staging effects
across categories, it is necessary given that the goods’ prices might vary considerably
over commodity groups for reasons unrelated to staging.
The base regression is reported in the first column of Table 7. We also provide
several robustness checks. For international shipments we know to which country the
good will be exported, but not where in the country it winds up. That is sufficient for
distant countries, but it is problematic for Canada and Mexico. The length of a shipment
from Seattle to Canada depends greatly on whether it is destined for Vancouver or
Montreal. Accordingly, we drop Canada and Mexico for columns 2-4. The spatial
characteristics of wholesale shipments differ from other goods, so we exclude these in
column 3, and consider only wholesale shipments in column 4.
Table 7 tells us that the factory gate price is rising in the distance it is shipped.
Prices are higher for export shipments than for domestic shipments. Our preferred
specification is in column three, which excludes wholesale shipments and the noisier
North American export destinations. A 10% increase in distance raises the unit value of
shipments by 8%. The unit values of export shipments are 31% higher than domestic
shipments. This is consistent with our staging story.
One alternative possibility for higher unit values is that long-distance shipments
and exports are of higher quality than local domestic shipments. Hummels and Skiba
(2001) show that the fas price of exports at the 10-digit commodity level is increasing in
distance, and interpret this as evidence of quality differences that arise from AlchianAllen effects. We are unable to reject this alternative explanation, but column 4 provides
some suggestion that our multiple-staging story is important. Wholesale shipments are
much less sensitive to distance and borders than are non-wholesale shipments. Since
staging is more likely in non-wholesale shipments, and wholesalers are just as likely to
exhibit Alchian Allen-type behaviors, we conclude that staging is at least partly
responsible for f.o.b. unit values rising with distance and border variables.

21

Table 7. Shipment Characteristics and Spatial Frictions
All shipments
Constant
Distance
Border
Adj R2
Observations

0.606
(0.002)
0.043
(0.0003)
0.253
(0.005)

Shipments to
Canada/Mexico
excluded
0.606
(0.002)
0.043
(0.0003)
0.348
(0.005)

Wholesale
shipments also
excluded
0.178
(0.002)
0.081
(0.0004)
0.311
(0.006)

Including only
wholesale
shipments
0.842
(0.002)
0.053
(0.0004)
0.075
(0.010)

0.71
5221504

0.71
5211096

0.73
2869971

0.69
2341125

Fixed effects, 5-digit sctg code absorbed. All coefficients significant at the 1% level

The staging story can be seen more directly in plant characteristics. The further
along in the value chain is a plant, the higher is the ratio of gross output to value added.
We match our shipments data to the plants from which those shipments originated. We
construct an average shipment distance for the shipments originating in each
establishment n, and then regress average distance shipped on the gross-output to value
added ratio of that establishment and a vector of commodity fixed effects.
 GO 
(18) ln DISTn = β ln 
 + ak + ε s
 VA  n

Similarly, we examine the effect of plant characteristics on the likelihood of exporting.
We estimate the share of that plant’s shipments that travel internationally given the
GO/VA of the plant.
 GO 
(19) ln ExpSharen = β ln 
 + ak + ε n
 VA  n

We also use a probit to estimate the probability that a shipment crossed an international
border given the GO/VA of the plant doing the shipping.
Table 8 tells us that, within an SIC, establishments with larger gross output to
value added ratios ship longer distances, export a larger share of their output, and are
more likely to be exporters. A 10% increase in an establishment’s gross output to value
added ratio raises the average distance it ships a given commodity by 0.9%. A 10%
increase in the GOVA ratio raises the share of a commodity that an establishment exports
22

by 0.04%. These results are consistent with our hypothesis that firms in earlier stages of
production ship shorter distances and are less likely to export than later-stage firms.
Table 8. Establishment Characteristics and Spatial Frictions
Dependent variable
Regression
technique
ln(go/va)
Adj R2
Observations

ln (Average
shipment distance)
OLS, 5-digit
commodity fixed
effects
0.094
(0.012)

Share of shipments
exported
OLS, 5-digit
commodity fixed
effects
0.004
(0.001)

Exporter dummy

0.16
77624

0.04
78175

0.04
78175

Probit 2-digit
commodity fixed
effects
0.055
(0.010)

All coefficients significant at 1% level.

Shipment levels: commodity regressions
We wish to identify the size of geographic frictions that operate directly through
changing the relative price of proximate v. distant goods, Table 6 identifies the indirect
effect of frictions, operating through changes in the production/absorption mix in space.
The remaining question is whether changing the production/absorption mix magnifies the
total effect of geographic frictions on trade volumes. Put another way, by controlling for
the production/absorption mix, we hope to separately identify the size of the direct effect.
If it is smaller than in an uncontrolled regression, this is evidence for magnification.
To test these hypotheses, we estimate versions of equation (10) in three ways.
(20) ln Tijk = a k + β1 ln Yi + β 2 ln Y j + β 3 ln( Distij ) + β 4OwnStateij + β 5 ADJ ij + ε ijk

( )

( )

(21) ln Tijk = a k + β1 ln Yi k + β 2 ln e kj + β 3 ln ( Distij ) + β 4OwnStateij + β 5 ADJ ij + ε ijk

(22) ln Tijk = a k + β 3 ln( Distij ) + β 4OwnStateij + β 5 ADJ ij + a j + ai + ε ijk

23

Each equation is estimated separately for each commodity on bilateral shipments
between all state pairs. The first includes aggregate income and output for the importing
and exporting state, along with trade barriers. This controls for state scale, but not
composition, and omits relative prices. The second adds predicted absorption of
commodity k for the importing state (defined in equation (14)), output of commodity k in
the exporting state, and trade barriers. This controls for state scale and composition, but
not relative prices. This equation is likely to suffer from simultaneity bias between
production/absorption shares and bilateral shipments if, for example, our regressions do
not include all the frictions that impede trade. For these reasons our preferred
specification is equation (22), as it employs vectors of importing and exporting state fixed
effects (ai, aj) to control for composition and prices. By controlling for relative prices in
this way, we can accommodate the Anderson and van Wincoop (2001a) critique of the
gravity literature in a parsimonious manner.
If magnification effects are important this should be evident in reduced trade
barriers coefficients between the first and third specifications. In other words, once we
control for composition and prices, the remaining barrier coefficients are more accurate
measures of the direct effect of barriers on relative prices of proximate and distant
varieties.
There are 160 commodity level regressions for each column in Table 9, which
presents a problem for conveying results concisely.20 We report the means and standard
deviations of the 160 estimated coefficients in order to describe the distribution of trade
barriers. We also report the number of coefficients from equations (21) and (22) that lie
within the confidence interval from equation (20) that ignores composition effects.
Several things are notable. First, there is a tremendous variation in estimated coefficients
across commodities. For many commodities, there is no significant effect of the included
barriers on shipment levels. This suggests that assuming common trade frictions across
sectors, as done implicitly in aggregate gravity regressions, is highly inappropriate.
Second, including composition effects improves the ability to explain shipment levels.
Production and absorption shares are significant in all estimates of equation (21) and the

20

Census disclosure rules also limit our ability to report results for specific commodities.

24

fit improves.21 Third, own-state and adjacency effects are cut dramatically by the
exclusion of wholesale shipments. This is a useful point to emphasize, as previous
authors in the home bias literature have tried to address the presence of wholesale
shipments in aggregate trade flows by uniformly reducing all trade flows by the
wholesale share of total shipments. Our results show that wholesale shipments are highly
localized, meaning that uniform reductions overstate the localized nature of remaining
industrial shipments.
What we do not find is strong evidence for the magnification effect. In
comparing estimates with and without fixed effects, the mean trade frictions are smaller
for the own-state and adjacency variables, but larger for the distance variable. And most
of the coefficients from the fixed effect regressions lie within the confidence intervals of
the coefficients that ignore composition. This suggests that the elasticity of trade with
respect to frictions is more or less the same whether or not we control for production and
absorption composition.
There are two possible interpretations of this result. One, even though we found
evidence for co-location it is not strong enough to create a noticeable magnification
effect. Two, the co-location and magnification effects we are looking for occur at a
highly disaggregated level. Heterogeneity below the level we can measure with this
commodity classification system will escape our vectors of fixed effects.

21

However, the potential for simultaneity bias gives us pause in interpreting these estimates.

25

Table 9. Commodity level shipments.
Sample
Control
variables
distij

All shipments
Yi,Yj
Yik,Yjk

Ownstate

2.08
(1.20)

Adjacent

0.73
(0.55)

-0.63
(0.40)
110
2.30
(0.95)
132
0.81
(0.53)

R2

0.30
(0.14)

0.38
(0.13)

-0.60
(0.45)

Excluding wholesale shipments
Origin/destination Yi, Yj Yik,Yjk Origin/destination
fixed effects
fixed effects
-0.90
-0.53
-0.56
-0.82
(0.43)
(0.47) (0.38) (0.41)
71
110
78
1.83
1.26
1.59
1.16
(0.98)
(1.34) (1.13) (1.19)
125
128
124
0.61
0.53
0.63
0.42
(0.37)
(0.55) (0.49) (0.53)
158
156
0.61
0.25
0.36
0.61
(0.09)
(0.15) (0.14) (0.09)

For each column 160 regressions are estimated. The table reports the mean and standard deviation of
estimated coefficients, not the standard errors for any particular coefficients. Numbers in italics are the
number of commodity-specific estimates that lie within the confidence interval of the estimates reported in
the first column.

Section V. Conclusion

Apparent home bias in consumption is one of the great puzzles confronted by
empirical trade research. We provide an explanation for home bias in trade levels that
also yields observable implications in terms of the composition of trade and the
characteristics of individual shipments and the firms’ doing that shipping. We bring this
theory to the data using detailed data on shipments and firms using the private sample
1997 U.S. Commodity Flow Survey and U.S. Census of Manufactures.
We have five major findings. One, absorption varies over space in strong relation
to the location of final production and corresponding industrial demands for intermediate
goods. Two, idiosyncratic production and absorption are matched in space, in the sense
that absorption of a good is highest when production of that good is large locally (and
vice versa). However, this phenomenon is highly local, operating within a state and in
neighboring states, but not over longer distances.
Three, the characteristics of shipments within a narrow commodity classification
vary markedly over space. Goods at the initial stages of the value chain travel very short
distances while goods at the end stages of the value chain travel long distances. Late

26

stage goods are also much more likely to be exported. This pattern is repeated in the
characteristics of the firms doing the shipping. Within a narrow industrial classification,
firms with a low ratio of gross output to value added (indicating they are early in the
value chain) ship short distances, while firms with high ratios of gross output to value
added (late in the value chain) ship long distances. Late stage firms are also much more
likely to be exporters.
Four, barriers to trade vary considerably over goods, but loom very large for the
median good. Five, we find no evidence that controlling for production location
eliminates the magnification effect of trade barriers – the elasticity of trade with respect
to barriers is unchanged whether or not we control for idiosyncratic production and
absorption. A possible explanation for this is that our goods classification system is
insufficiently granular, and intermediate-final linkages occur for very specific products.
In other words, it is not so much that auto parts co-locate with auto assembly plants, but
mufflers for Ford Explorer plants co-locate with the assembly of Ford Explorers.
In terms of future work, our results suggest that models intended to describe
geographic frictions should be amended to incorporate a broader set of responses to those
frictions. Incorporating intermediate goods into modeling appears especially important
for matching facts about co-location effects and non-uniform absorption over space.
Finally, research on home bias and trade frictions has focused almost entirely on trade
levels. Our results suggest the story of frictions may be told more richly in terms of trade
composition.

27

Bibliography
Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop 2001a, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper 8079, (January).
Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop 2001b. “Borders, Trade and Welfare,” NBER
Working Paper 8515, (October).
Anderson, Michael A., and Stephen L. S. Smith 1999, “Canadian Provinces in World
Trade: Engagement and Detachment” Canadian Journal of Economics 32
(February): 22-38.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen 1997, “Exporters, Skill Upgrading, and the
Wage Gap,” Journal of International Economics; 42(1-2), (February), pages 3-31.
Clausing, Kimberly 2001, “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in the Canada- United
States Free Trade Agreement,” Canadian Journal of Economics 34(3), (August),
pp. 677-696.
Davis, Donald R. 1998, “The Home Market, Trade, and Industrial Structure,” American
Economic Review, 88(5), (December), pp. 1264-1276.
Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein 1999, “Economic Geography and the Regional
Production Structure: An Empirical Investigation,” European Economic Review
(February) pp. 379-407.
Ellison, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser 1997, “Geographic Concentration in U.S.
Manufacturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy
(October) pp. 889-927.
Evans, Carolyn L. 2000, “National Border Effects and Heterogeneous Fixed Costs of
International trade,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo.
Evans, Carolyn L. 2001, “Big border effects, small border costs?” Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, mimeo.
Frankel, Jeffery, Ernesto Stein and Shang-Jin Wei 1996, “Regional Trading
Arrangements: Natural or Supernatural?” American Economic Review 86(2), (May)
pp. 52-56.
Harrigan, James 1995, “The Volume of Trade in Differentiated Products: Theory and
Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(2), (May) pp. 283-293.

28

Haveman, John and David Hummels 1999, “Alternative Hypotheses and the Volume of
Trade: Evidence on the Extent of Specialization,” University of Chicago mimeo
(January).
Head Keith and Thierry Mayer 2000, “Non-Europe: The Magnitude and Causes of
Market Fragmentation in the EU,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 136(2), pp. 284-314.
Head, Keith and John Ries 1998. “Immigration and Trade Creation: Evidence from
Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 31 (February): 47-62.
Head, Keith and John Ries 2001, "Increasing Returns Versus National Product
Differentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of US-Canada Trade," American
Economic Review.
Helliwell, John F. 1996. “Do National Borders Matter for Quebec’s Trade?” Canadian
Journal of Economics 29 (August): 507-522.
Helliwell, John F. 1998, How Much Do National Borders Matter? Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Hillberry, Russell (forthcoming), “Aggregation Bias, Compositional Change, and the
Border Effect,” Canadian Journal of Economics.
Hummels, David 1999a, “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs,” University of Chicago
mimeo (January).
Hummels, David 1999b, “Have International Transportation Costs Declined?” University
of Chicago, mimeo (November).
Hummels David and Alexandre Skiba 2001, “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An
Empirical Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture,” Purdue University
mimeo. (October).
Krugman, Paul 1980, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
Trade,” American Economic Review 70 (December), pp. 950-959.
Krugman, Paul 1991, Geography and Trade, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Krugman, Paul and Anthony Venables 1993, “Integration, Specialization, and
Adjustment.” NBER Working Paper 4559 (December).
Krugman Paul and Anthony Venables 1996, “Integration, Specialization, and
Adjustment,” European Economic Review 40 (April), pp. 959-967.
McCallum, John T. 1995, “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade
Patterns,” American Economic Review 85 (June), pp. 615-623.

29

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in Modern
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Working Paper 7777,
(July).
Rauch, James E. 1999, “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of
International Economics, 48 (June) pp. 7-35.
Rose, Andrew K. and Eric van Wincoop 2001, “National Money as a Barrier to
International Trade: The Real Case for Currency Union,” American Economic
Review 91(2), (May), pp. 386-90
Wolf, Holger C. 2000, “Intra-national Home Bias in Trade,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics 82(4) (November), pp. 555-563.

30

Figure 1. Predicted vs. Actual Absorption Uniformity

Actual Absorption Uniformity

1

0
0

Predicted Absorption Uniformity

1

Summary of uniformity measures
Median
Production
Absorption (Actual)
Absorption (Predicted)

0.71
0.84
0.91

Production
1
0.36
0.57

31

Correlation
Absorption (Actual)

Absorption (Predicted)

1
0.63

1

Appendix A: Price variation over space
In Section II we demonstrate a systematic relationship between trade frictions
(how far a good is shipped) and the price of the good, which in our model measures its
stage of production. In this appendix we demonstrate that, for the functional forms used
universally in this literature, this is not an implication of a model with a single stage of
production.
Our model nests a case where all goods are purchased solely for final
consumption ( µ ks = 0, ∀s, k ). Suppose that trade frictions are increasing in the distance
shipped and in the ratio of a shipment’s weight to value, reflecting the notion that heavier
goods are more expensive to ship. Formally, let freight charges on a shipment of variety
n from i to j ( f njk ) be represented as
ϕ

 ω nk 
A1) f =  k  F ( Dist ij )
 pn 
where ω is the unit weight, p is the f.o.b unit price, and F(Distij) is any increasing
function of distance. The weight to value ratio captured here is of special interest as it is
the inverse of the price measure we employ in the empirical section.
If all varieties within a category have the same per unit price and weight, freight
charges affect each variety equally, and it is trivial to show that the composition of the
traded bundle is independent of shipping costs. If instead varieties within a category
differ in their weight-value ratio, freight charges will vary over varieties. Does this affect
the average price (value/weight) of shipments over space?
The average price of shipments between regions i and j in commodity k is given
by the total value over the total weight. The total value of ijk shipments is calculated by
summing the value of shipments for each variety within ijk, and similarly for total
weight. Note that the shipment value of a particular variety can be written as unit price
times quantity, and the shipment weight can be written as unit weight times quantity.
−ϕσ


1−σ
 ωn 
−σ
k
k

 / Pj
k kD
η
p
Y
F
(
Dist
)
∑

n
j 
ij
p
q
k
∑n n nj n   pn 

T 

A2)
=
=
 
k kD
−ϕσ
ω
W
q


 ij ∑ n nj
1−σ
ω 
n
∑n ωnk η kY j  pn  F ( Distij )−σ  / Pj
 n


~k
−σ
k
Since η Yj , F (Dist ij ) , and Pj are common to all varieties, they factor out of both the
k
nj

( )

( )

numerator and denominator, and can be cancelled. The average per pound price of ijk
shipments can then be expressed as
−ϕσ

ω 
p  n 
∑
k
T 
n
 pn 
A3)   =
,
−ϕσ
 W  ij


ω
∑n ω nk  pn 
 n
Average prices are independent of trade frictions.
The intuition is straightforward. Heavier varieties face higher freight costs which
reduce quantities sold. But quantity sold appears in both the numerator and denominator,
k
n

32

so that the elasticity of total weight with respect to frictions is equal to the elasticity of
total value with respect to frictions. In other words, the average price is constant across
destinations and is given by a weighted average of f.o.b. prices divided by a weighted
average of unit weights.
It should be noted that this implication does not go through for more general (noniceberg) functional forms on trade frictions. The multiplicative property of the barriers is
critical for factoring distance terms out of (A2). The appropriateness of this assumption
is not within the scope of this paper, and we follow the functional form used universally
in this literature.22
The intuition in (A3) and (A4) applies to our multi-stage model if the econometric
procedure appropriately accounts for regional variations in expenditures, including
industrial demands, Ejk. Ejk replaces ηkYj in (A3), and it can be factored and cancelled in
the same fashion. Thus, the Krugman and Venables model predicts that shipment
characteristics are constant with respect to geographic frictions if the data are sufficiently
disaggregated.
This is not the case if an industrial category in the data contains multiple stages of
production. Suppose that earlier stages of production are likely to have higher
weight/value ratios as successive stages of production add more value than weight.23 We
show in the implications section that earlier stages will have stronger incentives to colocate. The response to trade costs is not simply a substitution away from heavy varieties
– it includes an endogenous location response correlated with distance and borders. Ejk
will not factor out as in A3, and per pound prices will tend to rise with distance.

22

For an exception, see Hummels and Skiba (2001).
Imagine that one stage produces parts and the second stage assembles them. In that case the second stage
adds only value and no weight.

23

33

