                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTRA-NATIONAL HOME BIAS: SOME EXPLANATIONS


                                            Russell Hillberry
                                            David Hummels


                                          Working Paper 9022
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9022


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2002




We wish to thank, without implication, Dan Kovenock and David Meyer for helpful comments; Cathy
Buffington and Arnold Rezneck at the Center for Economic Analysis for data assistance; and Purdue CIBER
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the U.S. International Trade Commission or any of its individual
Commissioners.


© 2002 by Russell Hillberry and David Hummels. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Intra-national Home Bias: Some Explanations
Russell Hillberry and David Hummels
NBER Working Paper No. 9022
June 2002
JEL No. F15, R12



                                            ABSTRACT

        Wolf (2000) demonstrates that trade within the U.S. appears substantially impeded by state
borders. We revisit this finding with improved data. We show that much intra-national home bias can
be explained by wholesaling activity. Shipments by wholesalers are much more localized within states
than shipments from manufacturing establishments. Controlling for relative prices and the use of actual,
rather than imputed, shipment distances also reduces home bias estimates.




Russell Hillberry                                               David Hummels
U.S. Intl. Trade Commission                                     Department of Economics
and Purdue University                                           Krannert School of Management
                                                                Purdue University
                                                                West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
                                                                and NBER
                                                                hummelsd@purdue.edu
                                                                Tel: 765-494-4495
                                                                Fax: 765-496-1778
I. Introduction
        Why do political boundaries shape the geographic pattern of trade? This question

has attracted considerable attention since McCallum’s (1995) finding that Canadian

interprovincial trade was twenty-two times larger than province-state trade. While the

magnitude of the McCallum estimate is surprising1, one can certainly identify reasons

why international borders impede trade. Presumably, national borders proxy for a wide

range of trading frictions, including tariffs and non-tariff measures imposed intentionally

by national governments, as well as costs associated with customs clearance and currency

exchange that inevitably arise when shipping goods across differing national

jurisdictions.

        Such frictions are notably absent in trade between U.S. states, which are

constitutionally enjoined from impeding interstate commerce. Yet, it still appears that

state borders inhibit trade flows. Using the public sample of the 1993 US Commodity

Flow Survey, Wolf (2000) estimated that intra-state trade was more than 4 times larger

than trade between states. This leaves us with two questions. One, why do arbitrarily

drawn political boundaries like U.S. state borders appear to pose a barrier to trade? Two,

is there economic significance to these borders not previously appreciated?

        An answer may be found by noting that Wolf’s data included shipments

originating in both manufacturing and wholesale establishments.2 One can broadly think

of manufacturers and wholesalers as a kind of hub and spoke arrangement. Goods are

manufactured in the hub and dispersed, sometimes at great distances, to a number of

wholesaling spokes spread throughout the country. The wholesaling spokes then


1
  The magnitudes are both surprising and in question. See Anderson and vanWincoop (2001).
2
  This implies that any particular good may be counted twice in the shipments data; once when shipped
from the manufacturer, and once when shipped from the wholesaler.


                                                    1
distribute, over very short distances, to retailers. As a result, lumping wholesaling and

manufacturing shipments together may provide a misleading picture of spatial frictions.

         The reason that manufacturers would choose to employ this hub and spoke

system is itself quite interesting and informative about spatial frictions. Put another way,

one might ask: if manufacturers find it easy to ship over long distances, why don’t

wholesalers? And the answer may be that the kinds of geographic frictions wholesalers

face are quite different from those faced by manufacturers.

       Several possibilities suggest themselves. Wholesaling may be employed in order

to efficiently manage inventories and respond rapidly to demand fluctuations. Hub and

spokes system may also be used to exploit the relative efficiency of long and short haul

transportation modes. That is, large trucks or rail are used for movements between

manufacturers and wholesalers, while smaller trucks transport between wholesalers and

retailers. In both cases, wholesale shipments are excessively local relative to

manufacturing shipments because the cost of some geographic frictions related to

distribution rise sharply in stages of the value-chain immediately prior to consumption.

Returning to Wolf’s result, it is not that state borders matter, per se, but that borders

proxy for very short shipment lengths.

       It may also be that the political boundaries are of direct interest due to contractual

stipulations binding on wholesale shippers. Manufacturers are legally allowed to

segment markets by designating explicit geographic boundaries that their wholesalers are

not allowed to cross. Such segmentation may be an effective way to engage in resale

price maintenance, and state boundaries are an obvious way to divide territory.




                                               2
        All three explanations can be thought of as kinds of geographic frictions, but they

are quite different than straightforward transportation cost frictions typically supposed.

The question then becomes whether the responsiveness of shipments to geographic

frictions depends as much on the nature of the shipper as on the good being shipped. If

yes, then this informs us about the nature, as well as the size, of the frictions in question.

        To answer these questions we employ a private use sample of the 1997 US

Commodity Flow Survey.3 These data provide two significant benefits relative to the

1993 public use sample used by Wolf. First, we can separate wholesale shipments from

shipments by manufacturing establishments in order to distinguish their respective spatial

characteristics. Second, we observe actual distances shipped rather than having to impute

distances from the physical distribution of a state’s population. We find that actual

shipment distances within states are much shorter than Wolf’s measure of distance

suggests, with the effect quite pronounced within states.

        We incorporate information on shipment distances and wholesale versus

manufacturing establishments in our estimates, and also control for goods’ prices in a

manner consistent with the Anderson and van Wincoop (2001) critique of the gravity

literature. Our results suggest state border effects are still significant, but roughly a third

as large as Wolf estimates.



II. Estimation Approach and Data

        We use a gravity equation to estimate the volume of shipments between any state

pair ij, including within state trade. This equation is typically motivated by a model in


3
 Hillberry and Hummels (2002) employ this data to link intermediate goods trade with industry
agglomeration.


                                                   3
which goods are differentiated by origin and consumers uniquely value each variety.

With CES preferences the value of bilateral trade M, between origin i and destination j, is

given by:

                         1−σ
                     pi 
        M ij = YY
                i j           tij−σ
                     P 
(1)
                     j

where Y denotes income, pi / Pj the price of output in region i relative to the consumer

price index in region j, tij the ad valorem iceberg cost of trade between regions, and σ

the elasticity of substitution among varieties of output. Wolf estimates a reduced form of

(1) by taking logs and measuring the trade friction (tij) using distance shipped and a

dummy variable, Ownstate, for whether the flow remains within the originating state

(i=j). Relative prices are ignored.



(2) ln M ij = a0 + β1 ln Yi + β 2 ln Y j + β 3 ln DISTij + β 4OWNSTATEij + eij



        In order to make comparisons directly with Wolf, we use (2) as our baseline

regression. Our contributions come primarily in providing significantly improved data on

shipment values, and on distance shipped, as detailed below. Anderson and van Wincoop

(2001) show that the specification in equation (2) leads to biased estimation because, in

equilibrium, the omitted price index term from equation (1) is related to the size and

distribution of trade barriers. We incorporate their critique in a parsimonious fashion by

including vectors of importing and exporting state fixed effects. This also controls for

idiosyncrasies outside of the model such as variation in the share of state output devoted

to nontraded services.


                                                 4
        The primary data source we use is the raw data file from the 1997 U.S.

Commodity Flow Survey (CFS). The CFS is collected every five years by the U.S.

Census Bureau, which chooses a stratified random sample of shipments from U.S.

mining, manufacturing, and wholesale establishments.4 Reported shipment

characteristics include the shipment’s weight, value and commodity classification, an

establishment identifier, the shipper’s (SIC) industrial classification, the zip code of the

shipment’s origin and destination and the actual shipping distance between them.

        These are the best available data documenting sub-national trade because the data

are drawn from stratified random samples of actual shipments. This is in sharp contrast

with the Statistics Canada data, which are imputed from multiple data sources. The

private use sample provides two improvements relative to the publicly available CFS data

used by Wolf (2000) and Anderson and van Wincoop (2001): the ability to

include/exclude wholesale shipments and the ability to measure actual shipment

distances.

        Wholesale shipments are important for reasons addressed above. Estimates of the

Ownstate coefficient in (2) can be highly sensitive to the measure of internal state

distances because these distances set the baseline against which actual Ownstate trade

flows are compared. Wolf relies on a simple measure of internal distance (Dii):

                        Popi ,1         
(3) Dii = 2 Di ,12 1 −                  
                    Popi ,1 + Popi ,2 

where Popi,1 and Popi,2 are the populations of the first and second largest cities in i,

respectively, and Di,12 is the distance between the two largest cities in i.


4
 The procedure samples a set of establishments, then randomly samples shipments for the chosen
establishments.


                                                   5
         Several authors construct more sophisticated distance measures by linking them

directly to a model of spatial activity which treats output as proportional to population

and fixed in space.5 What Wolf and subsequent authors have in common is that their

measures overstate actual distances if firms move to be near to sources of idiosyncratic

demand. For example, suppose a food processing firm is the primary customer for a

particular kind of glass jar. If the glass jar manufacturer moves proximate to its customer

within the same state the actual shipping distance of the jars may be minute. Yet, Wolf’s

measure applies a statewide distance as the measure of frictions applied to this

transaction. The problem is most acute for internal state distances, but also applies to

distances between adjacent states.

         We sidestep the debate on theoretical constructions of distance by using shipment

level data on actual distance shipped taken from the Commodity Flow Survey.6 This

draws on Department of Transportation impedance calculations on actual transport miles,

that is, mileage that shipments must have traveled given the system of highways and rail

lines connecting any two points. This distance can be much larger than straight line miles

when highways and rail lines do not permit direct transit. It can also be much smaller

than equation (3) if the location of output responds to trade costs.7

         To see the difference, we compare Wolf’s measure of distance to the shipment

level data in the 1997 CFS.         We regress actual distances for each shipment s on the

distance measure used by Wolf, along with an own state dummy variable, an adjacent

state dummy variable and a commodity fixed effect

5
  Nitsch (2000) and Helliwell and Verdier (2001) provide the most exhaustive measures of internal
distance.
6
  The calculations apply the distance between zip code of origin and zip code of destination. These are still
central place distances, but they are applied within a very fine grid.
7
  Direct evidence on this point is provided in Hillberry and Hummels (2001).


                                                      6
(4) ln ACTDISTijs = β1 ln WOLFDISTij + β 2OWNSTATEij + β 3 ADJ ij + ak + eij


              Table 1. Actual versus imputed distances
                           OLS                   Fixed Effects
Wolf distances     0.939       0.821      0.931        0.816
                   (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
Ownstate                       -0.498                  -0.488
                               (0.004)                 (0.004)
Adjacent                       -0.404                  -0.395
                               (0.002)                 (0.002)

Observations           303086        303086        303086          303086
Adj R2                 0.865         0.878         0.869           0.881
Dependent variable is logged shipment distance reported in CFS. Standard errors
in parentheses. All variables are significant at the 1% level.



        We find that the Wolf distances slightly overstate actual distances for all pairs,

but dramatically overstate distance within own-state and between adjacent state pairs.

Actual shipments in-state are half as large as the Wolf measure suggests, while adjacent

state shipments are 40 percent smaller. These differences affect our estimates of home

bias within states.



III. Results

        We estimate equation (2) as follows. First, we aggregate shipments over

commodity categories to yield total bilateral trade flows between states. We regress these

shipment values on output in each state, distance and an own-state dummy variable. The

columns in Table 2 reflect differences in the dataset employed. Column 1 reports Wolf’s

(2000) results from the 1993 CFS public use sample. The remaining columns use the

1997 data. Columns 2-4 use Wolf’s distance measure. Columns 5-7 use actual shipment

distances from the CFS. The other adjustments are excluding wholesale shipments, and



                                                   7
using vectors of origin-state and destination-state fixed effects to control for output

levels, relative prices, and other state-level idiosyncracies outside of the model.

                              Table 2. Aggregate domestic shipments
                  1993      Basic         Excluding      Using          Basic         Excluding       Using
                  CFS       regression    wholesale      origin and     regression    wholesale       origin and
                  (Wolf                   shipments      destination                  shipments       destination
                  2000)                                  fixed                                        fixed
                                                         effects                                      effects
yi                1.02      1.04          1.01                          1.04          1.01
                            (0.02)        (0.02)                        (0.02)        (0.02)

yj                0.98      0.98          1.03                          0.99          1.05
                            (0.02)        (0.02)                        (0.02)        (0.02)

distij            -1.00     -0.96         -0.88          -0.95
(Wolf                       (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
measure)

distij                                                                  -1.06         -1.00           -1.05
(observed)                                                              (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)

Ownstate          1.48      1.13          0.74           0.53           0.99          0.61            0.44
                            (0.14)        (0.15)         (0.11)         (0.13)        (0.14)          (0.10)

Observations 2137 2304                    2304           2304           2304          2304            2304
Adj R2       0.836 0.825                  0.812          0.893          0.848         0.832           0.911
Dependent variable is the logged value of aggregate shipments from state i to j. Standard errors in
parentheses. All variables significant at the 1% level.



         We focus primarily on the Ownstate dummy variable. There are four main

findings. First, the estimated Ownstate coefficient is lower in 1997 than in 1993.8

Second, using actual distances shipped reduces the Ownstate coefficient in all

specifications. Third, excluding wholesale shipments considerably reduces the effect of

the Ownstate dummy, as well as slightly lowering the distance elasticity. This suggests

that wholesale shipments are highly localized. Fourth, using origin and destination fixed

effects to control for prices, among other things, reduces the Ownstate coefficient further.

8
 This may simply reflect differences in sample coverage between the private and public use data. Also, the
1997 data includes all state pairs within the continental US, while the 1993 data exclude some pairs.


                                                     8
Our final specification, which incorporates all three adjustments, shows the sizable

border coefficient estimated by Wolf to be reduced to one-third its former size.9

        To check robustness, we also estimated a version of equation (2) separately for

each 4 digit SIC category using a dependent variable that first included, then excluded,

wholesale shipments. We employed origin-state and destination-state fixed effects,

distance shipped, and an own-state dummy as dependent variables. Ownstate coefficients

were, on average, twice as large for the shipment regressions that included wholesale

shipments. Distance coefficients were also systematically larger for wholesale

shipments.



IV. Conclusions

        By documenting the effect of state borders on internal U.S. trade patterns, Wolf

(2000) suggested an important puzzle for the economic geography literature. Home bias

in trade among U.S. states is surprising, given the relative absence of obvious trading

frictions. We provide three possible explanations for measured home bias in state

commodity flows. Taken together, we find home bias one-third as large as Wolf.

        First, average distance calculations based on the geographic distribution of

population overstate actual distances that shipments travel. This is likely explained by

firms locate near to idiosyncratic demand for their output. Second, wholesale shipments

are highly localized, and more sensitive to state borders. This is consistent with the view

that wholesale shipments serve a substantially different economic function (e.g.,

inventory holding) than shipments by manufacturers. Wholesale shipments may also be

9
  The coefficient implies that the ratio of actual to predicted Ownstate trade is 1.55. Manufacturers’
Ownstate shipments are 55% higher than is predicted by the model. Wolf’s coefficient estimates imply a
ratio of 4.39.


                                                   9
directly affected by state borders if distribution contracts assign exclusive state territories

to wholesalers. Finally, controlling for variation in relative prices, as suggested by

Anderson and van Wincoop (2001), reduce measured home bias.




References:


Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop 2001, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
    Border Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper 8079.

Helliwell, John F. and Genevieve Verdier 2001, “Measuring Internal Trade Distances: A
     New Method Applied to Estimate Provincial Border Effects in Canada,” Canadian
     Journal of Economics 34, pp. 1024-1041.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels 2002, “Explaining Home Bias in Consumption:
     The Role of Intermediate Input Trade,” Purdue University mimeo.

McCallum, John T. 1995, “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade
    Patterns,” American Economic Review 85, pp. 615-623.

Nitsch, Volker 2000, “National Borders and International Trade: Evidence from the
     European Union,” Canadian Journal of Economics 33, pp. 1091-1095.

Wolf, Holger C. 2000, “Intra-national Home Bias in Trade,” The Review of Economics
     and Statistics 82(4), pp. 555-563.




                                              10
