NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHIPPING THE GOOD APPLES OUT?
AN EMPIRICAL CONFIRMATION OF THE ALCHIAN-ALLEN CONJECTURE

David Hummels
Alexandre Skiba

Working Paper 9023
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9023

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2002

We thank Jack Barron, Christian Dahl, Peter Klenow, Dan Kovenock, Kala Krishna, John Umbeck, and
seminar participants at the Midwest Economics Meetings for helpful comments and discussions and Purdue
CIBER for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by David Hummels and Alexandre Skiba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture
David Hummels and Alexandre Skiba
NBER Working Paper No. 9023
June 2002
JEL No. F1

ABSTRACT
We model demand for quality differentiated goods to derive a relationship between trade costs
and the quality composition of trade. Detailed data on traded goods’ prices, quantities and shipping costs
for many importers and exporters are used to test these predictions. These data provide a strong rejection
of the iceberg assumption on transportation costs and a strong confirmation of the classical Alchian Allen
hypothesis. Within a narrowly defined commodity classification, exporters charge destination-varying
prices that co-vary positively with shipping costs and negatively with tariffs. Shipping costs operate as
a quantitative restriction similar to quotas.

David Hummels
Department of Economics
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu
Tel: 765-494-4495
Fax: 765-496-1778

Alexandre Skiba
Purdue University

I. Introduction
The presence of a per unit transactions cost lowers the relative price of high
quality goods. This point was originally made by Alchian and Allen, and was described
by them more colorfully as “shipping the good apples out”. That is, international
transportation costs lead firms to ship high quality goods abroad while holding lower
quality goods for domestic consumption. Despite considerable theoretical attention, this
classical proposition has not previously been examined empirically. This paper tests the
Alchian Allen conjecture using a model of trade in quality differentiated goods, and
extensive data on traded goods’ prices, quantities and shipping costs.
We begin by modeling consumer demands for traded goods of varying quality in
the presence of shipping costs. In its traditional form, the Alchian Allen hypothesis
concerns the relative quality of goods shipped internationally versus domestically. We
generalize this to a more readily observable case: we show that the presence of bilateral
variation in per unit shipping costs will change the relative price of high and low quality
goods across those bilateral pairs. As a consequence, the shares of high and low quality
goods, and therefore the average observed import price, will positively co-vary with
shipping costs.
Critical to this demonstration is the form of the shipping cost function. The more
closely shipping costs approximate the (commonly assumed) iceberg formulation, the
weaker are Alchian Allen effects. Related to this point, we also show that the Alchian
Allen effect is decreasing in the size of true ad-valorem costs such as tariffs.
A major contribution of the paper lies in assembling a data set suitable for
examining the hypothesis. We employ bilateral trade data from over six thousand
2

country pairs in each of more than five thousand goods (measured at the 6-digit
Harmonized System level). The data include prices, quantities, shipping costs, and advalorem tariffs specific to each flow. Schott (2001) and Hummels and Klenow (2001)
show that trade data exhibit variation in prices across exporters for a given importer in a
narrow commodity. We show that, conditional on the exporter and commodity, prices
vary considerably over importers. That is, exporters appear to charge destination-varying
fob (“free on board”, exclusive of shipping costs) prices for the same good. A
straightforward interpretation of this finding is that each exporter produces goods of
varying quality within a narrowly defined commodity classification. Differences in the
observed price reflect differences in the quality mix across destinations.
Our estimation proceeds in two parts. First, we estimate the shipping cost
function and show that shipping costs more closely resemble per unit, rather than per
value, charges. This property is necessary for shipping costs to affect the quality
composition of trade. We then relate the (fob) prices of traded goods to the magnitude of
shipping costs. We find that doubling shipping costs leads to a 70-143% increase in
average fob prices. Shipping costs affect the quality composition of trade both across
exporters, and across importers for a given exporter.
We discuss alternative interpretations of our findings, including the possibility
that per unit charges lead monopolistically competitive firms to charge destinationvarying markups. We show that the optimal markup follows a sign pattern identical to
the Alchian-Allen effect – markups are increasing in per unit trade costs, decreasing in
ad-valorem costs – but the magnitude of the effect is much too small to explain our
results.

3

This paper relates to three distinct literatures. The idea that transactions costs
may shift the relative price of high and low quality goods is not new. The theoretical
literature on Alchian Allen effects has primarily focused on the conditions under which
relative demands for quality depend on per unit transactions costs.1 Our interest, and
contribution, lies in an empirical identification of the Alchian Allen effect. Accordingly,
we begin with a model in which these effects do occur and use it to guide our
examination of the data.
Prominent in the trade literature are papers that analyze international trade quotas,
quality upgrading, and the attendant welfare consequences. These papers argue that
quotas lead to significant quality upgrading for the goods on which quotas are imposed.
Unlike the Alchian Allen literature, there is considerable empirical support for the theory,
including paper that examine: cheese, Anderson (1985); footware, Aw and Roberts
(1986); Japanese cars, Feenstra (1988); and US steel imports, Boorstein and Feenstra
(1991). Our empirical evidence shows that shipping costs act as a kind of quantitative
restriction with effects similar to quotas. Indeed, Alchian Allen effects are arguably a
more important force affecting the quality mix because shipping costs are ubiquitous and
bind on all trade flows regardless of size. In contrast, quotas bind on only a select few
goods, a set that should dwindle in importance as GATT/WTO rules shift member
nations away from quantitative restrictions.

1

Theoretical examinations of the Alchian Allen conjecture include Gould and Segall (1969), Borcherding
and Silverberg (1978), and Umbeck (1980). Theoretical papers examining trade quotas and quality
upgrading include Falvey (1979), Rodriguez (1979), Santoni and VanCott (1980), Leffler (1991) and
Herguera, Kujal, and Petrakis (2000). Barzel (1976) focuses on the link between domestic taxation and
quality upgrading.

4

Finally, our work relates to a growing literature that measures trade costs and
identifies their effect on trade. For example, recent research suggests that transportation
costs play a central role in determining the quantity of trade, and the distribution of trade
over partners.2 This paper examines whether and to what extent transportation also
affects the quality composition of trade.

II. Relative Demands for Quality
This section examines relative demand for higher quality goods in response to a
change in transportation costs. We suppose that each exporting country provides only
two varieties, high and low quality, each from a competitive sector. Though we do not
explicitly model the supply side3, the assumption can be justified in several ways. The
first lies behind the original “shipping the good apples out” conjecture – for reasons
outside of the firm’s control, production processes yield joint output of both high and low
quality goods (apples), which are then priced appropriately. The second explanation is
that there are two types of firms who differ in their cost of producing quality. This leads
them to specialize in high and low quality goods respectively. Both stories extend easily
to the case with a distribution of qualities, but this added complication adds little.
Consumers view products as differentiated by national origin, and enjoy greater
utility from higher quality goods. We employ a CES utility function augmented to
include quality differences, and assume that consumers take the supply of quality and the

2
3

See, for example, Hummels (2001), Limao and Venables (2000), and Finger and Yeats(1976).
We re-examine our estimates in light of some supply side responses in Section IV.

5

associated prices as given. Denoting quantites by q, quality by λ, and indexing importers
by i, exporters by j, and quality by high (H) and low (L), we have
1/ θ

(1.1)


θ
θ 
U i =  ∑ λ jL ( qijL ) + λ jH ( qijH ) 
 j


where λ jH > λ jL , and θ = 1 − 1/ σ , with σ describing the elasticity of substitution between
varieties.
Suppressing quality superscripts, the price of the good facing the consumer
depends on the fob price p j and a two-part trade cost that includes both an ad-valorem
tariff rate, tij > 1 , and a per unit shipping charge fij .

(1.2)

pij = p j tij + fij

Because we have assumed competitive firms, the firm’s fob price is independent of the
final destination. In a later section we generalize this to monopolistically competitive
firms that charge a destination-varying fob price. From the consumer’s first order
conditions, we find :
(1.3)

 p Lj tij + f ij
=
qijL  p Hj tij + f ij

qijH

σ





 λ jH
 L
 λj

σ





The relative quality demand for location j goods depends on the prices inclusive
of trade costs, ratio of qualities, and elasticity of substitution. Dividing the relative
prices through by the tariff we get
 p Lj + f ij / tij
=

qijL  p Hj + fij / tij

qijH

σ





 λ jH
 L
 λj

σ





6

This expression makes clear that the relative price of high and low quality goods is most
affected by trade costs when the per unit freight charge is large relative to the ad-valorem
tariff.
In this model, the Alchian Allen hypothesis can be seen by examining the effect
of trade costs on the relative demands for high and low quality goods originating in j. A
change in the per unit charge f results in
 qH 
∂  ij L 
qij  σ  λ jH

=  L
(1.4)
∂f ij
tij  λ j

σ





 p Lj + fij / tij
 H
 p j + fij / tij

(p

σ −1





(p

H
j

H
j

− p Lj )

+ f ij / tij )

2

Assuming that it is more expensive to produce a higher quality good,

(p

H
j

− p Lj ) > 0 , the sign of the derivative is positive and the share of the higher quality

good is increasing in f. The size of the change depends positively on the ratio of
qualities, negatively on the ratio of fob prices, and is greatest when the per unit charge f
is large relative to the ad-valorem charge t.
Increasing an ad-valorem barrier has the opposite effect.

(1.5)

 qH 
σ
∂  ij L 
H
 qij  = σ f ij  λ j 


tij2  λ jL 
∂tij

 p Lj + f ij / tij
 H
 p j + f ij / tij

σ −1





(p

(p

H
j

L
j

− p Hj )

+ fij / tij )

2

Since ( p Lj − p Hj ) < 0 , the relative demand for the higher priced good is decreasing in the
ad valorem part of the trade costs. The result that the per unit and ad-valorem costs have
the opposite effect is fairly intuitive. Suppose that fij = 0 and all costs are ad-valorem.

(1.6)

σ

 p Lj tij 
=

qijL  p Hj tij 

qijH

 λ jH
 L
 λj

σ


 p Lj / λ jL
 =  H H

 pj / λj

σ





7

In this case, the ad valorem barrier scales up the price of all goods proportionally.
Relative demands for the goods depend only on their price relative to quality, and are
independent of barriers. In the presence of the per unit cost, however, the ad valorem
trade cost decreases the relative importance of the per unit trade cost in the final price of
the good and therefore dampens its effect on the relative demand for the high quality
good.
Freight rates may also be described in more general terms as combining both an
ad-valorem and a per unit element. Freight rates may be positively related to goods’
prices because of insurance charges, more costly handling requirements for higher quality
goods, or the need to rely on more expensive transportation modes such as air shipping.4
Also, if ocean liner cartels can succesfully exercise monopoly power in setting prices,
their markups over marginal cost will be increasing in the goods price.5

To reflect the

possibility that freight rates are a function of the goods price, we write
(1.7)

fij = p βj X ij

where X is a vector of non-price factors such as distance, shipment quantity, or a
commodity specific shifter that may raise the price. In this more general case, we
describe the Alchian Allen effect in terms of the change in demand for quality caused by
a change in X, the non-price portion of the freight charge.

4

Hummels (2001) examines transportation modal choice and shows that higher priced goods are more
likely to be air-shipped.
5
A monopoly shipper faces a transportation demand curve that is a function of import demand multiplied
by the ad-valorem equivalent of the shipping charge. Higher priced goods have a lower ad-valorem
equivalent so that transportation demand is less reponsive to changes in the transportation price. Thus,
optimal markups are increasing in the goods’ price.

8

(1.8)

 qH 
∂  ij L 
H
 qij  = σ  λ j

tij  λ jL
∂X ij

σ





 p Lj + fij / tij
 H
 p j + fij / tij

σ −1





piL p Hj

(( p )

L β −1
j

(p

H
j

− ( p Hj )

+ fij / tij )

β −1

)

2

The sign and magnitude of Alchian Allen effects depend on β. For β = 1 , we
have the well-known case of iceberg transportation costs. Here, the freight rate is purely
ad-valorem, and we can rewrite the price facing consumers as pij = p j (tij + X ij ) .
Quantity shares for the high and low quality goods are given by equation (1.6), and no
Alchian Allen effects exist. For β < 1 , we have Alchian Allen effects, which grow
stronger as β → 0 . At that point, the freight rate is per unit, and quantity shares are
given by equation (1.3). The remaining case, β > 1 can be thought of as a reverse
Alchian Allen effect – freight rates rise faster than goods prices so that an increase in the
non-price portion of the freight rate (e.g. distance) actually raises the price of high
relative to low quality goods.
To this point we have focused on the relative demand for quality assuming that
the trade data allow us to identify high and low quality products as separate categories of
goods. Suppose instead that the data are sufficiently aggregated that we observe a mix of
qualities within a particular category of goods. Equation (1.8) cannot be directly applied
because quantities of each quality type are not observed. In this case it is useful to
describe the comparative statics in terms of the observed average price of shipments from
a particular exporter.
(1.9)

pij = SijH p Hj + (1 − SijH ) p Lj

9

SijH denotes the share of high quality goods in the bundle for ij. The average category

fob price is a weighted average of the fob prices for each quality. An increase in per unit
freight rates increases the share of the high quality good, which increases the observed
average price for a commodity. When looking over multiple importers, a particular
exporter will charge destination-specific average prices because the shares of the high
and low quality goods vary according to trade costs.
The sign of the Alchian Allen effect measured in average prices matches the sign
of the effect measured in relative demand for qualities. However, the magnitude of the
effect will always be smaller when measured in terms of average prices because the
average price is bounded between the high and low prices. A comparison of the
magnitudes can be seen in Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 graphs the shares of high and low
quality goods against X/t, for various values of β. We choose values such that quality
adjusted fob prices are equal, or p H / λ H = p L / λ L . The range of X/t is given by the
90/10 percentile distribution of our data. Figure 2 graphs the average price of goods for
the same X/t and β. A small change in the average prices can be a result of a large change
in the ratio of the high to low quality goods.

III. Empirics

III.1 Data Description

Our data cover the bilateral trade of six importers (Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Paraguay, Uruguay, and the United States) with all exporters worldwide, measured at the
6 digit level of the Harmonized Classification System (5000+ categories) in 1994. We
10

observe shipment values V, weight (WGT), the total freight bill paid (F), and the advalorem tariff rate (t). All included variables have true importer-exporter-commodity
category variation. We use shipment weight as our measure of quantity, so the per unit
freight rate is f=F/WGT and prices are p = V/WGT. All data are expressed relative to
commodity means, which subsumes differences in units across categories. That is, one
can think of all categories in terms of a common unit (weight), or in terms of a category
specific unit (e.g. number of shoes) multiplied by weight per category unit.
Data on V, WGT, and F are taken from national data sources for the importers.
Bilateral tariff rates are taken from extracts of the UNCTAD TRAINS database. Per
capita incomes are taken from the Summers and Heston Penn World Tables data.
We begin by describing the data and its variation in Table 1. For each
observation (importer-exporter-commodity category), we describe prices relative to
category means ( pijk / pk ), exporter-category means ( pijk / p jk ), and importer-category
means ( pijk / pik ). Then we report means and standard deviations of these statistics for all
exporters, and exporters grouped into top 25th percentile and bottom 75th percentile by per
capita income.6 We repeat this exercise for per unit freight charges and for per unit
freight charges/ad-valorem tariffs.
Table 1 shows that prices vary tremendously within a category (st.dev/mean =
5.1). Conditioning on an importer-category, prices vary a great deal over exporters
(st.dev/mean = 2.26), and are higher for rich than for poor exporters. This is consistent
with the results in Schott (2001) and Hummels and Klenow (2001) finding that within-

6

There are more trade observations for richer countries and a greater range of variation in incomes at the
high end. Cutting at the 25th percentile splits the number of observations in half, and provides a
comparable range of income variation in both samples.

11

category price variation is positively correlated with exporter income. This data feature
is consistent with richer exporters specializing in higher quality varieties and importers
buying a bundle of qualities from different sources. Of most interest, conditioning on an
exporter-category mean we see considerable variation in prices across importers
(stdev/mean = .64). That is, exporters charge destinating varying prices for the same
goods category. This is consistent with a model in which each exporter produces a
number of varieties of differing quality within each 6-digit category. We observe
(average) prices varying across destinations because the share of high and low quality
goods in the bundle varies.7
Examining per unit freight charges, we see a pattern quite similar to prices.
Freight rates and freight rates relative to tariffs vary considerably for a given category,
somewhat less conditioning on an importer-category, and less still conditioning on an
exporter-category. However, substantial variation across importers remains in freight
charges (stdev/mean = .7) and freight relative to tariffs (stdev/mean = 1.19). Extensive
variation of this sort is important if Alchian-Allen effects are to explain changes in the
quality bundle across importers.
A final interesting fact from Table 1 is that freight charges are much higher for
rich exporters. This seems somewhat counterintuitive, as rich exporters typically have
better transportation infrastructure and enjoy scale benefits in shipping. The reason is
that we are reporting freight charges per unit, rather than freight charges per value
shipped. Rich exporters ship higher priced goods. If total freight charges are rising in
value as in equation (1.7), we would expect that freight charges per unit would be higher

7

An alternative explanation is that the observed price variation reflects destination-varying markups
charged by exporting firms with market power. We address this alternative explanation in the final section.

12

for rich countries, while freight charges per value would be lower. This is exactly the
case, suggesting that it will be important to account for simultaneity between prices and
freight rates in estimating Alchian-Allen effects.

Empirical Specification

Our empirical examination of the Alchian Allen effect proceeds in two parts.
Equation (1.8) shows that the existence and magnitude of the effect depends on the
elasticity of freight rates with respect to price. To estimate this elasticity, write the per
unit freight bill from exporter j to importer i in commodity k as a function of the goods’
price, the distance shipped, total shipment quantity in a category8, and a vector of
commodity specific shifters α k . This gives an estimating equation in logs
(1.10) ln f ijk = β ln( pijk ) + δ ln( DISTij ) + ω ln(Qijk ) + ∑ α k + eijk
k

Since the freight rate is defined in per quantity terms, inclusion of quantities on the right
hand side reflects possible scale economies in shipping.
The second part of our empirical analysis consists of a direct test of the Alchian
Allen effect. We model observed goods prices as a function of per unit freight rates, advalorem tariff rates, and the per capita incomes (y) of the exporter and importer.
(1.11) ln pijk = γ 1 ln fijk + γ 2 ln tijk + γ 3 ln yi + γ 4 ln y j
The comparative statics from the preceding section show that the quality shares
(and therefore average prices) depend on the per unit freight and ad-valorem tarif rates.
Summary statistics in Table 1, and recent papers by Schott (2001), and Hummels and

8

Our theory assumes that observed shipments are a mix of quality goods, but the observed quantities are
the sum of quantities from all quality types.

13

Klenow (2001) show that prices are increasing in exporter income.9 Finally, we have
employed homothetic utility functions in our model for simplicity but we include
importer income to incorporate the possibility that rich importers may have a taste for
higher quality goods.
Section II considers relative demands for quality for a particular importer-exporter
pair as the per unit freight rate rises. To implement this empirically, we have crosssectional variation across importers i, exporters j and goods categories k that we might
examine. The base specification in equation (1.11) employs variation over multiple ij
pairs for many goods. We also examine variation across ij pairs for a given commodity k
in order to take out commodity-specific variation in prices that may be unrelated to
Alchian Allen effects.
(1.12) ln pijk = γ 1 ln fijk + γ 2 ln tijk + γ 3 ln yi + γ 4 ln y j + ∑ k α k + eijk
Finally, we examine variation across importers for a given exporter and commodity.
(1.13) ln pijk = γ 1 ln fijk + γ 2 ln tijk + γ 3 ln yi + ∑ j , k α jk + eijk
Specifications (1.11) and (1.12) control for exporter prices imperfectly by including
exporter per capita income, whereas in (1.13), we completely control for variation across
exporters in prices by taking out exporter-commodity means. Doing so potentially
eliminates important sources of variation (across exporters, across commodities) in
freight rates that could lead to Alchian Allen effects, but it also provides the experiment
closest to the comparative statics performed in the theory section. That is, it holds

9

If production of quality is human or physical capital-intensive then countries well endowed with these
factors have both higher income and a higher quality mix for goods in their trade bundle. Hummels and
Klenow (2001) show more generally that a country with a relative technological advantage in producing
higher quality goods will enjoy higher per capita income.

14

constant the supply side of the model (in prices and quantities of high and low quality
goods), allowing only variation across importers due to freight rates. This issue is
discussed further in Section IV.
There is a simultaneity problem between freight rates and prices in all equations,
and, in equation (1.10), shipment quantities are endogenous to the freight rate. Happily
our specification provides useful instruments. When estimating the effect of prices and
quantities on freight rates, we instrument using tariffs and the incomes of exporters and
importers. When estimating the effect of freight rates on prices, we instrument freight
rates by the distance and quantity shipped. We also employ one year lagged values of
prices as an instrument in this second equation.

Results

Table 2 reports estimates of equation (1.10) using OLS and IV estimators.10 Two
different samples are used. The first pools over all importer x exporter x commodity
variation in our data. We find an elasticity of freight rates with respect to price around
0.6, well below the unitary elasticity implied by the iceberg assumption on shipping
costs. Quantities enter negatively, suggesting a moderate scale effect in shipping. OLS
and IV estimates are significantly different from each other in a statistical sense, but the
economic effect of the magnitudes are quite similar. It should be noted that the reported
R2 here are net of the fixed effects, and so these regressions do an excellent job of fitting
the considerable variation we observe in freight rates.

10

First stage regressions for the IV estimators show that the instruments strongly co-vary with both price
and quantity.

15

We also report this regression using a sample of US imports data measured at a
much more disaggregated level (10 digit HS, or 17,000 goods). We further restrict the
sample to include only those goods with count-based (rather than weight-based) quantity
data available, and those cases where the data consist of only one shipment. More
aggregated data and data consisting of multiple shipments provide a relationship between
average freight rates and average prices (and quantities) within the ijk observation. By
looking at single shipments of more disaggregated data we hope to identify a relationship
between freight rates and prices for a homogeneous product. The third and fourth rows
of table 2 report results. We find, in the IV regressions, a substantially weaker price
effect and a substantially stronger quantity effect on freight rates. That is, for the more
homogeneous records we find a case much closer to per unit than ad-valorem freight
rates, and stronger scale economies in shipping.
Table 3 reports estimates of equations (1.11), (1.12), and (1.13), first using
distance and shipment quantities as instruments for freight rates, and then using lagged
values on the dependent variable as an instrument. We find strong support for the
Alchian Allen hypothesis in all cases. Doubling freight rates increases average prices by
70 to 143 percent, depending on the estimation strategy. As predicted, ad-valorem freight
rates significantly reduce average prices, which our theory suggests can only happen in
the presence of significant per unit charges. Finally, the regressions that include exporter
x commodity fixed effects are closest in spirit to our comparative statics, in that they
allow only variation across importers to affect the measured elasticities. Compared to the
other specifications, the magnitudes are quite similar suggesting that it is variation across
importers that drives our results.

16

We provide several robustness checks. In Table 3 we pool over all commodity
categories. We also estimate equation (1.13) separately for each 3-digit HS category,
using shipment weight and distance as instruments and including exporter x 6-digit
category fixed effects.11 We plot the elasticity of prices with respect to freight rates on
the vertical axis in Figure 3. Every 3-digit category shows significant Alchian-Allen
effects. This makes it unlikely that something like an oligopoly pricing-to-market story12
could explain our results.
Why does the magnitude of the effect vary over categories? Recall from equation
(1.4) that our model predicts Alchian-Allen magnitudes will differ across commodities
depending on the range of prices (qualities) available from the exporter. Simply, if the
exporter produces only a single quality then it is not possible for the quality mix to
change over importers in relation to trade costs.
Since we are interpreting our data in terms of average prices, we cannot directly
observe the full range of price variation available from an exporter. However, average
prices are bounded by the true variation which means we can use the variation in average
prices to determine a minimum possible range: the lowest (highest) price available from
the exporter must be at least as low (high) as the lowest (highest) observed average price.
We calculate the distribution of prices relative to exporter-6-digit category means for
each 3-digit category, and represent price dispersion using the 90th/10th percentile split
prices on the horizontal axis in Figure 3. Alchian-Allen effects are strongest for those
commodities in which we observe the widest variation in prices.

11

We pool over 3-digit categories because at 4-,5-,and 6-digit levels we have sufficiently few observations
that our estimates begin to lose precision. However, the results are very similar to the 3-digit results.
12
See Goldberg and Knetter (1997) for a survey of pricing to market.

17

Finally, our identification strategy relies on the assumption that variation in
average prices within a category reflect changes in the composition of a quality bundle.
This requires that the 6-digit detail groups together goods that are similar, but not
homogeneous with respect to quality. But even at this level it may be that the categories
sweep in a mix of goods sufficiently dissimilar that it would be inappropriate to apply our
model. To check this, we use the 10-digit Harmonized System data employed by the US
Census Bureau to calculate how many different 10 digit product lines appear in each 6
digit category. Call this N k . We then pool 6-digit categories by N k and re-estimate
equation (1.13). We find that the magnitude of the AA effect is weaker for 6-digit
categories with higher N k , but the effect is positive and significant regardless of how
much category heterogeneity exists below the 6-digit level.

IV. Alternative explanations.
We have considered an endowment economy with perfectly competitive firms in
deriving Alchian Allen effects in Section II and estimating them in Section III. In this
section, we consider two alternative explanations for our results. First we examine
effects on average prices when the supply side of the model is also allowed to respond.
Second, we relax the assumption of perfect competition, and show that the presence of
per unit costs will cause monopolistically competitive firms to charge destination-varying
markups over marginal cost.

18

Supply Responses

Consider first what might be called “traditional” transport cost incidence. The
notion that higher shipping costs affect fob prices is not new, but the typical formulation
posits a negative relationship. Suppose we have a competitive firms with an upward
sloping supply for a homogeneous good. Now, increase the freight charge this exporter
pays in shipping to all destinations (or equivalently, compare one country more distant
from world markets than a second). Increasing the freight charge lowers the fob price
that firms can charge. In the limiting case of a small country facing fixed world prices,
the fob price decline should exactly offset the freight increase.
The distinction between traditional transport cost incidence and the Alchian Allen
effect is that in the former case shipping costs change the common fob prices that firms
charge to all destinations. This variation might be picked up by our estimates that pool
over multiple exporters, equations (1.11) and (1.12). However, these supply responses do
not affect our estimates of equation (1.13); in that instance, price changes common to all
importers for a given exporter-commodity are already removed by the fixed effects.
Since the estimated effects are quite similar across those three specifications it follows
that traditional incidence is relatively unimportant.

Destination Varying Markups

We have previously assumed perfectly competitive firms so that we could treat
the price of any one good as equal to the marginal cost of production, and invariant
across destinations. Assuming this, any variation in average prices across importers for a

19

given exporter-commodity must be the result of changing shares of high and low quality
goods.
If we have instead monopolistically competitive firms, fob prices now include
both marginal cost of production and a markup. A familiar result from the trade literature
holds that fob prices are invariant to destination because the markup over marginal cost is
constant. That result is contingent on all trade costs being ad-valorem. A per unit charge
alters this formulation and optimal markups will vary over destinations.
Suppose that preferences are CES, but each country produces only a single quality
in a monopolistically competitive sector. Consumer prices include both a per unit charge
f, and an ad-valorem cost t. The profit maximization problem implies a (fob) pricing

rule of
(1.14)

pij
MC

H
j

=

1
σ
.
+
tij (σ − 1) MC j σ − 1
fij

The pricing rule contains the markup over marginal costs, σ /(σ − 1) , that is
familiar in the literature, plus an additional term that is destination specific. Prices are
increasing in the per unit freight charge and decreasing in the ad-valorem tariff. In short,
pricing-to-market driven by per unit costs would give precisely the same sign pattern of
price variation we have observed in our regressions. However, the variation in markups
is much too small to explain the magnitudes we observe. Using the f/t variation we
observe in our data, and a value of σ = 5 (Hummels, 2001), the elasticity of price with
respect to the freight rate would be on the order of 0.007. This compares unfavorably to
estimated elasticities of 0.7 – 1.4 shown in Table 3.

20

We can also extend our analysis of Alchian Allen effects on the quality mix
within this model. Suppose preferences are the same as in Section II. High and low
quality goods are respectively produced by two sectors of monopolistically competitive
firms with marginal costs of MC H and MC L . Given fob prices above, the price facing
the consumer is now
(1.15) pijH tij + f ij =

σ
fij + MC Hj tij )
(
σ −1

Relative demands for quality are
(1.16)

 MC Lj + f ij / tij
=

q Hj  MC Hj + fij / tij
q Hj

σ





 λ jH
 L
 λj

σ





Compare this to the relative demands for quality described in the perfectly competitive
setup in Section II, equation (1.3). Since prices under perfect competition are given by
the marginal costs of production, relative demands are exactly the same in the perfect
competition and monopolistic competition cases. That is, while the markups raise the fob
price of high and low quality goods relative to the perfect competition case, the relative
price faced by the consumers remains the same. All of our comparative statics on relative
demands go through as before. However, average prices observed in our trade data move
for two reasons. Markups on both goods, as well as Alchian Allen effects increasing the
share of the high price good, are increasing in f and decreasing in t.

V. Conclusions
We formalize the Alchian Allen “shipping the good apples out” hypothesis,
showing that the shares of high relative to low quality goods in an import bundle will be
increasing in the per unit freight rate and decreasing in ad-valorem costs. We test this

21

hypothesis by relating average prices charged by an exporter in a particular commodity to
freight and tariffs. Fob prices vary considerably over importers and provide strong
support for the theory: doubling freight rates increases fob prices by 70 – 143 percent;
doubling the ad-valorem tariff rate decreases prices by a factor of 3-4.
Critical to this demonstration is the idea that shipping costs are applied on a per
unit rather than ad-valorem basis. Freight rates do not move relative demands for quality
if they are linear in the value of goods being shipped. This is, of course, the standard
assumption on international transportation costs. We show directly, by estimating the
shape of the shipping cost function, and indirectly, by finding large Alchian Allen effects,
that the iceberg assumption is neither correct nor innocuous.
We provide a complementary interpretation of our results in terms of pricing-tomarket by monopolistically competitive firms. With ad-valorem trade costs, these firms
charge the same fob price to all destinations. In the presence of per unit charges,
markups vary positively with freight rates and negatively with tariff rates. However, the
predicted markup variation is too small to explain the observed movements in average
prices.
Finally, the price effects we observe are quite large and the implied changes in
quality shares are even larger. This suggests the likelihood that Alchian Allen effects
could lead to a general equilibrium response in the supply of quality. We leave to future
work this question: could the very high quality of Japanese manufactures be partly the
result of its remote location?

22

References

Anderson, J.E. “The Relative Inefficiency of Quotas: The Cheese Case.” American
Economic Review, 75 (1), 1985, 178-190.
Aw, Bee Yan and Roberts, M.J. “Measuring Quality Change in Quota-Constrained
Import Markets. The Case of U.S. Footwear.” Journal of International Economics, 21,
1986, 45-60.
Barzel, Y. “An Alternative Approach To The Analysis Of Taxation.” The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 84, Iss. 6, 1976, 1177-1197.
Boorstein, R. and Feenstra, R.C. “Quality Upgrading And Its Welfare Cost In U.S. Steel
Imports, 1969-74.” International Trade And Trade Policy ed. Elhanan Helpman and
Assaf Pinhas. 1991.
Borcherding, T.E., Silberberg, E. “Shipping The Good Apples Out: The Alchian And
Allen Theorem Reconsidered.” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, Iss. 1, 1978,
131-138.
Epple, D. “Hedonic Prices And Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand And Supply
Functions For Differentiated Products.” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 95, Iss.
1, 1987, 59-80.
Falvey, R.E. “The Composition Of Trade Within Import-Restricted Product Categories.”
The Journal of Political Economy, Volume 87, Issue 5, Part 1, 1979, 1105-1114.
Feenstra, R.C. “Quality Change Under Trade Restraints In Japanese Autos.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 103, Issue 1, 1998, 131-146
Finger, J.M. and Yeats, Alexander (1976), “Effective Protection by Transportation Costs
and Tariffs: A Comparison of Magnitudes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 169-176.
Goldberg, Pinelopi, Knetter, Michael, “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have
We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35(3), September 1997, pages 1243-72.
Gould, J.P., Segall, J. “The Substitution Effects Of Transportation Costs.” The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 77, Iss. 1, 1969, 130-137.
Herguera, I., Kujal, P., Petrakis, E. “Quantity Restrictions And Endogenous Quality
Choice.” International Journal of International Organization, 18, 2000, 1259-1277.
Hummels, David and Klenow, Peter . “The Quality and Variety of a Nation’s Trade.”
Mimeo, Purdue University, 2001.

23

Hummels, David. “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs.” Mimeo, Purdue University,
2001.
Leffler, K.B. “Ambiguous Changes In Product Quality.” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 72, Issue 5, 1982, 956-967.
Kay, J., Keen, M. “Product Quality Under Specific And Ad Valorem Taxation.” Public
Finance Quarterly. Vol.19, No. 2, 1991, 238-347.
Rosen, S. “Hedonic Prices And Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation In Pure
Competition.” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82, Iss. 1, 1974, 34-55.
Rodriguez, C.A. “The Quality Of Imports And Differential Welfare Effects Of Tariffs,
Quotas And Quality Controls As Protective Devices” Canadian Journal of Economics
12, 1979, 439-449.
Santoni, G. J. and Norman VanCott. “Import Quotas: The Quality Adjustment Problem.”
Southern Economic Journal 46, 1980, 1206-1211.
Schott, Peter. “Do Nations Specialize?” Mimeo, Yale University. 2001.
Umbeck, J. “Shipping The Good Apples Out: Some Ambiguities In The Interpretation
Of ‘Fixed Charge’”. The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, Iss. 1, 1980, 199-208.

24

Table 1 – Summary Statistics
PRICES

Variation
relative to

All exporters
th

Top 25 p’tile by
income
th

Bottom 75 p’tile
by income
FREIGHT
CHARGE

Exportercategory mean

Importercategory mean

Category mean

st.dev.

0.64

2.26

5.10

mean

1

1

1

st.dev.

0.67

2.83

6.73

mean

1

1.15

1.31

st.dev.

0.61

1.34

2.07

mean

1

0.8

0.65

Exportercategory mean

Importercategory mean

Category mean

st.dev.

0.70

1.95

3.67

mean

1

1

1

st.dev.

0.73

2.34

4.64

mean

1

1.11

1.18

st.dev.

0.68

1.38

2.11

mean

1

0.88

0.80

Variation
relative to

All exporters
th

Top 25 p’tile by
income
th

Bottom 75 p’tile
by income

FREIGHT
Variation
CHARGE/TARIFF relative to
All exporters
th

Top 25 p’tile by
income
th

Bottom 75 p’tile
by income

Exportercategory mean

Importercategory mean

Category
mean

st.dev.

1.19

1.72

3.61

mean

1

1

1

st.dev.

1.20

1.95

4.40

mean

1

1.06

1.12

st.dev.

1.18

1.41

2.38

mean

1

0.93

0.86

25

Table 2. Freight Rates.
Dep var:
Ln(freight rate)
(1) OLS, all countries
(2) IV*, all countries
(3) OLS,
restricted US sample
(4) IV*
restricted US sample

Variables
Distance Quantity

R2

Observations

0.64
0.26
-0.12
(0.0012) (0.0019) (0.0005)

0.64

275398

0.61
0.25
-0.18
(0.0048) (0.0020) (0.0022)

0.63

254031

0.716
0.114
-0.219
(0.0017) (0.0017) (0.0024)

0.83

299409

0.125
0.221
-0.480
(0.0138) (0.0050) (0.0142)

0.69

277756

Price

All variables are in log levels and mean differenced by commodity;
* - in these regressions price and quantity are instrumented by tariffs, and exporter and
importer GDP per capita.

26

Table 3. Alchian Allen Effects.
Dep var:
ln(shipment price)

Freight

Variables
Tariff
yi/Li

yj/Lj

R2

Obs.

Freight rate is instrumented by shipment weight and distance.
(1) IV, pooled
(2) IV, commodity
differenced
(3) IV, commodity and
exporter differenced

0.95
(.0020)

-1.18
(.0372)

0.46
(.0048)

0.18
(.0032)

0.70

254031

0.798
(.0023)

-1.56
(.0368)

0.46
(.0044)

0.20
(.0029)

0.60

254031

0.84
(.0026)

-1.46
(.0289)

0.53
(.0036)

--

0.53

275398

Freight rate is instrumented with lagged values of dependent variable.
(4) IV, pooled
(5) IV, commodity
differenced
(6) IV, commodity and
exporter differenced

1.35
(.0038)

-3.18
(.0726)

0.27
(.0091)

0.01
(.0063)

0.60

91989

1.33
(.0072)

-2.56
(.0787)

0.34
(.0092)

-0.03
(.0067)

0.34

91989

1.41
(.0144)

-2.28
(.0689)

0.62
(.0087)

--

100118

27

