NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PEER EFFECTS IN MEDICAL SCHOOL

Peter Arcidiacono
Sean Nicholson

Working Paper 9025
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9025

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

We thank the National Board of Medical Examiners and the Association of American Medical Colleges for
generously providing the data. Helpful comments were provided by Gregory Besharov, Eric French, Rob
Lemke, Tom Nechyba, Bruce Sacerdote, Carol Simon, Randy Walsh, Jacob Vigdor, and seminar participants
at the University of Florida, Stanford, William and Mary, the University of Wisconsin, the 1999 Hotelling
Triangle Econometrics Conference, the 2000 World Congress of the Econometric Society, the Applied
Economics Workshop at the Wharton School, the Public Economics reading group at Duke University, and
the Eleventh Annual Health Economics Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Peter Arcidiacono and Sean Nicholson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Peer Effects in Medical School
Peter Arcidiacono and Sean Nicholson
NBER Working Paper No. 9025
July 2002
JEL No. I21, J24, I11

ABSTRACT
Using data on the universe of students who graduated from U.S. medical schools between 1996
and 1998, we examine whether the abilities and specialty preferences of a medical school class affect a
student’s academic achievement in medical school and his choice of specialty. We mitigate the selection
problem by including school-specific fixed effects, and show that this method yields an upper bound on
peer effects for our data. We estimate positive peer effects that disappear when school-specific fixed
effects are added to control for the endogeneity of a peer group. We find no evidence that peer effects are
stronger for blacks, that peer groups are formed along racial lines, or that students with relatively low
ability benefit more from their peers than students with relatively high ability. However, we do find some
evidence that peer groups form along gender lines.

Peter Arcidiacono
Department of Economics
Duke University
209 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu

Sean Nicholson
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
nicholss@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The belief that peer groups in schools influence the behavior and outcomes of their members
has been important in shaping public policy. The Coleman report (Coleman et al., 1966)
concluded that peer effects in public schools contributed to differences in the achievement
of black and white students. Busing was implemented in many school districts due in part
to this finding. Moreover, one of the principal arguments against school vouchers is that
the best students will leave the public school system, and thereby impair the performance of
the students who remain behind. Several recent theoretical papers on the impact of school
vouchers assume that student achievement is influenced by the characteristics, achievement, or
behavior of a person’s classmates (Nechyba, 2000; Caucutt, 2000; Epple and Romano, 1998).
There is a substantial empirical literature examining how peer groups affect teenagers’
criminal behavior (Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman, 1996), the likelihood that teenagers
will become pregnant and complete high school (Evans, Oates, and Schwab, 1992), grade school
childrens’ achievement (Hoxby, 2000; Ding and Lehrer, 2001), college students’ grades, choice
of major, and fraternity choices (Sacerdote, 2001; Arcidiacono, 1999), and high school students’
drug and alcohol use, cigarette smoking, church attendance, and the likelihood of completing
high school (Gaviria and Raphael, 2001). However, many economists remain skeptical of
estimates of social interactions due, in part, to the difficulty of separately measuring the effect
of a peer group, the effect of unobserved characteristics shared by members of the peer group,
and the effect of the environment (e.g., a school) in which the members of the peer group
operate (Manski, 2000).
Most existing studies of peer groups focus on adolescents and grade school children. The
influence of peer groups on medical students’ specialty choices may have important policy
implications because many policy makers believe the U.S. has a shortage of physicians in the
primary care specialties (pediatrics, family practice, and general internal medicine), which
contributes to high health care expenditures and inadequate access to medical care (Physician
Payment Review Commission, 1995). The federal government provides a higher subsidy to
teaching hospitals for training primary care rather than non-primary care residents, and a
majority of state governments passed bills in the 1990s to provide loans and scholarships to
medical students who enter primary care specialties (Nicholson, 2001).
Physicians in primary care specialties generally earn much less than physicians in nonprimary care specialties. In 1997, for example, the mean annual income exceeded $200,000
in 11 non-primary care specialties (e.g., orthopedic surgery, radiology, cardiology), while the

1

mean income in the three primary care specialties were all under $150,000. Women and blacks
are much more likely than men and whites to choose the relatively low-paying primary care
specialties. Forty-two percent of female physicians were in a primary specialty in 2000 versus
29 percent of male physicians, and 46 percent of black physicians were in a primary care
specialty versus 33 percent of white physicians. Occupational segregation is more striking
in certain high-paying specialties. Women represented 25 percent of doctors in 2000 but
accounted for only 3.5 percent of orthopedic surgeons, the specialty with the highest mean
income. If peer groups influence students’ specialty choices, medical schools may be able to
encourage more students to enter primary care and promote greater gender and racial balance
across specialties by altering their admission policies to change the characteristics of their
matriculating students.
In order to examine the influence of medical school peer groups, we have obtained access
to a data set on the universe of students who graduated from a U.S. medical school between
1996 and 1998. Medical students take a standardized exam, the Medical College Admissions
Test (MCAT), before entering medical school. The MCAT score provides us with a uniform
measure of each student’s ability before they join their peer group – their medical school
class. Medical students spend their first and second year together in the same classes, so
a medical school class (e.g., students matriculating at Harvard Medical School in 1993) is
arguably the relevant peer group – the unit in which students interact. Performing well in
medical school is important because residency positions in high-income specialties such as
orthopedic surgery and dermatology are rationed (Nicholson, 2001). As a result, students
who receive high scores on the National Board of Medical Examiners test (commonly referred
to as the board exam), which is taken between the second and third years of medical school,
will have a relatively high probability of entering a high-income specialty when they complete
medical school. We also observe each student’s preferred specialty at the beginning and end
of medical school, so we can identify people who switch specialties after their peer group has
been formed. In the market that we study, therefore, members of a peer group can affect a
medical student’s future earnings by improving a student’s accumulation of human capital,
and thereby increasing the student’s likelihood of being admitted into a high-income specialty,
and by influencing a student’s specialty preference directly.
Manski (1993) highlights three empirical challenges when measuring peer effects. First,
peer groups are endogenous. Students who choose to attend the same school probably share
similar observed as well as unobserved characteristics. Therefore, an association between the

2

observed characteristics of a peer group and the outcomes of individual members of the group
may not imply a causal relationship if outcomes are affected by an unobserved characteristic
(e.g., motivation). Second, by definition members of a peer group operate in the same environment and are exposed to the same set of policies. In our context, students at a medical school
take the same courses from the same faculty, which makes it difficult to isolate the impact of
a peer group from the impact of the school itself. Third, if behavior by two members of a peer
group affect each other simultaneously, it is difficult to measure the causal effect of any single
member on another member’s behavior. This reflection problem is less relevant in our study
because we focus on whether the characteristics of peer group members before the observation
period (medical school) affect the behavior of other members during the observation period.
Unlike Hoxby (2000) and Sacerdote (2001),

1

our peer groups are not random; prospective

medical students choose where to apply. The richness of our data, however, does allow us
to address the endogenous nature of a peer group. We include school-specific fixed effects to
control for unobserved characteristics that are shared by students who attend the same medical
school, and to control for the influence of the school itself on the outcomes and behavior of
its students. The peer effect variables are identified by variation within a school over time in
the entering students’ abilities and specialty preferences. In Manski’s (1993) framework, the
school fixed effects allow us to separately identify the correlated effects (common unobserved
characteristics of the constituents of the peer group and the common environment in which
the group members operate) from the exogenous effects (characteristics and background of
the students in the peer group).
Our approach yields an upper bound on peer effects if cohorts with high observed ability
are also cohorts with high unobserved ability. We present evidence that the observed and
unobserved abilities of medical school classes are positively correlated by examining how the
average observed ability of an entering medical school class varies within a school over time
as the size of the applicant pool varies, and as the percentage of entrants who are in-state
residents varies. High observed ability is correlated with high applicant to entrant ratios and
low percentages of in-state entrants, suggesting that cohorts with high observed ability also
1

Sacerdote (2001) examines peer effects at the room and dormitory level at Dartmouth College, where

freshmen are randomly assigned to rooms and dorms. He finds that peer groups defined at the dormitory level
have no effect on an individual’s grade point average and choice of major, but the grade point average of a
person’s roommate does have a positive effect on the person’s own grade point average. Hoxby (2000) examines
grade school children in Texas and assumes that gender, race, and ability variation across schools over time is
random. She finds that students receive higher reading scores when their classmates have high reading scores
relative to the particular school and grade.

3

have high unobserved ability.
One of the additional advantages of having data on the universe of medical students is that
we can experiment with different definitions of a peer group. If students form peer groups
based upon their race or gender, an analyst who only observes the characteristics of the entire
student population may falsely conclude that there are no spillovers from a peer group to its
members. We are also able to test whether a peer group exerts a stronger influence on men
versus women, blacks versus non-blacks, and high versus (relatively) low ability students. By
contrast, most existing studies of peer effects either have aggregated data on the characteristics
of a peer group (e.g., proportion of each school’s students with household income below the
poverty line), or individual-specific data for a single school (e.g., grade point average for each
student at a single college).
We find that the abilities and specialty preferences of a peer group have a significant effect
on medical students’ performance on the board exam and on students’ specialty choices when
we assume the characteristics of a person’s peer group are exogenous. After controlling for the
endeogeneity of peer groups using school-specific fixed effects, however, most of the peer effects
disappear. Although a student’s board score and ultimate specialty choice are influenced by
the school they attend, the transmission mechanism does not appear to be the abilities and
specialty preferences of the student’s classmates. Using a variety of definitions of a peer
group in the school-specific fixed effects model, we find no evidence that peer groups affect
specialty choices or performance on the board exam for males or blacks. The only evidence
of a peer effect is for female students. Females who attend schools where the other female
students received relatively high scores on the verbal portion of the MCAT exam subsequently
receive higher board scores themselves, although the magnitude of this effect is small. In all
specifications, the effect of the specialty preferences of a student’s peer group on his own
specialty choice disappears after controlling for school fixed effects.
We also examine whether a peer group exerts a different influence on low- versus highability students. Redistributing students to different schools according to their ability will
not improve overall student performance if peer effects are symmetric – if low-ability students
benefit from high-ability students, and high-ability students are harmed in a equal manner by
low-ability students. People opposed to tracking students according to ability, on the other
hand, argue that low-ability students benefit from the presence of high-ability students, but
the presence of low-ability students has few negative consequences for the high-ability students.
We find no evidence of asymmetric peer group effects according to students’ abilities, whether

4

or not we include school fixed effects.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the process by which medical
students choose specialties. The data are described in Section 3. We present the model and
the empirical approach in Section 4, discuss the results in Section 5, and conclude in Section
6.

2

How Medical Students Choose a Specialty

Physicians in the United States practice in more than 40 different specialties. There are substantial income differences between the specialties and substantial differences in non-monetary
attributes such as the type of patients treated (e.g., children versus adult; chronically ill versus
relatively healthy), the amount of face-to-face contact with patients, the length of residency
training, and the probability of being sued for malpractice.
Medical students do not formally choose a specialty until the fourth year of medical school
when students apply for a residency position in a particular specialty. In the first two years
of school students take required courses such as anatomy and pharmacology that are general
rather than specific to a specialty. Medical students begin their clinical training with a series
of required clerkships or rotations in the third year, including internal medicine, surgery,
pediatrics, psychiatry, obstetrics/gynecology, and family practice. In these rotations students
treat patients under the supervision of residents and faculty. Fourth-year students take elective
rotations in specialties such as plastic surgery, dermatology, and infectious diseases. Students
are likely, therefore, to learn about the characteristics of specialties after taking the board
exam.
Over 92 percent of U.S. medical students enter the National Resident Matching Program
in the Spring of their fourth year. In the Match, as it is commonly referred to, students rank
residency programs in descending order of preference and residency programs rank students in
descending order of preference. A computer algorithm then assigns students to residency programs taking into consideration the preferences of both parties (Roth, 1984). All fourth-year
medical students who are in good academic standing are technically qualified to apply to a
residency program in any specialty. In many-high income specialties, however, there are more
applicants than available positions (Nicholson, 2001). As a result, positions are rationed; students who perform well in medical school will be ranked relatively high by residency program
directors and will therefore have a better chance of receiving a position in the Match.
Orthopedic surgery provides a good illustration of the rationing process. Practicing or5

thopedic surgeons had the highest mean income of any specialty ($313,000) in 1998. Between
1996 and 1998, the number of medical students who listed an orthopedic surgery residency
program first in the Match exceeded the number of available positions by an average of 53
percent per year.
In Table I we report coefficient estimates from a probit regression for students whose
preferred specialty in the fourth year of medical school was orthopedic surgery. The dependent
variable takes on the value of one if a student was actually training in an orthopedic surgery
residency program after graduating from medical school, and a zero otherwise. We use the
score on the board exam, a uniform national exam that covers material from the first two
years of medical school and is taken between the second and third years of school, to measure
student performance in medical school. The board exam is important because it is one of
three tests an individual must pass in order to be licensed to practice medicine in the United
States and residency program directors often consider the score when evaluating applicants
(Crane and Ferraro, 2000).
The coefficient on the board score in Table I is positive as expected. In the bottom
panel of Table I we report the predicted probability that three different students would be
able to receive a residency position in orthopedic surgery. A white male student who has the
median board score among fourth-year students who prefer orthopedic surgery has a predicted
probability of 0.89 of receiving a residency position in the specialty. Otherwise similar students
with board scores at the 5th percentile and the 95th percentile have predicted probabilities
of 0.70 and 0.96, respectively. In general, the probability of entering a specialty is inversely
related to the average income of the specialty, and the board score has a stronger effect on
entry probabilities in high-income than low-income specialties (Nicholson, 2001).
The entry probabilities in Table I most likely understate the importance of medical school
performance on specialty choice for two reasons. First, a high board score probably helps
the student match to a more prestigious residency program within a particular specialty and
to a residency program in a relatively desirable location. Second, students are aware of the
rationing process and probably self-select into specialties where they have a good chance of
matching. Hence, a person with low unobserved ability will only enter the match in orthopedic surgery if he has a high unobservable preference for orthopedic surgery or high hidden
information that he would be able to find a match. If the hidden information on matching
is uncorrelated with board scores and unobservable preferences, the selection on the hidden
information will bias the estimated effect of board scores downward. That is, those who have

6

low board scores and still choose orthopedic surgery on average have higher values of the
hidden information.
Although medical students might not be aware of the difficulty of entering high-income
specialties when they first enter medical school, they are clearly aware of how competitive
certain specialties are by the time they take the board exam. A book that many second-year
medical students use to help prepare for the board exam advises students regarding how well
they need to do on the board exam in order to have a good chance of entering each specialty.
Students who would like to match in dermatology, ENT, orthopedic surgery, or opthalmology
are advised in a recent edition to “ace the exam”; students interested in emergency medicine,
ob/gyn, radiology and general surgery are advised to “beat the mean”; and students who plan
to enter pediatrics, family practice, internal medicine, anesthesiology, and psychiatry need
only “comfortably pass” the exam (Bhushan, Chu, and Hansen, 1998).
Manski (2000) outlines three ways that an action by one agent may affect the actions
of other agents in the same peer group: expectations, constraints, and preferences. Each of
these three channels appears to be important for medical students. First, as medical students
acquire information on the monetary and non-monetary attributes of each specialty, the revealed expectations (e.g., starting salary) of one’s fellow students may influence a person’s
own expectations. Second, if medical schools impose explicit or implicit quotas on the number
of students they will support for residency training in each specialty, or if medical students
perceive that schools behave in this manner, then when one student expresses a preference
for a specialty it could reduce the probability that her peers will also choose that specialty.
Alternatively, consider a student who matriculates at a medical school where the majority of
first-year students plan to enter a high-income specialty. Since residency positions are rationed
according to performance in medical school, the specialty preferences of the peer group might
create a highly-competitive environment that makes it less costly for other students to study
hard. Third, the revealed specialty preferences of a person’s classmates might directly affect
a person’s own ordering of specialty alternatives.

3

Data

The sample for this paper is the universe of medical students (n=47,755) who graduated from
a U.S. medical school in 1996, 1997, or 1998. Students were surveyed in the Fall of their first
year and the Spring of their fourth year by the Association of American Medical Colleges
(AAMC). On these surveys students were asked to indicate their preferred specialty or to
7

indicate if they were undecided about a specialty. The AAMC survey response rates among
the first-year and fourth-year students were 90.5 percent and 86.7 percent, respectively.
The Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) is our measure of students’ initial ability.
The MCAT has three sections that are separately graded: physical sciences, biological sciences,
and verbal reasoning. Each of the three components of the MCAT exam has a maximum of
15 points. We use the board exam to measure student performance in medical school.
After consolidating the AAMC surveys with test score data and eliminating observations
with missing values, we have complete data on MCAT scores, board scores, first- and fourthyear specialty preferences, and demographic information for 31,698 students across 124 U.S.
medical schools. The three most common reasons why students were dropped from the sample
were if they took the MCAT exam before 1991 when the format was slightly different (4,792
students dropped for this reason), if they failed to complete the first-year AAMC survey (3,703
students dropped for this reason), or if they failed to complete the fourth-year AAMC survey
(4,632 students dropped for this reason). We also deleted 392 students who attended one of
the three medical schools where a majority of the students are black because the racial mix,
and probably the peer group structure, are so different at these three schools than at the other
124 schools. To analyze potential bias in our sample, we ran a probit regression where the
dependent variable is one for students who were dropped from the analytic data set. Students
with lower verbal reasoning and biology MCAT scores, blacks, males, first-year students who
preferred a low-income specialty, and students who graduated in 1996 were more likely to be
deleted from the sample.
Sample means are reported in Table II. Forty-three percent of the students are female
and 5.4 percent are black. Two variables are created to capture the ability and specialty
preferences of each student’s peer group. For most of the analysis we define a person’s peer
group as all other students who graduate from his/her school in the same year (e.g., 1997
graduates of Jefferson Medical College), other than the student in question. In some cases we
define the peer group more narrowly as all female or all black students who graduate from a
particular school in a particular year. The ability peer effects are defined as the mean MCAT
scores for each section by a student’s classmates; the specialty peer effect is defined as the
proportion of a student’s classmates who indicated a preference for a high-income specialty in
their first year of school.
The mean combined MCAT score for the 124 medical schools over all three years ranges
from a low of 16.8 (out of a possible 45) at the lowest-scoring school to 34.0 at the highest-

8

scoring school, with a mean of 28.2. The proportion of first-year students interested in a
high-income specialty ranges from 0.066 to 0.667 across schools, with a sample mean of 0.33.
For our analysis, we aggregate the specialties into high- and low-income categories. The
following specialties had a mean income of $220,000 or more during the 1991 to 1997 time
period and are classified as high-income specialties: surgery, medical sub-specialties, radiology,
anesthesiology, pathology, and obstetrics.2 Low-income specialties include internal medicine,
emergency medicine, pediatrics, family practice, and psychiatry. Students undecided about a
specialty constitute a third specialty category.

4

The Model and Empirical Approach

We examine the students’ performances on the board exam as well as their speciality choices
in the final year of medical school. First we present a base model, ignoring for the moment
the endogeneity of a student’s peer group. Next we describe how we control for the potential
biases that may result because students choose their peer group, and we demonstrate why our
method yields an upper bound on the effect of the peer group.
Finding the right definition of a peer group is one of the goals of this paper. In particular,
the proper characterization of a student’s peer group may be the medical class as a whole, or
it may consist only of students of the same race or sex as the reference person. A second goal
is to examine whether peer groups have stronger effects for particular groups of people. For
example, Neal (1997) finds that blacks from low income families experience the largest test
score improvements from attending Catholic schools. We experiment with many peer group
definitions and allow peer groups to have different effects across racial and gender groups, and
across ability levels.

4.1

The Base Model

The board score for individual i, Bi , is assumed to be a function of both the individual’s and
the peer group’s abilities and preferences. An individual’s scores on the three components of
the MCAT exam represents his observed ability, Aoi . People may exert more or less effort in
preparation for the board exam depending on the specialty they intend to pursue. We therefore
control for differential effort by including an indicator variable for an individual’s specialty
preferences, d1i . This indicator variable takes on a value of one if the individual expresses a
2

Income data on practicing physicians are from the American Medical Association’s annual Socioeconomic

Monitoring Study, a stratified random sample of practicing physicians.

9

preference for a high-income specialty when they first matriculate in medical school.3
We allow both the abilities and the specialty preferences of a peer group to affect the board
score of the peer group’s constituents. The observed ability of the peer group is represented by
the average score on each of the three sections of the MCAT exam, Aoi . Students interested
in a high-income specialty may work harder in medical school to improve their chances of
entering these competitive specialties. When members of a person’s peer group work hard, it
may become less costly for that person to exert effort. The specialty preferences of the peer
group are represented by the proportion of the peer group who prefer a high-income specialty
at the beginning of medical school, d1i .
The estimating equation for a student’s board score is expressed as follows:
Bi = β0 + Aoi β1 + d1i β2 + Aoi β3 + d1i β4 + Bi
= ZBi β + Bi

(1)
(2)

2 ).
where Bi is unobserved and is assumed to be distributed N(0,σB

The specialty a student chooses in the fourth year of school is a function of demographic
characteristics of the individual (Xi ), the individual’s board score (Bi ), his initial specialty
preference (d1i ), and the specialty preferences of his peer group (d1i ). Note that a student’s
observed ability and the observed ability of their peer group affect specialty choice only through
the board score.
An individual’s latent utility of choosing a high-income or low-income specialty can be
expressed as follows:
UHi = αH0 + Xi αH1 + Bi αH2 + d1i αH3 + d1i αH4 + Hi

(3)

ULi = αL0 + Xi αL1 + Bi αL2 + d1i αL3 + d1i αL4 + Li

(4)

where Hi and Li represent the individual’s unobserved specialty preferences.4
Subtracting the latter equation from the former yields the difference in utility from choosing
a high- rather than a low-income specialty in the fourth year of medical school:
UHi − ULi = α0 + Xi α1 + Bi α2 + d1i α3 + d1i α4 + Si
= ZSi α + Si
3

(5)
(6)

Although we do control for initial specialty preferences in both the board score and specialty choice equa-

tions, the qualitative results do not change substantially if d1i is omitted. Further, there is virtually no sorting
on initial specialty choice by MCAT scores, suggesting that this variable represents individuals’ preferences.
4
We use d1i = 1 as opposed to d1i = 0 in this latter equation so that the variables in the two equations are
consistent. Since either d1i = 1 or d1i = 0, only the constant term is affected by this notation.

10

We observe whether this utility difference is positive or negative, where:
d2i = 1

if UHi − ULi ≥ 0

= 0

if UHi − ULi < 0

(7)

Students who want to enter a high-income specialty need to receive a relatively high score
on the board exam. A first- or second-year medical student who experiences a preference
shock that increases the utility of a high-income specialty will work harder when preparing for
the board exam. Therefore, we expect the unobserved component of the board score equation
to be correlated with the unobserved component of specialty utilities. If one does not control
for this correlation, the coefficient estimate on the board exam, α2 , will be biased, most likely
upward. An upward bias in α2 would cause us to overestimate the effect of a peer group’s
ability on a person’s specialty choice, as transmitted through the person’s board score. We
assume instead that the unobservables in equation (7) and the unobservables in equation (1)
have a bivariate normal distribution with the following covariance matrix:


2
σB
ρBS σB

Σ=
ρBS σB
1

(8)

The joint density f (B , S ) can be expressed as:
f (B , S ) = f (S |B )f (B )

(9)

With this factorization, Evans, Oates, and Schwab (1992) show that the log likelihood function
for individual i can be written as the sum of two parts:5
L1i = d2i ln Φ(Wi ) + (1 − d2i ) ln[1 − Φ(Wi )]


Bi − ZBi β 2
L2i = − ln(2πσB ) −
2σB

(10)
(11)

where:
Wi =

ZSi α + (Bi − ZBi β)ρBS σB
(1 − ρ2BS ).5

(12)

and Φ(W ) is the cumulative standard normal distribution.
If the correlation between S and B were zero, the first part of the log likelihood function
would simplify to a probit specification. The key assumption needed to identify ρ is that at
least one variable in ZB is not in ZS . We include initial ability measures (MCAT scores) in
5

Evans, Oates, and Schwab (1992) use this method to control for the endogeneity of a student’s peer group.

We use this method to control for the effect of specialty preferences on the effort exerted by a student in
preparation for the board exam.

11

ZB but not in ZS . That is, we assume that a student’s initial ability affects their board score
(which in turn affects specialty choice), but the MCAT score itself has no independent effect
on their specialty choice. We believe this is an appropriate specification as the MCAT score
had no significant effect on the probability of obtaining a residency position in the student’s
preferred specialty when the student’s board score was also included in the model.

4.2

Endogenous Peer Groups

A natural criticism of the proposed specification is that students choose their medical school,
so there may exist an unobserved ability variable Au that is correlated with both the average
observed ability and the observed first-year specialty choices of a school’s students. Students
who have high values of this unobserved ability measure may enroll at schools where the
level of unobserved ability of their peers is also high. Not being able to directly control for
unobserved ability may therefore bias upward the estimates of peer effects (both in estimating
board scores and specialty choices) because the peer measure would capture some of the effect
of an individual’s own unobserved ability.
Similar to Dale and Krueger (2000), suppose that a medical school’s admission officers
actually observe a student’s unobserved ability. School j admits student i if
Aoi + Aui + ij > sj ,

(13)

where sj is some threshold combination of observed and unobserved ability and ij is noise that
is uncorrelated with either ability measure. Schools that have higher thresholds will accept
students with higher values of both Ao and Au .
It is here that we take advantage of the panel aspect of our data set. In particular, we
add school-specific fixed effects to control for the average ability of students, both observed
and unobserved, at each school. When school fixed effects are included, the coefficients on the
peer effect variables are identified by variations within schools over time in the average ability
and specialty preferences of the medical school class. The question we examine, therefore,
is whether a student’s performance in school and chosen specialty change if he matriculates
at a particular school with a high-ability cohort or a cohort that has a strong preference for
high-income specialties.
Including school indicator variables allows us to separately identify the correlated effects
from the exogenous peer effects in Manski’s (1993) framework. Correlated effects exist if
the school itself or a student’s unobserved ability affects board scores and specialty choices;

12

exogenous peer effects exist when the characteristics of a group affect the decisions of its
members.
Our method will yield an upper bound on the estimates of the peer effects if cohorts with
high observed ability also have high unobserved ability. This will be the case when a school’s
admission standards change over time, due to a particularly strong and/or large applicant
pool. Another possibility, however, is that the admission standards do not change over time,
but instead medical schools admit classes with the same overall ability but with a different
composition of observed and unobserved ability. School fixed effects would then fully capture
the peer effect.6 We examine the relationship between the size of the applicant pool and
the observed ability of each medical school class and find evidence supporting the former
hypothesis above; cohorts at medical schools that have relatively high observed ability are
likely to also have relatively high unobserved ability.
To show this, we perform two tests using data from the Medical School Admission Requirements publication for 1992-1994, the years when the students in our sample enrolled in medical
school. At some medical schools the number of applicants varied substantially between 1992
and 1994, due presumably to changes in the prestige, reputation, and relative tuition of a
school, or to other idiosyncratic factors. For example, the number of applicants to George
Washington’s medical school increased from 8,496 for the 1992-93 school year to 12,074 for
the 1994-95 school year, while Georgetown experienced a much smaller increase (from 9,100
to 11,894). During this time period, the number of entrants at the two schools, and at medical schools generally, was constant. Similarly, Columbia had fewer applicants (2,463) than
Harvard (2,949) for the 1992-93 school year; by the 1994-95 school year, however, Columbia
had more applicants (3,508 to Harvard’s 3,424). Again, these changes in applicants occurred
with virtually no change in the number of entering first-year students.
In our first test, we examine whether schools admit students with higher observed ability in
years when they have a high applicant to entrant ratio. We regress the mean MCAT score of a
school’s entering students on school indicator variables, a time trend, and the school’s applicant
to entrant ratio. We include a time trend because applications to medical schools increased
during this period. The mean MCAT score of an entering class was significantly higher, at
the 90 percent level, in years when a school’s applicant to entrant ratio was relatively high.
Furthermore, this result is significant at the 95 percent level when we restrict the sample to
6

Note that this is only an issue for the ability peer effects; no such argument could be made with the

specialty preference peer effects.

13

private schools.7 It seems reasonable to assume that if an increase in the number of applicants
is associated with an increase in the observed ability of an entering class, then the same
relationship would hold true for unobserved ability.
The second test examines the composition of the entering class. Public medical schools
may be encouraged by state legislatures to admit a quota of in-state students. If so, we would
expect out-of-state entrants to have higher observed and unobserved ability than in-state
entrants at public medical schools. We examine how MCAT scores vary with the proportion
of entrants who are residents of the same state where the medical school is located. We find
that the mean MCAT score is significantly higher, at the 95 percent level, in years when the
percentage of matriculating students who are state residents is lower than the mean percentage
for that school. Since out-of-state applicants most likely have high observed and unobserved
ability, this result suggests that high observed ability cohorts are also high unobserved ability
cohorts. Both of these tests support the hypothesis that cohorts with high observed ability
also have high unobserved ability cohorts, which implies that our method will yield an upper
bound on the true peer effect.
One potential difficulty of using school-specific fixed effects is that there may not be enough
variation in the mean abilities and specialty preferences of entering cohorts within a school
over time to identify the peer effects. If this is the case, the standard errors will be so large that
the point estimates become meaningless. This does not occur in our analysis. Furthermore,
the two previous tests demonstrate that there are substantial differences in abilities between
cohorts.8

5

Results

5.1

Estimates of the Board Score Equation

Although the parameters of the board score equation and specialty choice equations are estimated jointly, we present the estimation results separately for ease of interpretation. We
discuss the fit of the model when reviewing the results on specialty choice. Throughout, the
definition of the peer group is constant within a particular specification. For example, if peer
7

The coefficient on the applicant to entrant ratio was insignificant when the sample was limited to state

schools, which may be due to constraints that state schools face to admit a quota of state residents. An increase
in the applicant to entrant ratio may produce higher ability in-state applicants, but these students might still
be below average relative to the out-of-state accepted applicants. We address this issue with the second test.
8
Although we did not analyze it formally above, the descriptive data indicate that there is even greater
variation in specialty preferences than abilities between cohorts at a medical school.

14

groups are defined by gender in the board score equation, they are defined identically in the
specialty choice equation.
In Table III we present the board score results when a peer group is defined to be a
person’s medical school class as a whole, excluding the person himself. The two columns
report results of the same regression with and without school-specific fixed effects. Students
with high initial ability, as measured by their scores on the three components of the MCAT
exam, also perform well on the board exam. The score on the biological sciences component
of the MCAT exam has an effect on the board score that is three times the magnitude of the
verbal score. Students who preferred a high-income specialty or were undecided about their
specialty in the first year of school received slightly higher board scores relative to students
who initially preferred a low-income specialty. Although the magnitude of this effect is small,
it does imply that students who plan to enter high-income specialties either have relatively
high unobserved ability or work relatively hard to prepare for the board exam.
In column one the ability peer effect for the verbal MCAT score is positive and significant;
students who attend schools where other first-year students have relatively high verbal MCAT
scores also receive relatively high board scores themselves. The ability peer effects for biological
and physical sciences are not significant. The specialty preferences of a person’s peer group
are also correlated with outcomes on the board exam. Students who attend medical schools
where a relatively large proportion of first-year students are undecided or prefer a high-income
specialty receive relatively high board scores.
In column two of Table III we report coefficient estimates from a specification that includes
school fixed effects.9 Although the coefficients on student characteristics do not change, the
coefficients on the ability and specialty peer effect variables become much smaller and all are
insignificant. Students who attend schools that have smart students perform relatively well
on the board exam. This improvement appears to be caused by either characteristics of the
school, such as the curriculum and the faculty, or the unobserved ability of the student, not the
abilities of a student’s peer group. The peer effect coefficients are now identified by changes
within a school over time in the average MCAT score and specialty preferences of first-year
students.
The coefficient estimates on the school indicator variables have a range of 21 points from
the school with the smallest to the largest incremental effect on a student’s board score. This
21 point range is about 1.2 standard deviations of the board score among the entire sample.
9

The school indicator variables are jointly significant. The log likelihood of the model is reported in Table

V.

15

These coefficients measure the incremental effect of a school on a student’s accumulation of
human capital and the effect of the unobserved ability that is common among the students
but uncorrelated with observed ability.
The insignificance of the peer effect coefficients in the latter specification may occur because
we mistakenly defined a peer group as a student’s entire medical school cohort rather than the
students within a person’s class who are of the same race or sex. It is also possible that certain
types of students benefit more from working with high ability students than others. We test
these hypotheses in Table IV. The first column repeats the ability peer effect estimates from
the base specification (Table III). As shown in the last three rows of the table, the definition
of a peer group, with and without school fixed effects, has little impact on the coefficients on
a student’s own ability.
In the second set of estimates, the school-wide peer effect is interacted with the black
indicator variable to see if blacks receive larger spillovers from their peers. The coefficients
are large and negative for both the verbal and biology peer effect. However, none of the black
interactions are statistically significant regardless of whether or not we control for school fixed
effects. Apparently there is not enough variation in MCAT scores in this version of the peer
group variable to precisely estimate the peer effect. In all other specifications there is sufficient
variation to precisely estimate the peer effect.
In the third specification of Table IV, we define the peer group for non-black students to be
the entire medical school class, as before. For black students, we define a second peer group
that only includes the other black students in the class. This second peer effect, which is
interacted with the black indicator variable, allows the abilities of black students in a cohort
to affect the performance of other black students. The coefficients on the interactions are
very small, both with and without school fixed effects. Unlike the previous set of estimates,
here the standard errors are quite small. Once again, when school-specific fixed effects are
included, none of the peer effect coefficients are significant.
Although none of the alternative peer group definitions yield significant peer effects for
blacks, this is not the case for women. In the fourth set of estimates, we interact the female
indicator variable with the school-wide peer effect variables. The coefficients on the biological
science and physical science peer effects are small and insignificant. The coefficient on the
verbal peer effect interacted with the female indicator is positive and significant when school
fixed effects are included. However, the school-wide verbal peer effect is negative and larger
than the female interaction. According to these results, men actually perform worse when

16

their cohort has strong verbal skills and women are unaffected. This seems implausible, which
suggests that the entire class may not be the correct peer group.
The final set of estimates uses same-sex peer groups within a medical school class. That
is, males are assumed to be affected only by other males, and females only by other females.
We also allow the effect of a peer group to vary by gender. The coefficient on the interaction
of the female indicator with the verbal reasoning peer effect is positive and significant when
we control for school fixed effects, while the coefficient for males is small and insignificant.
The biology and physical science peer effects are both insignificant. It is interesting that peer
effects appear to operate through the verbal score because the contribution of a student’s own
verbal reasoning MCAT score on his board score is substantially smaller than the contribution
of his biological science and physical science MCAT scores. In fact, the verbal peer effect for a
female student is similar in magnitude to the effect of her own verbal score. The verbal score
may capture how well individuals communicate which, based upon the results from Table IV,
may be more important for women than for men.10
We have also estimated models allowing the impact of peer groups to vary according to the
initial ability of a student (e.g., MCAT score at the bottom quartile, the middle two quartiles,
and the top quartile). If the mean ability of a peer group has the same impact on all members
of the group, then reassigning high ability students to a different school will not affect total
achievement. For peer effects not to be a zero sum game, some constituents must benefit
more from a peer group than others. In the debate on tracking by ability in public schools,
for example, some people argue that low ability students receive greater benefits from high
ability students than do other high ability students. Using a variety of specifications, we find
no evidence that peer groups exert a differential effect by ability.11

5.2

Specialty Choice Estimates

We report estimated coefficients from the specialty choice portion of the model in Table V.
The dependent variable takes on a value of one if a student prefers a high-income specialty in
his fourth year of medical school and a zero otherwise. The specification in the first column
does not include school fixed effects while the specification in the second column does.
10
11

This specification also has the highest log likelihood, as reported in Table VI.
In fact, when there were differential effects, it was the high-ability individuals who received the greatest

benefits from their peers. The mean biology MCAT score for a medical school class had a greater (and positive)
effect on the board scores of students in the highest ability quartile than students in the bottom two quartiles.
Although this result was often statistically significant, the performance differential was small. Results are
available from the authors upon request.

17

The coefficient on a student’s board score is positive as expected. Students who receive
relatively high board scores are attracted to high-income specialties, even after conditioning
on a student’s first-year specialty preference. The estimated correlation between the error
in the the board score equation and the error in the specialty choice equation is 0.11 and is
significant (reported at the bottom of Table VI), which confirms that the board score is, to
some extent, endogenous.
The coefficient on the female indicator is large and negative; women are more likely than
men to switch into low-income specialties during medical school. In both specifications, the
coefficients on a student’s specialty preferences in the first year of school are positive and very
large. Although a majority of students switch specialties during medical school, preferences
are clearly correlated across time. The coefficient on the proportion of a student’s peers who
prefer a high-income specialty in the first year of medical school (the specialty preference peer
effect) is positive and significant in the model without school fixed effects.
In column two we report the coefficient estimates when school fixed effects are included.
The 123 school indicator variables, whose coefficients are not reported in Table V, are jointly
significant. The only coefficient that changes substantially when school fixed effects are included is the specialty preference peer effect variable, which is now identified by variations
within a school over time in the proportion of first-year students who prefer high-income specialties. The magnitude of the high-income peer effect falls substantially and is no longer
statistically or economically significant. Although a student’s ultimate specialty choice is influenced by the school they attend, the transmission mechanism does not appear to be the
specialty preferences of a student’s classmates, as was also the case with the board score
analysis.
Corresponding to the board score results in Table IV, we report results with different
peer group definitions and where the magnitude of the peer effect is allowed to vary by race
and gender. This extended analysis is reported in Table VI. The peer groups are defined in
the same manner as in Table IV. The first specification in Table VI represents the baseline
case (with and without school fixed effects). In the second specification we interact the black
indicator variable with the school-wide specialty preference peer effect. The third specification
adds a second peer group variable that measures the proportion of blacks in a medical school
class who preferred a high-income specialty in their first year of school. This race-specific
peer effect variable is interacted with the black indicator variable. The fourth specification
includes an interaction of the school-wide peer effect with the female indicator variable. The

18

fifth specification defines peer groups by gender and interacts the female-specific peer effect
with the female indicator variable.
Without school fixed effects, the coefficient on the interaction between the black indicator
and the overall peer effect (in the third column of Table VI) has a similar magnitude as the
coefficient on the overall peer effect variable. The coefficient on the black interaction term
remains the same when school fixed effects are added, while the magnitude of the overall
peer effect coefficient does decrease substantially (column 4 of Table VI). However, as in the
board score regression, none of the interacted peer effects are statistically significant. All
the coefficients on the black peer group variables in the third specification are small and
insignificant.
In contrast to the board score analysis, where women had positive and significant ability
peer group effects when peer groups were defined more narrowly, the specialty peer effects for
women in Table VI are statistically insignificant and economically unimportant. This holds
both for the case when female is interacted with the overall peer effect and also when peer
groups are defined by gender.
Peers may influence each other at medical school in ways that we can not measure with our
data. For example, we do not actually observe students at the study group level. However,
we do observe many of the same characteristics that a medical school observes when making admission decisions. Unlike undergraduate education, where students can be randomly
assigned across housing units (see Sacerdote 2001), medical schools can affect peer groups
only through the admission of a medical school class. Medical schools cannot decide who the
medical students can or cannot study with. Hence, we believe that our peer group measures
are the most relevant ones for this study.

6

Conclusion

If peer groups influence students’ specialty choices, medical schools may be able to encourage
more students to enter primary care specialties by altering the characteristics of their matriculating classes. We use the universe of medical students who graduated from U.S. medical
school schools between 1996 and 1998 to examine whether the abilities and preferences of a
student’s peer group affects his achievement in medical school and his choice of specialty. We
take advantage of this rich data set to examine whether peer effects are stronger when the
peer group is defined by gender and race within a particular medical school class, and whether
the effect of a peer group is different across different types of people.
19

We find that the ability of a person’s peer group does affect his board score when we do not
control for the endogeneity of peer groups. When school fixed effects are included to control
for the endogeneity of peer groups, however, the ability peer effects disappear in almost all
specifications. We find no evidence that low-ability students receive a greater benefit from
the presence of high-ability peers than do high ability students. The one positive peer effect
that we find is for female students, who appear to benefit from attending medical schools that
have other female students with relatively high scores on the verbal reasoning section of the
MCAT exam.
In the models with school fixed effects, the peer effects are identified by variation in the
average ability of students within schools over time. We provide evidence that our method
yields an upper bound on the peer effect. In years where schools have relatively high applicant to entrant ratios, schools matriculate students with relatively high observed abilities.
Furthermore, in years when public medical schools have a relatively large number of in-state
entrants, observed ability is relatively low. This evidence suggests that cohorts with high
observed ability also have high unobserved ability.
We also find positive peer effects with specialty preferences when we assume the characteristics of a student’s classmates are exogenous. Attending a medical school with other
students who plan on choosing a high-income specialty appears to increase a person’s board
score and the probability they will choose a high-income specialty at the conclusion of medical school. We find no evidence that specialty preference peer effects are stronger when the
peer group is defined by race or gender rather than the entire medical school class, or that
specialty preference peer effects have a stronger impact on blacks or women. As before, when
we include school-specific fixed effects to control for the endogeneity of a peer group, the specialty preference peer effects become statistically and economically insignificant. Although a
student’s board score and ultimate specialty choice are influenced by the school they attend,
the transmission mechanism does not appear to be the abilities and specialty preferences of
the student’s classmates.

References
[1] Association of American Medical Colleges Medical School Admission Requirements,
United States and Canada vols. 44-46.
[2] Arcidiacono, Peter. “Compensating Differentials in College and in the Workplace,
Learning, and the Choice of College Major” Mimeo, 2001.
20

[3] Bhushan, Vikas, Edward Chu, and Jeffrey Hansen. First Aid for the Boards: A
Student-to-Student Guide to the USMLE Step I. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1993.
[4] Brock, William and Steven Durlauf. “Interactions-Based Models.” Forthcoming in
J. Heckman and E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics vol. 5, 1999.
[5] Caucutt, Elizabeth. “Peer Group Effects in Applied General Equilibrium.” Economic
Theory, forthcoming, 2000.
[6] Coleman, James S., E.Q. Campbell, et al. Equality of Educational Opportunity.
Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1966.
[7] Crane, Joseph T. and Carl M. Ferraro. “Selection Criteria for Emergency Medicine
Residency Applicants.” Academic Emergency Medicine 2000, 7(1) p.p. 54-60.
[8] Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B. Krueger. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a
More Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.”
NBER Working Paper #7322, August, 1999.
[9] Ding, Weili, and Stephen F. Lehrer. “Do Peers Affect Student Achievement in
China’s Secondary Schools?” Mimeo, 2001.
[10] Epple, Dennis, and Richard Romano. “Competition Between Private and Public
Schools, Vouchers, and Peer Group Effects.” American Economic Review 1998, 88 p.p.
33-62.
[11] Evans, William, Wallace Oates, and Robert Schwab. “Measuring Peer Group
Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 1996, 100 p.p.
966-991.
[12] Gaviria, Alejandro, and Steve Raphael, “School- Based Peer Effects and Juvenile
Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics 2001, 83(2) p.p. 257-268.
[13] Glaeser, Edward, Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose Scheinkman. “Crime and Social
Interactions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 1996, p.p. 507-548.
[14] Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, and Steven G. Rivkin.
“Do Peers Affect Student Achievement?” Mimeo, Hoover Institution, Stanford, 1999.
[15] Hoxby, Caroline. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation.” NBER Working Paper #7867, August, 2000.
21

[16] Manski, Charles F. “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2000, 14(3) p.p. 115-136.
[17] Manski, Charles. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.” Review of Economic Studies 1993, 60 p.p. 531-542.
[18] Neal, Derek. “The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Achievement.” Journal of Labor Economics 1997, 15(1) pp. 98-123.
[19] Nechyba, Thomas J. “Mobility, Targeting, and Private-School Vouchers.” American
Economic Review 2000, 90 p.p. 130-146.
[20] Nicholson, Sean. “Physician Specialty Choice Under Uncertainty.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 2001, forthcoming.
[21] Physician Payment Review Commission. Annual Report to Congress. Washington,
D.C., 1995.
[22] Roth, Alvin. “The Evolution of the Labor Market for Medical Interns and Residents:
a Case Study in Game Theory.” Journal of Political Economy 1984, 92(6) p.p. 991-1016.
[23] Sacerdote, Bruce. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 2001, 116 p.p. 681-704.
[24] Sloan, Frank A. “Lifetime earnings and Physicians’ Choice of Specialty.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 1970, p.p. 47-56.

22

Table I
Coefficient Estimates: Determinants of Receiving an Orthopedic Surgery Residency Position
Coefficient

Standard Error

Step 1 board score

0.0225*

0.0026

Female

-0.196

0.141

Black

-0.154

0.176

Graduated in 1997

0.0945

0.116

Graduated in 1998

-0.437*

0.105

Constant

-3.70*

0.569

Observations

1,375

Log likelihood

-558.38

Note: sample includes students who state a preference for orthopedic surgery in their fourth year
of school. Dependent variable is 1 if they were actually in an orthopedic surgery residency
position the year after graduating from medical school, and 0 otherwise.
*significantly different from zero at the five percent level
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Predicted Probability of Entering Orthopedic Surgery For a White, Male Student Graduating in
1996
Board score among fourthyear students who prefer
orthopedic surgery
5th percentile (187)

0.695

Median (220)

0.894

95th percentile (243)

0.962

Table II
Sample means (n = 31,698)
Mean

Standard
Deviation

Female

0.425

0.494

Black

0.0544

0.227

Graduated in
- 1996
- 1997
- 1998

0.279
0.360
0.361

0.449
0.480
0.480

MCAT score
- biological sciences
- physical sciences
- verbal reasoning

9.54
9.34
9.41

1.76
1.98
1.76

Step 1 NBME board score

210.8

18.0

Ability peer effects:
- biological sciences
- physical sciences
- verbal reasoning

9.52
9.32
9.38

0.763
0.880
0.673

0.327

0.0749

0.246

0.0646

Specialty preference peer effects
- proportion of first-year
classmates who choose a
high-paying specialty
- proportion of first-year
classmates who are
undecided

Table III: Determinants of a Student’s Board Store
Dependent variable is Step 1 board score (n = 31,698)
(standard errors in parenthesis)
Coefficient Estimates
Without School Effects
Student’s MCAT verbal reasoning
Student’s MCAT biological sciences
Student’s MCAT physical sciences
Student preferred high-income
specialty in first year
Student was undecided in first year
Peer Effects:
School avg verbal reasoning MCAT
School avg biological sciences MCAT
School avg physical sciences MCAT
Proportion of first-year classmates who
preferred high-income specialty
Proportion of first-year classmates who
were undecided
Graduated in 1997
Graduated in 1998
Constant

Coefficient Estimates
With School Effects

0.933*
(0.0558)
3.20*
(0.0647)
1.85*
(0.0594)
0.680*
(0.196)
0.696*
(0.213)

0.903*
(0.055)
3.18*
(0.0638)
1.84*
(0.0588)
0.640*
(0.193)
0.648*
(0.210)

1.35*
(0.239)
0.104
(0.471)
-0.165
(0.411)
5.13*
(1.29)
7.78*
(1.42)

-1.12
(0.613)
0.378
(0.730)
0.350
(0.729)
1.07
(2.43)
2.91
(2.26)

1.08*
(0.218)
2.99*
(0.230)
137*
(1.51)

1.12*
(0.240)
2.90*
(0.303)
154*
(6.49)

Note: model also includes indicator variables for females and blacks.
*significantly different from zero at the five percent level

Table IV: Determinants of Step 1 Board Score Under Alternative Definitions of a Student's Peer Group (n=31,698)
Peer Group:
All Students
Overall Peer Effect
- MCAT verbal
- MCAT biological sci
- MCAT physical sci

1.35
(0.239)
0.104
(0.471)
-0.165
(0.411)

-1.12
(0.613)
0.378
(0.730)
0.350
(0.729)

Black interactions
- MCAT verbal
- MCAT biological sci
- MCAT physical sci

Peer Group:
All Students

Race-specific peer
effect for blacks

1.34
(0.244)
0.211
(0.482)
-0.187
(0.420)

-1.06
(0.617)
0.496
(0.737)
0.282
(0.735)

1.35
(0.239)
0.1383
(0.472)
-0.150
(0.412)

-1.09
(0.613)
-0.387
(0.730)
0.373
(0.730)

-1.23
(1.29)
-2.33
(2.17)
1.31
(1.92)

-0.357
(1.29)
-2.32
(2.15)
.986
(1.91)

-0.513
(0.504)
-0.501
(0.617)
-0.195
(0.614)

-0.158
(0.500)
-0.300
(0.611)
0.417
(0.609)

Female interactions
- MCAT verbal
- MCAT biological sci
- MCAT physical sci
Student’s score
- MCAT verbal
- MCAT biological sci
- MCAT physical sci

School fixed effects?

Peer Group:
All Students

Peer Group:
Same Gender

0.975
(0.315)
0.104
(0.611)
-0.117
(0.535)

-1.53
(0.646)
0.285
(0.824)
0.485
(0.803)

1.35
(0.297)
0.474
(0.522)
-0.566
(0.457)

-0.272
(0.474)
0.468
(0.625)
0.095
(0.574)

0.814
(0.469)
-0.014
(0.934)
-0.092
(0.820)

0.918
(0.464)
0.213
(0.924)
-0.332
(0.811)

0.202
(0.424)
-0.082
(0.723)
0.199
(0.634)

1.23
(0.438)
0.252
(0.766)
-0.588
(0.673)

0.933
(0.0558)
3.20
(0.0647)
1.85
(0.0594)

0.903
(0.0551)
3.18
(0.0638)
1.84
(0.0588)

0.936
(0.0558)
3.20
(0.0647)
1.84
(0.0590)

0.908
(0.0550)
3.19
(0.0638)
1.84
(0.0588)

0.938
(0.0558)
3.21
(0.0647)
1.84
(0.0594)

0.908
(0.0551)
3.19
(0.0638)
1.84
(0.0588)

0.931
(0.0558)
3.20
(0.0647)
1.85
(0.0594)

0.902
(0.0551)
3.18
(0.0638)
1.85
(0.0588)

0.930
(0.0557)
3.20
(0.0646)
1.85
(0.0594)

0.903
(0.0551)
3.18
(0.0638)
1.85
(0.0587)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Note: model also includes female and black indicator variables, student's initial preferred specialty, specialty peer effects, and year indicators
Coefficients in bold are significant at the 95% level

Table V: Determinants of Specialty Choice
Utility Function Parameter Estimates for Choosing a High-Income Specialty (n = 31,698)
Dependent variable = 1 if chose high-income specialty in fourth year
(standard errors in parentheses)
Without School Effects
Board Score
Student chose high-income
in 1st year
Student undecided in first year
Peer effects:
Proportion of first-year classmates
preferring high-income specialty
Proportion of first-year classmates
who were undecided
Female
Black
Graduated in 1997
Graduated in 1998
Constant
Log likelihood

With School Effects

0.00350*
(0.00085)
1.53*
(0.0292)
0.626*
(0.0322)

0.00349*
(0.00104)
0.924*
(0.0177)
0.372*
(0.0194)

0.933*
(0.188)
0.167
(0.206)

-0.0336
(0.221)
-0.0748
(0.207)

-0.328*
(0.0263)
0.0882
(0.0564)
0.0650*
(0.0324)
0.132*
(0.0345)
- 2.86*
(0.294)

-0.197*
(0.0162)
0.0533
(0.0384)
0.0173
(0.0211)
0.0393
(0.0249)
-2.43*
(0.413)

-149135

-148428

*significantly different from zero at the five percent level

Table VI: Determinants of Specialty Choice in Fourth Year of Medical School (n=31,698)
Peer Group:
All Students

Peer Group:
All Students

Race-specific peer
effect for blacks

Peer Group:
All Students

Peer Group:
Same Gender

Overall Peer Effect
% of first year students
choosing high-income

0.560
(0.113)

-0.034
(0.221)

0.531
(0.115)

-0.065
(0.223)

0.555
(0.113)

-0.039
(0.221)

0.564
(0.145)

-0.044
(0.239)

0.423
(0.118)

0.044
(0.154)

% of first year students
undecided

0.102
(0.125)

-0.075
(0.207)

0.083
(0.128)

-0.101
(0.209)

0.106
(0.125)

-0.072
(0.207)

0.127
(0.161)

-0.063
(0.230)

0.204
(0.148)

-0.083
(0.186)

Black interactions
% of first year students
choosing high-income

0.573
(0.483)

0.525
(0.491)

0.110
(0.171)

0.065
(0.173)

% of first year students
undecided

0.418
(0.558)

0.441
(0.565)

-0.079
(0.208)

-0.097
(0.211)

Female interactions
% of first year students
choosing high-income

-0.010
(0.211)

0.023
(0.212)

0.071
(0.183)

0.115
(0.194)

% of first year students
undecided

-0.062
(0.244)

-0.281
(0.246)

-0.338
(0.206)

-0.057
(0.220)

Board Score

0.0035
(0.0008)

0.0035
(0.0010)

0.0034
(0.0008)

0.0034
(0.0010)

0.0034
(0.0008)

0.0034
(0.0010)

0.0035
(0.0008)

0.0035
(0.0010)

Rho

0.111
(0.014)

0.114
(0.017)

0.112
(0.014)

0.115
(0.017)

0.112
(0.014)

0.115
(0.017)

0.110
(0.014)

0.113
(0.017)

0.110
(0.014)

0.113
(0.017)

School fixed effects?
Log likelihood

No
-149315

Yes
-148428

No
-149126

Yes
-148422

No
-149219

Yes
-148424

No
-149131

Yes
-148422

No
-149133

Yes
-148420

Note: regressions also include female and black indicator variables, student's initial preferred specialty, and year indicators
Coefficients in bold are significant at the 95% level

0.0036
0.0035
(0.0008) (0.0010)

