NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEATHS OF MANUFACTURING PLANTS

Andrew B. Bernard
J. Bradford Jensen

Working Paper 9026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

We thank Peter Schott for numerous helpful discussions and for providing the import competition data. The
research in this paper was conducted at the Center for Economic Studies. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census.
The paper has not undergone the review the Census Bureau gives its official publications. It has been
screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Andrew B. Bernard and J. Bradford Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants
Andrew B. Bernard and J. Bradford Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 9026
July 2002
JEL No. D2, F1, L2, L6

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the causes of manufacturing plant deaths within and across industries in the
U.S. from 1977-1997. The effects of international competition from low wage countries, exporting,
ownership structure, product diversity, productivity, geography, and plant characteristics are considered.
The probability of shutdowns is higher in industries that face increased competition from low-income
countries, especially for low-wage, labor-intensive plants within those industries. Conditional on industry
and plant characteristics, closures occur more often at plants that are part of a multi-plant firm and at
plants that have recently experienced a change in ownership. Plants owned by U.S. multinationals are
more likely to close than similar plants at non-multinational firms. Exits occur less frequently at
multi-product plants, at exporters, at plants that pay above average wages, and at large, older, more
productive and more capital-intensive plants.

Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Tel: 603-646-0302
Fax: 603-646-0995
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu

J. Bradford Jensen
Center for Economic Studies, Bureau of Census
University of Maryland

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

1.

2

Introduction

Plant shutdowns are an integral part of the process of industrial restructuring. Plant deaths shape industry and aggregate productivity paths and
are a major component of job destruction. Over a typical five year period,
more than 32% of U.S. manufacturing plants shut down, accounting for
more than 22% of total job destruction.1 Foster et al. (1998) find that
plant births and deaths “contribute disproportionately to industry productivity growth”, as much as 35% of average annual multi-factor productivity
growth. While plant deaths are part of the normal process of the entry and
exit of firms, there is substantial heterogeneity in the shutdown probability
across plants, firms and industries. Some plant shutdowns are associated
with firm failure, others are choices by firms to reallocate activity among
production units and some plants are driven out of existence by increasing foreign competition. This paper examines the role of plant, firm, and
industry characteristics in the shutdown process as well as the eﬀect of
increasing import shares from low wage countries.
The determinants of plant deaths have been an active area of empirical
and theoretical research. Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988, 1989),
using data on the entire U.S. manufacturing sector, established the strong
co-movement of industry exit and entry rates as well as the relationship
between survival and plant age and size. Their work emphasized the
importance of sunk entry costs in determining death rates as well as the
large degree of heterogeneity across plants within industries.
Theoretical work has resulted in a number of models of industries with
heterogeneous firms in part designed to match the stylized facts of the
empirical literature.2 These papers have emphasized the importance of
understanding the shutdown decision in modeling the dynamics of industry
and aggregate productivity. However, to maintain analytical tractability,
these models have typically assumed a reduced number of state variables
for the firm, notably productivity and the capital stock. Associated empirical work has typically focused less on the shutdown margin than on
the diﬀerences in estimated industry productivity under the assumptions
1
Data tabulated by the authors from the Longitudinal Research Database of the
Bureau of the Census.
2
See Jovanovic (1982), Hopenhayn (1992a,b), Ericson and Pakes (1995), Olley and
Pakes (1996) and Melitz (1999).

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

3

of firm heterogeneity. In this paper, we concentrate exclusively on the
manufacturing firm’s decision to close a plant. In doing so, we develop a
new, richer portrait of the shutdown decision.
Our empirical work focuses on four important aspects of plant deaths
which have been largely ignored in the previous literature. We provide
the first evidence on the eﬀect of imports from low wage countries on the
survival of domestic plants.3 Second, we examine the role of firm structure and ownership in the shutdown decision. Third, we consider product
market characteristics including whether the plant sells some of its output
abroad and whether the plant produces multiple products. Finally, we
extend the range of plant attributes that might influence the probability
of failure to include variation in inputs such as capital and skill. We also
provide a new measure of the sunk costs of entry based on entry and exit
rates. Throughout, we distinguish between unconditional and conditional
relationships and control for sunk costs of entry and regional agglomeration.
Each of our four areas of focus provides important new insights into
the plant shutdown decision. We provide the first evidence on the role of
imports from low wage countries on plant survival. We use new industryspecific measures on the share of imports from low wage countries and
find that such import penetration sharply increases the probability of plant
death. More importantly, low wage import competition interacts with
plant characteristics within industries in ways predicted by endowmentbased trade theory. The least skill and capital intensive plants have the
greatest increase in their shutdown probabilities when low wage countries
enter their markets. This relationship suggests that imports from low
wage countries contribute to the reallocation of activity towards the most
capital-intensive, highest wage plants in the manufacturing sector.
The nature of the firm plays a crucial role in plant shutdowns. Unconditionally, multi-plant firms are far less likely to shut down a plant than a
single-plant firm. However, this positive relationship is driven entirely by
the nature of the plants within a multi-unit firm. Multi-unit firms have
plants with better characteristics, i.e. they are older, bigger, more productive, capital-intensive etc. However, accounting for other plant attributes,
these same firms are actually more likely to close a plant. Similarly, plants
3

We recognize the interest in all forms of import competition but in this paper we
choose to focus on only one aspect of changing US trade patterns over the last 30 years.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

4

that have changed ownership have positive attributes that make them less
likely to die. However, conditioning on the plant’s qualities, the new owner
is significantly more likely to close the acquisition. The multinational status of the firm also influences its decisions to close plants. We find that
a U.S. multinational is more likely to close a plant than a comparable domestic firm.
Third, the characteristics of plant product markets are strongly associated with the likelihood of exit. Single-product plants are much more
likely to fail in any five year period than establishments producing multiple
goods. The probability of failure continues to decrease as the number of
products made at the plant rises, even controlling for other plant attributes.
Exporting plants are also significantly less likely to die. The export status
of the plant reduces the probability of shutdown by as much as 15% even
after accounting for plant size, productivity, factor intensity and ownership
structure.
Finally, while plant size, age and productivity are important determinants of plant survival, there are additional positive eﬀects of capital and
skill intensity at the plant. Within and across industries, survival probabilities are greater for plants with high capital-labor ratios and those with
relatively skilled, high wage workers. In particular, these plants are better
able to survive increases in imports from low wage countries.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section
begins with a simple empirical model of plant shutdowns followed by the
development of a number of hypotheses about the determinants of plant
deaths. Section 3 introduces the new import competition measures. In
Section 4, we give a brief overview of the plant and firm data, describe
the particular variables we employ in the empirical analysis, and document
their unconditional relationship to plant shutdowns. Section 5 presents the
main results on plant death from our multivariate empirical specification.
Section 6 concludes.
2.

An empirical model of plant shutdowns

This paper examines the incumbent firm’s decision to close a plant.
For single-plant firms this is equivalent to going out of business while for
multi-plant firms this decision may represent a discrete adjustment to on-

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

5

going capacity. We present an empirical model of the shutdown decision
which is compatible with a wide range of existing models of heterogeneous
firm dynamics. We also assemble predictions about plant deaths from a
variety of fields including international trade, economic geography, and industrial organization. Building on the existing literature, we incorporate
plant characteristics such as age, size, and productivity as determinants of
exit while also considering the diﬀerential use of capital and skilled labor
by plants within industries. Our two major contributions come from the
extensive information on the role of firms in the plant shutdown decision
and the ability to identify industries facing increased competition from international trade. The interaction of plant production techniques and low
wage imports plays a significant role in the probability of plant death.
In this section we start by presenting a simple empirical model of the
shutdown decision. The model is general enough to be consistent with
the implications of a large number of theoretical models in the growing
literature on industry dynamics with heterogeneous firms. At every point
in time the incumbent firm maximizes the expected present value of net cash
flows. In any period, the firm first decides whether to continue operating
or exit the industry. Conditional on remaining in business, the firm then
decides on the appropriate level(s) of investment.4 The net cash flows in any
period are determined by conditions outside the industry, characteristics (or
state variables) of the firm, and state variables for the plant itself. The
three vectors of state variables are given by (θt , λt , γ t ) where θt is the set of
exogenous factors reflecting conditions outside the domestic industry, λt is
a vector of firm state variables, and γ t summarizes the market structure of
the domestic industry including the plant’s own prior investment history.
Single period net cash flow net of investment costs is given by
Rt (θt , λt , γ t , it ) = π t (θt , λt , γ t ) − c(it ).

(1)

The firm’s problem for each plant can be described by the general value
function for the dynamic program,
¡
¡
¢¢
Πt (θt , λt ) = max L, sup Rt (θt , λt , γ t , it ) + βΠt+1 θt+1 , λt+1 , γ t+1 |Ωt
(2)
4

In our empirical work, we will consider both physical and human capital to be relevant
for the shutdown decision.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

6

where L is the liquidation value of the plant, Rt is current period net cash
flows, it is a vector of current period investment in various types of capital
and Ωt is the current information available to the firm. Only if the ongoing
value of the enterprise is greater than the liquidation value does the firm
then choose a non-negative level of investment for the plant. We define the
indicator variable D to be equal to 1 if the firm exits. Then the shutdown
decision is written as
Dt =

1 if dt < dt (θt , λt , γ t )
0
otherwise

(3)

In this paper, we focus exclusively on the shutdown decision and estimate
a non-structural version of equation 3 as a function of a set of industry,
firm and plant characteristics. In the following sections we identify plant,
firm and industry variables from a variety of literatures that may aﬀect the
firm’s decision to close a plant or stop operating entirely.
2.1.

Heterogeneous firms and industry equilibrium

There is a growing body of research on plant entry and exit stimulated
by the work of Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988, 1989). Looking
across industries, Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (henceforth DRS) (1988)
find that plant entry and exit rates are strongly positively correlated, and
that the correlation persists over time. In DRS (1989), they consider the
role of plant size, age, and ownership type as determinants of plant failure.
They find that failure rates decline as size and age increase.
In his influential papers, Hopenhayn (1992a,b) develops a general equilibrium model of entry and exit to largely match the DRS facts. Hopenhayn’s model focuses on a steady state with balanced entry and exit. Comparative static exercises reveal that increases in sunk entry costs lower both
entry and exit rates causing them to move together. In addition, the models have the characteristics that failure rates are decreasing in both size and
age of the firm, matching the within-industry facts oﬀered by DRS (1989).
Hypothesis 1 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
industry sunk costs of entry.
Hypothesis 2 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
plant size.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

7

Hypothesis 3 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
plant age.
These features of correlated entry and exit and the negative relation
between exit and plant size and age are also present in the heterogeneous
firm models of Jovanovic (1982), Ericson and Pakes (1995), Olley and Pakes
(1996) and Melitz (2002). All these market structure models are driven by
the interaction of idiosyncratic paths for plant productivity with sunk costs
of entry. If productivity falls far enough, plants exit the industry. As a
result, all the models predict that low productivity plants are unconditionally more likely to exit. In addition, the evolution of industry structure
in these models means that younger plants are also much more likely to
fail. If the stock of physical capital can aﬀect the distribution of future
plant productivity, as in Olley and Pakes (1996), then low capital intensity
plants will be more likely to exit.
Hypothesis 4 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
plant productivity.
Hypothesis 5 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
plant physical capital intensity.
We also consider the possibility that the stock of human capital matters
for plant productivity and include a variety of proxies in our empirical
work.
Hypothesis 6 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
plant skill intensity.
2.2.

International Trade and Exit

One of the primary contributions of the current paper is to examine the
impact of increased foreign competition on the shutdown decision. Several
papers have integrated trade into an industry model with heterogeneous
plants with direct implications for exit. Melitz (2002) adds imperfect competition and exporting with sunk costs of entry to the Hopenhayn (1992a)
model. He finds that exposure to international trade will induce only
the more productive firms to enter the export market and simultaneously

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

8

causes the least productive firms to exit the domestic market entirely. Continued increases in the industry’s exposure to trade through reduced trade
costs or larger numbers of trading partners will further push out the low
end firms and may cause the most productive firms to expand. To the
extent that exporting signals positive information about the plant, beyond
measured productivity, we would expect current period exporters to have
a lower probability of failure.
In related work, Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2000) (henceforth BEJK) develop a static Ricardian model of exporting where again
only the most productive domestic firms are able to overcome the additional
costs of international trade and thus export. In this model, a reduction
in trade costs leads to increases in both imports and exports. The cost
reduction has two main eﬀects. Some plants that were producing just for
the domestic market no longer are the low price producers and must shut
down. These plants are typically of lower than average eﬃciency. In addition, some plants that were exporting are no longer the low cost supplier
in the foreign market and cease exporting. These former exporters may
or may not continue to supply the domestic market but their shutdown
rates will be lower than those for domestic-only suppliers. In addition,
some high productivity firms now start exporting. The model predicts that
trade cost reductions, or increased trading partners will lead to increased
plant closure and the probability of closure will be highest among the least
productive plants and lower among current exporters. If export sales do
not covary perfectly with domestic sales, then the resulting reduction in
the variance of sales and profits would increase the probability of survival.
Hypothesis 7 The probability of plant death is increasing in
foreign competition.
Hypothesis 8 The probability of plant death is lower for exporters.
Both theoretical models contain two relevant predictions for our empirical work. First, increased trade will raise the exit rate in exposed industries. Second, the probability of shutdown will increase the most among
plants with the lowest comparative advantage. One necessary limitation
of the models is that both consider only aggregate plant productivity as a

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

9

determinant of comparative advantage. We extend the factors contributing to a plant’s comparative advantage to include measures of production
techniques such as skill and capital intensity. In the face of increased
import competition, we expect that plants with low productivity and/or
low skill intensity and/or low capital intensity would be the most likely to
fail. In our empirical work, we look for a negative relationship between the
interaction of low wage competition and these plant attributes
Hypothesis 9 The probability of plant death is increasing in
the interaction of foreign competition and low physical capital
intensity/low skill intensity/low productivity.
Firm heterogeneity is not essential to establishing the link between import competition and plant death. Albequerque and Rebelo (2000) model
a two sector economy with homogeneous firms and sunk costs of entry.
Trade liberalization may induce reallocation across the sectors, through
firm deaths, if the import-competing industry is close to zero profits before
sunk costs and the export-competing industry is at zero profits net of sunk
costs. In such a case, resources will move from the import-competing sector
to the exporting sector and the transition will be associated with exit in
the former and entry in the latter.
2.3.

Product Markets

If there are sunk costs of entry into new product markets analogous to
the sunk costs of entry into exporting or the domestic market, we should expect to see a lower probability of death among plants that produce multiple
products. Alternatively, the production of diﬀering products may reduce
the variability of sales and profits and thus increased expected survival.
Hypothesis 10 The probability of plant death is decreasing in
the number of products produced.
2.4.

Firm Structure

A diﬀerent strand of the existing literature on plant closures considers
exit from declining industries. Typically in such studies the focus is on the
pattern of plant closure within an industry with the ‘decline’ of the industry

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

10

taken as exogenous. Ghemawat and Nalebuﬀ (1985) show that in a duopoly
with Cournot competition, equal costs and declining demand, the largest
firms exits first as the smaller producer will be a successful monopolist
for longer. Allowing for cost advantages for large firms can overturn the
theoretical results if the cost diﬀerentials are substantial enough. Whinston
(1988) shows that the single plant assumption is important for the results
on size and exit and argues that plants in multi-plant firms may be more
likely to exit. Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989) find that plants that
are part of multi-unit firms have lower failure rates than single-plant firms,
even controlling for size and age.
The results from the related empirical literature are mixed, although
all studies find that larger plants are less likely to exit. Lieberman (1990)
and Baden-Fuller (1989) find that diversified firms are more likely to close
plants, although Deily (1991) finds no such eﬀect in the steel industry. Gibson and Harris (1996) look specifically at plant exit during a period of trade
liberalization and quota reduction in New Zealand. They find that large,
old, low cost establishments are more likely to survive the liberalization
and diversified multi-plant firms were more likely to close plants.
Hypothesis 11 The probability of plant death may be higher or
lower for plants in multi-plant firms.
Hypothesis 12 The probability of plant death is higher for
plants in diversified firms.
We also consider the role of takeovers, or ownership changes, in plant
survival. A recently acquired plant may be more or less likely to survive
than a comparable plant without an ownership change. Survival chances
will be lower if the acquisition is a bad match for the new firm or if the
ownership change was intended to allow the firm to reduce overall capacity
in the industry. Survival will be enhanced if the new plant-firm relationship
is mutually beneficial.
Hypothesis 13 The probability of plant death may be higher or
lower for plants with recent ownership changes.
Finally among the firm characteristics, we examine the role of US multinationals in plant closures. Multinational status may itself be an indicator

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

11

of unobserved quality of the firm which would suggest a lower probability
of closure for its plants. Doms and Jensen (1998) find that multinational
plants have superior observable characteristics. However, Brainard and
Riker (1997a,b) and Braconier and Ekholm (2000) find that multinationals have an increased elasticity of labor demand due to their ability to
shift production across locations within the firm. They do not examine
whether this activity also coincides with increased shutdown of domestic
plants. This ability to relocate production within the firm may lead to an
increased probability of shutdown.
Hypothesis 14 The probability of plant death may be higher or
lower for plants owned by multinationals.
2.5.

Geography and agglomeration

Recent work in economic geography has emphasized the importance of
regional industrial structure for the survival and death of plants. Duranton
and Puga (2000) establish a collection of stylized facts about city structure
and sectoral composition. Summarizing their own research and that of
others, especially Dumais, Ellison and Glaeser (2002), they report that
the birth and death processes are spatially biased. Plant deaths are above
average in diverse cities while plant closure is lower in concentrated regions.
We create measures of relative regional specialization and relative regional
diversity to control for geographic factors in plant shutdowns.
Hypothesis 15 The probability of plant death is higher in industrial diverse regions.
Hypothesis 16 The probability of plant death is lower in industrially concentrated regions.
While this list of hypotheses is by no means exhaustive, it allows us
to consider the unconditional and conditional eﬀects of a wide variety of
factors that aﬀect the plant shutdown decision.
3.

Imports from Low Wage Countries

One contribution of this paper is the analysis of the eﬀects of imports
from low wage countries on the shutdown decision. By focusing on the role

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

12

of low wage countries, we concentrate on the fastest growing component of
U.S. imports over the last 25 years. We make use of two new measures
of international import shares developed by Schott (2002) from product
level import data collected by the Bureau of the Census. The first measure, valueshri , is the share of the value of imports coming from low wage
countries in industry i,
valueshri =

imports from low wage countriesi
.
total value of importsi

This measure is relatively straightforward as it considers the fraction of
the value of imports coming from countries with income per capita below
a predetermined cutoﬀ.
The second measure, prodshri , is the count of products within industry
i coming from those same low wage countries relative to the total count of
products imported in industry i,
prodshri =

products imported from low wage countriesi
.
total # of products importedi

A product is defined to be a ten digit HS category. A product is considered
to be imported from a low wage country if any low wage country has positive
imports in the HS category during the calendar year. Both measures are
indicators of the distribution of activity in imports coming from low wage
countries rather than measures of the level of activity in a particular sectors.
We define ‘low wage’ to be those countries that have per capita GDP levels
less than 5% of that of the U.S. (see the list of countries in the appendix).5
The 5% cutoﬀ was chosen because it captured a large part of the change in
U.S. imports over the period combined with the fact that the country set
was relatively stable during the sample.6 For our empirical work, we use
an annual average of the measures by industry over the 5 prior years.
The measures we employ in this paper have both advantages and disadvantages relative to existing measures. One distinct advantage is these
5
We use current real exchange rates to perform the conversion to US$ rather than
a PPP exchange rate. For such low levels of income the use of current rates does not
change the list of countries below the cutoﬀ, while the data availability on PPP exchange
rates sharply limits the available number of countries and years.
6
For countries with per capita income levels at or below 30% of the U.S. this group
experienced by far the largest increase in import share over the relevant 20 year period.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

13

measures are largely robust to events that aﬀect both the domestic industry and competing imports. In addition, we have both measures of value
and the range of the product space within an industry where competition
is occurring. An obvious disadvantage is that the measures only capture
the changing share of a subgroup of countries. However, given the focus
in recent years on competition from China and other low income countries,
this provides us with a clean picture of the importance of these imports as
opposed to imports from advanced economies.
Existing measures of international competition have a variety of potential problems. A standard index of industry import penetration,
imports
,
domestic production + imports
suﬀers from the fact that domestic output of the industry is in the denominator, potentially leading to a spurious positive correlation with plant
failure. Industry import price measures, arguably a preferable indicator
of pressure from international trade, are rarely available for a wide range
of industries or time periods.7 In addition, the heterogeneity of products
within most manufacturing industries may weaken the relationship between
aggregate industry prices and domestic outcomes.
Figure 1 shows our two low wage import measures for each of our 5
year periods.8 During 1972-76, industries show a wide range of low wage
imports as measured by the product import share. The median industry
sees imports from low wage countries in 38% of its products. In contrast,
for the same period, few industries have a large value share of imports from
low wage countries. Low wage countries contribute only 0.3% of the total
value of imports for the median industry.
Over time, both measures of low wage import shares have increased
substantially. In Figure 1, this is seen by an upward and rightward shift
of the scatter. By 1987-1991, the share of products with any imports from
a low wage country had risen to 62%. Most of the increase in product
penetration occurred in the latter part of the sample with over half coming
during 1982-1986. Similarly, the measure of value penetration coming from
7

For the US, import price series are available only after 1977, and only for more
aggregate 3-digit SIC industries.
8
Note that the competition measures are annual averages for the five year periods
preceding the Census year, i.e. 1972-76, 1977-81, 1982-86, and 1987-1991.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

14

this group of poor countries increased for the median industry from 0.3%
to 2.5%. Over two thirds of that increase occurred during the 1980s. Generally, across industries, high levels of product penetration are positively
correlated with subsequent increases in the share of import value coming
from poor countries.
4.

Data

The data in this paper come from two sources. In addition to the
competition measures described above, the plant and firm data come from
the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) of the Bureau of the Census.
We use data from the Censuses of Manufactures (CM) starting in 1977
and conducted every fifth year through 1997. The sampling unit for the
Census is a manufacturing establishment, or plant, and the sampling frame
in each Census year includes detailed information on inputs, output, and
ownership on all establishments.9
From the Census, we obtain plant characteristics including location,
capital stock at the plant, the quantity of and wages paid to non-production
and production workers, total value of shipments, total value of exports,
energy and purchased material inputs, the number of products produced at
the plant, the primary Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), and age.
We also can match plants to their parent firms and obtain information on
the number of plants in the firm, the share of total firm assets held overseas,
and changes in ownership.
To develop our sample of plants we must make several modifications to
the basic data in the LRD. First, we drop any industry whose products are
categorized as ‘not elsewhere classified’. These ‘industries’ are typically
catch-all categories for a group of heterogenous products. In practice, this
corresponds to any industry whose four digit SIC code ends in ‘9’. Second,
we must aggregate some 4-digit SIC industries in order to match the import
competition measures.10 This aggregation leaves us with 337 industry
9
While the LRD does contain basic information on small plants (so-called Administrative records), we do not include them in this study due to the lack of information on
inputs other than total employees. Since our competition measures start only in 1972,
we must start our sample with the 1977 Census.
10
This aggregation is necessary because the HS categories in the customs forms cannot
distinguish between certain products which normally would fall into distinct 4-digit SIC

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

15

categories. We use information on all manufacturing establishments in the
1977, 1982, 1987, and 1992 Censuses but must drop any establishment that
does not report one of the input or output measures.11 We are left with
450,000+ plant-year observations across the four panels.
4.1.

Variables

In this section we describe the construction of the variables used to test
the range of hypotheses from Section 2.. We also report the unconditional
relationship between the variables and the probability of plant death. Table
1 reports the mean of each variable for two types of plants, deaths and
survivors. Column 3 of Table 1 also gives the marginal eﬀect on the
probability of plant shutdown from a univariate probit of plant death of
the form:
(4)
P r (Dpt = 1|Xpt ) = Φ (ct + βXpt )
where Xpt is the plant characteristic in year t and ct is a full set of year
dummies. Standard errors are robust to repeated observations on individual plants. Column 1 of Table 7 provides a summary of both the univariate
probit results as well as the full multivariate specification.
4.1.1.

Imports from Low Wage Countries

Starting with the role of low wage imports in plant deaths, we find that
failing plants are in industries with higher import shares from low wage
countries. Including both share measures as well as their interaction, we
find a strong positive relationship to the probability of death. This is best
seen in Figure 2 and Table 2.
From the unconditional probit including low wage import shares and
their interaction, we calculate for each industry and year the probability of
failure.12 We then subtract oﬀ the probability calculated for an industry
with median levels of low wage import shares in that year. The resulting
categories.
11
For 1977 and 1982 we use the Bureau of the Census imputations of capital stock
for establishments not included in the Annual Survey of Manufactures. Our results are
robust to the exclusion of these plants.
12
Since the competition levels are available only at the industry level, each plant in an
industry has the same calculated probability of failure.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

16

number is the increase (decrease) in the probability of death as import
shares rise above (fall below) that in the median industry. Figure 2 plots
the relationship between import shares levels and the unconditional probability of failure over the relevant range of the import variables. Clearly,
higher shares of imports and products from low wage countries are associated with large increases in the probability of plant failure.
Table 2 shows the distribution of these industry eﬀects for 1977 and
1992. In 1977, most industries had only modest exposure to low wage imports. Even so, 14% of the industries faced enough imports from low wage
countries to raise the unconditional probability of plant death by at least
2.5 percentage points above that of a plant facing median levels.13 Sixteen industries, including Leather Gloves (SIC3151) and Women’s Dresses
(SIC2335), faced enough low wage competition that their probability of
plant shutdown was more than 7.5 percentage points above the median.
By 1992, many more industries were facing substantial imports from
low wage countries as shown by the increase in the extremes of the table.
The probability of plant death was raised by at least 2.5 percentage points
in 27% of industries, and more than 9% of the industries saw their failure
probabilities rise by 12.5 or more percentage points. Overall there is a
strong positive relationship between the unconditional probability of plant
death and the level of imports from low wage countries.14
4.1.2.

Ownership Structure

The variables on firm ownership structure are all categorical in nature
and come from the LRD. We consider several possible configurations of
multi-plant firms. A plant is said to belong to a multi-plant firm if there is
at least one other plant with the same firm ownership number,
½
1 if ∃ at least one other plant with the same FirmID
multi =
.
0
otherwise
However, in our empirical work we would like to consider two types of plants
within the multi-plant firm. The first, called ‘orphan’, is a plant that has
a unique industry identifier within the firm, i.e. there are no other plants
13

The unconditional probability of death over all plants was 26.2%.
We caution that nowhere in this paper do we consider plant entry. Our results do
not provide information on net plant entry or exit.
14

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

17

with the same primary industry classification in the same firm. Plants of
this type are unique within the context of a diversified firm.
½
1 if multi = 1 & @ a plant with the same SIC within the firm
.
orphan =
otherwise
0
The second type of plant within the multi-plant firm, ‘sibling’, shares a
primary industry classification with at least one other plant within the
firm.
½
1 if multi = 1 & orphan = 0
sibling =
.
0
otherwise
Together orphans and siblings span the set of plants that belong to a multiplant firm, i.e. orphan + sibling = multi.
On average, 34.1% of surviving plants belong to multi-plant firms as
opposed to 27.6% of plants that exit (Table 1). Orphans are slightly more
likely to be found among dying plants than continuing ones (7.0% versus
6.7%), while siblings are much more likely to be found among survivors
(27.4% versus 20.6%). Unconditionally, belonging to a multi-plant firm is
associated with a 3.6 percentage point reduction in the probability of death
for the plant. This is a large reduction given that the overall probability
of plant failure in the sample was 26.2%. Plants with either sibling or
orphan status are less likely to shut down than stand alone establishments.
The reduction in the probability of death is much larger for siblings (7.0
percentage points) than for orphans (1.0 percentage point).
A plant is said to have changed owners in the previous five years if the
firm ID in the dataset changes,
½
1 if F irmIDt 6= F irmIDt−5
.
takeovert =
otherwise
0
For plants that did not exist in year t-5 we assume there was no change
in ownership. This measure cannot distinguish between various types of
ownership changes such as hostile versus friendly takeovers. 8.3% of plants
labelled as ‘takeovers’ survived to the next Census, while only 7.3% of such
plants died. The probability of closure was 2.9 percentage points lower
for plants that experienced an ownership change in the previous five years
than at plants without an ownership change.
The final firm characteristic we consider is its multinational status. We
construct a measure of multinational status as a function of the share of

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

18

firm assets held overseas. We define a U.S. multinational to be a firm with
at least 10% of its assets held outside the United States,
(
Assets
1
if Foreign
Total Assets ≥ 0.1 .
U SM N C =
otherwise
0
The assets measure is only available for U.S. firms so we cannot construct
a measure of foreign multinational ownership in our sample.15 This means
that plants owned by foreign multinationals are grouped into the category
that includes firms with no foreign presence. Plants owned by U.S. multinationals were more likely to be found among survivors (8.5% versus 6.2%)
and unconditionally, these plants had a 6.2 percentage point reduction in
their probability of death.
We caution that all these results on firm ownership are unconditional.
In particular, plants that change owners, are part of larger firms and are
part of multinational groups also have ‘good’ plant characteristics. Size,
age, productivity, capital intensity and wages are all positively and significantly correlated with each of the firm measures. In Section 5., we
control for plant attributes and attempt to identify the marginal eﬀect of
firm ownership structure on the probability of plant death.
4.1.3.

Products and Markets

Recent models of heterogeneous plants and international trade by Melitz
(2002) and BEJK (2000) predict that an exporting plant should have a lower
probability of failure than a non-exporter. In these models, the relationship
is driven by the relatively high productivity of exporting plants as opposed
to exporting itself. We recognize that exporting may proxy for other
unobservable, desirable characteristics of the plant. Our export measure is
an indicator variable that is one when the plant exports and zero otherwise.
As seen in Table 1, surviving plants are much more likely to be exporters
(22.1%) than are failing plants (12.0%). The results from the unconditional
probit show that exporting by the plant is associated with a 12.6 percentage
point reduction in the probability of death. This magnitude is enormous
given that the unconditional average probability of death is 26.2%.
15

See Doms and Jensen (1998) for a description of this measure.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

19

We also consider a measure of the market heterogeneity of the plant’s
output through the number of products that it reports manufacturing. If
every new product requires additional sunk costs of entry, analogous to
the export market, only the most productive plants will be able to enter
multiple product markets. Survivors produce 3.5 products on average while
deaths produce 2.6. For the probits, we create separate dummy variables
for plants that produce 2, 3, or 4+ products.16 The probability of death
is decreasing in the number of products made by the plant. Relative
to single product establishments, plants that produce 2, 3, or 4+ products
have failure probabilities that are 5.7, 11.1 and 15.6 percentage points lower
respectively.
4.1.4.

Entry Costs

The industry market structure models discussed in Section 2. combine
firm heterogeneity with sunk costs of entry. The magnitude of the sunk
costs of entry is of primary importance in determining the steady state
rate of firm births and deaths within the industry. Since our focus is not
on the estimation of sunk entry costs and because entry costs may covary
with, or be determined by, plant characteristics such as capital or skill
intensity, we need to control for entry costs in our multivariate empirical
specification. Unfortunately, there is no direct evidence on the magnitude
of these costs across industries or over time. Most other cross-industry
studies of shutdown have included industry fixed eﬀects to soak up variation
in industry entry costs. To the extent that sunk costs are varying across
time as well as industries, fixed eﬀects are inadequate.
Instead of a direct measure, we use the theory itself to generate an
indirect measure. The market structure models all predict that, in steady
state, entry and entry rates will covary exactly as sunk entry costs change.
If all our industries were in steady state, we could use the industry entry
rate to proxy for industry sunk costs in our plant shutdown equation.
In practice, of course, some industries are growing and others are declining leading to important diﬀerences in the two margins. However, we
can still use the co-movement of the two rates across industries to develop
an entry cost measure. Our measure of industry entry costs is based on the
16
Single product plants account for 39% of the sample. Plants that produce 2, 3, or
4+ products account for 20%, 11%, and 30% respectively.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

20

minimum of the entry and exit rates,
ECi = −{min [entryratei , exitratei ]}.
Contracting industries by definition will have higher exit rates than entry
rates. However, a contracting industry with low entry costs will have a
higher entry rate. Conversely, an expanding industry with relatively low
entry costs will have fewer plant deaths and a lower exit rate.17
The mean of our entry cost measure for deaths and survivors is given
in Table 1. As expected, industry entry costs are significantly lower on
average for plants that die, -0.35, that for plants that survive, -0.32. The
marginal eﬀect on the probability of death for the average plant is large,
negative and significant.
4.1.5.

Plant Performance

Both the existing theoretical literature and previous empirical work
suggest that plant age, size and productivity play important roles in determining plant survival. The LRD does not record the precise start year
for any plant. Instead, we only know the first year the plant appears in
a Census of Manufactures starting with the 1963 Census. Our measure of
plant age is the diﬀerence between the current year and the first recorded
Census year. Plants that are in their first Census are given an age of zero.
Plants that die are 8.6 years old in our sample while plants that survive are
11.7 years old according to this measure (Table 1). The marginal eﬀect of
age on the probability of death is negative and significant.
Following previous work, we measure the size of a plant by the log of
its total employment. Survivors are more than 60% larger than exits and
the marginal probability of death is sharply declining in plant size.
As is well known, accurately measuring multi-factor productivity at the
plant is quite diﬃcult. Since we have only single observations for many
of the establishments in the sample, we are constrained in our choice of
productivity measures. We estimate a simple five input production function
17
We thank Marc Melitz for suggesting this measure. Our measure is similar to one
calculated by Dunne and Roberts (1991) who find their measure of “producer volatility”
is both more pronounced and more persistent than entry, exit or net entry, suggesting it
is a good proxy for sunk costs.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

21

in logs for each industry and year,
ln Ypit = β 0it +β 1it ln Pipt +α2it ln Nipt +β 3it ln Kipt +β 4it ln Bipt +β 5it ln Mipt +

ipt

(5)
where Y is gross output of the plant in year t, P and N are the number of
production and non-production workers at the plant, K is the book value of
machinery and equipment, B is the book value of buildings and structures
and M is the value of purchased inputs and energy. Recognizing that
we are unable to adequately control for the co-movement of markups and
productivity, or the co-movements of variable inputs and productivity, we
use ipt as our measure of plant total factor productivity. By construction
the measure is mean zero for each industry in each period. Survivors are
0.9% more productive than the average plant in the industry and 3.3%
more productive that plants that fail (Table 1). The marginal eﬀect of our
productivity measure on the probability of death is negative and significant.
4.1.6.

Plant Input Intensities

As discussed in Section 2., endowment-based trade theories predict declining output in U.S. industries with low capital intensity and skill intensity. A simple extension of the theory along the lines of a DornbuschFischer-Samuelson model to incorporate within industry heterogeneity also
leads us to expect that higher plant capital and skill intensity will reduce
the probability of plant closure.18
Capital intensity at the plant is measured by the log of the capital-labor
ratio. Surviving plants are 31% more capital intensive than exits and the
marginal eﬀect of capital intensity on the probability of death is negative
and strongly significant.
Skill intensity is harder to measure in the LRD as there is relatively
little information on the characteristics of the workforce. We construct
three measures to identify plants that employ relatively skilled workers.
First, we use the share of non-production workers in the total workforce.
This measure has some well-known problems as a measure of skill. Most
notably, non-production workers can be relatively skilled, e.g. managers,
or relatively unskilled, e.g. janitors. The non-production worker ratio
18

The intra-industry model of Olley and Pakes (1996) predicts that physical capital
intensity will be positively correlated with plant survival.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

22

may have an additional problem in that plants performing poorly with a
relatively high probability of future failure may release production workers
first.19 This would raise the non-production worker ratio for plants with a
higher probability of death. In fact, there is no diﬀerence in the average
non-production ratio across surviving and dying plants (Table 1). In the
univariate probit, however, the marginal probability of death is significantly
decreasing in the share of non-production workers.
Our other two skill measures are based on the average wages paid to the
each of the two types of labor, production and non-production. Both types
of wages are significantly higher at surviving plants, 13% in each case. In
addition, the probit estimates show a strong negative relationship between
log wages and the probability of plant shutdown.
4.1.7.

Agglomeration and Geography

Our controls for geographic eﬀects on plant closure come from Duranton
and Puga (2000). For regions, we use the Labor Market Areas (LMAs) constructed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis based on common commuting
patterns. In the 50 states in our sample there are 183 LMAs. Working
with the LMA as the unit of geographic analysis has several advantages.
First the LMAs cover the entire U.S., rather than just metropolitan areas. Second, LMAs can cross state lines and large states can have multiple
LMAs, thus allowing them to correspond more closely to areas of related
economic activity.
The measure of regional relative specialization is given by
µ ¶
sri
RZIr = max
i
si
where sri is the share of industry i in region r and si is the share of industry
i in total national employment.
The measure of regional relative diversity is given by
RDIr = P

1

i |sri

19

− si |

This assumes that production workers are closer to a true variable input.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

23

where sri is the share of industry i in region r and si is the share of industry i
in total national employment. Plant deaths should be decreasing in relative
regional specialization and increasing in relative regional diversity.
As shown in Table 1, plants that die are in regions that are more diverse and in regions that are less specialized as predicted by Duranton and
Puga (2000). Running a simple probit of plant death on both geographic
measures, we find that plant deaths are significant related to regional specialization (negatively) and to regional diversity (positively) in the expected
directions. In the next section we present our multivariate specifications,
including both geographic measures as controls.
5.

Empirical results

We now estimate our base multivariate specification, first without the
measures of international competition in Table 3 and then including the
low-wage competition measures and their interaction eﬀects in Tables 4
and 6. Table 7 provides a summary of both the univariate and multivariate
probit results.
Columns 1-3 in Table 3 report our base specification pooled across years
for all plants in the sample. All plant characteristics (except plant export
status) are included along with our measures of firm ownership structure,
regional specialization, industry entry costs and year dummies. Column 3
reports the change in the probability of death for a one standard deviation
increase in the plant and firm characteristics.
As expected, the probability of plant shutdown is significantly decreasing in industry entry costs, plant age, plant size and plant productivity.
Increasing plant size by one standard deviation reduces the probability of
shutdown by 5.2 percentage points, and a comparable increase in age is associated with a 3.3 percentage point drop.20 The probability of death falls
1.5 percentage points for a one standard deviation increase in productivity.
Even controlling for age, size and productivity, we find significant roles
for plant factor intensity in the shutdown decision. Both capital and skillintensive plants are less likely to die. The capital-labor ratio, production
worker wage, and non-production worker wage are all significantly nega20

The change in probability is calculated with all variables at their sample means,
increasing only the relevant variable.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

24

tively associated with plant failure, with the probability falling 0.8, 1.6 and
1.2 percentage points respectively for a one standard deviation increase.
The ratio of non-production workers is the sole exception as it is positively
associated with shutdown.
The eﬀects of our geography variables remain unchanged. Increased
relative regional specialization in a dominant industry decreases the probability of exit while increased relative regional diversity across industries
increases the probability of closure.
5.0.8.

Firms and plant deaths

Next, we turn to the role of firm ownership in plant shutdowns. Relative
to the unconditional results reported in Section 4.1.2., we find substantial
changes in the role of firm characteristics in shutdowns once we condition on
plant characteristics. Unconditionally, plants that are part of a multi-plant
firm are less likely to be shut down than single-plant firms. However, this is
driven entirely by the ‘good’ characteristics of plants that are part of larger
firms. Controlling for plant size, age, factor intensity, etc., we find that the
being part of a larger firm significantly increases the probability of death
at the margin. The magnitude of the eﬀect is very large and is stronger for
plant that are ‘orphans’ than for ‘siblings’, 8.0 and 3.1 percentage points
respectively, although both are significant at the 1% level. The stronger
eﬀects on orphans matches the theoretical predictions from the declining
industry literature that diversified firms are more likely to close plants.
Multi-plant firms are able and willing to use the plant shutdown margin to
adjust employment and output. The diﬀerence in the shutdown probability
may point to separate sunk costs of entry for the firm and the plant.
Ownership changes at the plant show a similar pattern. Plants that
have experienced a change in ownership in the previous five year period have
characteristics that decrease their probability of death. This suggests that
typically ownership changes occur at ‘good’ plants. However, controlling
for other plant and firm attributes, we find that ‘takeover’ targets are more
likely to shut down than plants with unchanged ownership by 6.2 percentage
points. We cannot tell if this dramatically higher probability of failure is
related to a poor match between plant and firm or a planned rationalization
of capacity by the firm.
Finally, we consider whether the multinational status of the owning firm

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

25

is related to the probability of shutdown. Once again the unconditional
relationship suggests that domestic plants owned by U.S. multinationals
have ‘good’ attributes that make them less likely to fail. Controlling for
plant characteristics and other firm ownership characteristics, we find that
the marginal eﬀect of multinational ownership is to increase the probability
of exit by 3.6 percentage points. This matches the notion of ‘footloose’
capital proposed by Rodrik (1997). The foreign assets of the multinational
firm may increase their flexibility and thus raise the probability that they
will close one of their domestic plants. This also matches the evidence
of Brainard and Riker (1997a,b) and Braconier and Ekholm (2000) that
multi-nationals have, in eﬀect, an increased elasticity of labor demand due
to their ability to shift production across locations within the firm.
5.1.

Product markets and shutdowns

Both unconditionally and conditionally, plants that produce more products have lower probabilities of failure. Moving from 1 to 2 products
reduces the plant death probability by 2.5 percentage points, moving to 3
products lowers the probability an additional 3.7 percentage points. Plants
with large numbers of products, 4 or more, are dramatically less likely to
fail than a plant with a single product (8.5 percentage points).
In columns 4-5 of Table 3, we add plant export status to the base specification. Due to the limited availability of the export variable, we are able to
run the probits only for the 1987-1997 panels. None of the other variables
change sign, or substantively change their magnitude, from the full sample
estimation suggesting the underlying relationships are not changing over
time. Exporting by the plant remains significantly positively associated
with plant survival. Conditional on all the other variables, the probability
of death at exporters is 4.2 percentage points lower than at non-exporters.
The sign of the export variable is unchanged from the unconditional regressions reported above. Although the selection and survival models of
Melitz (2002) and BEJK (2000) predict that exporting will be associated
with lower failure rates, this relationship is driven by the underlying plant
productivity. Our strong results on exporting in the full specification suggest either that exporting has a direct positive eﬀect on survival or that
exporting is correlated with other unobserved characteristics of the firm
that increase survival.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

5.2.

26

Imports from low wage countries

We now consider the role of imports from low wage countries in shaping
industry structure through plant deaths. For our import measures, we use
the value share of imports, the product number share and the interaction
of the two as described in Section 3.. We expect to see two types of
eﬀects on shutdowns. First, plants in industries that are facing high or
rising imports from low wage countries should be more likely to close. To
test this we rerun our base specifications with the inclusion of the three
import measures. Second, within industries, we do not expect to see an
equal impact on all plants. Plants at a comparative disadvantage, either
because of low capital and skill intensities or low productivity, should be
more likely to fail in the face of high imports. Thus, within industries, these
low skill, low capital, and low productivity plants should be more likely to
close than their capital and skill intensive counterparts. To capture this
within industry heterogeneity, we interact plant characteristics with the
product × value import measure. The interacted plant characteristics are
capital intensity, the three skill measures, and productivity. Tables 4 and
6 contains the results including the measures of low wage imports without
and with the interaction terms respectively.
Imports from low wage countries remain significantly positively related
to the probability of plant death even after controlling for other plant, industry, and regional characteristics. This is best seen in Figure 3 which
shows the conditional relationship between the low wage import measures
and the increased probability of plant death. The surface shows the increase in the shutdown probability as the level of low wage import shares
rise for the industry.21 Most important is the large increase when both
the share of products and the share of import values from low wage countries are high. Remembering that in our sample the unconditional average
probability of death is 26%, these increases associated with high import
competition are still very large, although smaller than the unconditional
results in Figure 2.22
21

As in Figure 3, each point on the surface represents the diﬀerence in the probability
of death for a plant (with average characteristics) in an industry with the associated
levels of low wage competition from the probability for the same plant in the industry
with the median levels of low wage competition.
22
Note that there is almost no change in sign, significance or magnitude of the coeﬃ-

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

27

In Table 5, we show the distribution of eﬀects of low wage import shares
relative to the median industry for 1977 and 1992, the endpoints of our
panel. In 1977, most industries had relatively low exposure to low wage
imports. Even so 5% of the industries faced enough competition from low
wage countries to raise the conditional probability of plant death by at least
2.5 percentage points.
By 1992, many more industries were facing substantial import penetration from low wage countries. The probability of plant death was raised
by at least 2.5 percentage points in more than 14% of industries, and more
than 7% of the industries saw their failure probabilities rise by 5 or more
percentage points.
One additional point of interest is the large diﬀerence between the unconditional and conditional eﬀects of low wage imports. This suggests
that imports from low wage countries are arriving in industries that are the
least skill and capital intensive, as predicted by endowment-based models
of international trade.
5.2.1.

Heterogeneity within industries

While the previous results show the strong eﬀect of import competition
on plant mortality across industries, we also suspect that plants within an
industry are diﬀerentially exposed to low wage countries. Existing models of plant heterogeneity and international trade, i.e. Melitz (2002) and
BEJK (2000), focus on the role of productivity in plant shutdowns due
to trade. In both cases, low productivity plants within an industry are
more likely to close in the face of increased import competition. However,
these models do not distinguish between competition from low wage and
high wage countries. Given the nature of our trade measures, we expect
to see a significant role for plant input intensities in the face of competition from low wage countries. Within an industry, low wage competition
will directly aﬀect less capital and skill intensive plants within an industry.
To examine such eﬀects, we interact low wage import shares with selected
plant attributes. In particular, we consider both plant productivity and
plant factor intensity (capital and skill).
cients on other plant, firm and industry characteristics between Table 3 and Table 4, i.e.
without and with the low wage competition measures.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

28

We interact the plant characteristics with the product × value import
measure and report the results in Table 6.23 The interaction terms for all
the measures of factor usage at the plant have negative coeﬃcients. With
the exception of production worker wages, the coeﬃcients are all significant
at the 10% level. This suggests that within industries facing significant
competition from low wage countries, capital and skill intensity oﬀset some
of the increased probability of shutdown. Interestingly, there is no role for
the interaction of plant productivity and low wage imports, the coeﬃcient
has the wrong sign and is not significant.24
To understand the importance of these within industry eﬀects, we consider the probability of failure for a plant with high capital and skill intensity and one with low capital and skill intensity. Our high (low) capital
intensity plant has log(K/L) one standard deviation above (below) the
mean.25 The top panel in Figure 4 shows the probability of failure for our
low capital plant while the bottom panel shows the probability of failure
for the high capital plant. Both the levels and slopes of the surfaces diﬀer
substantially for the two types of plants. For both types of plants, the
probability of death is increasing in import shares from low wage countries.
Capital and skill intensity at the plant level is not suﬃcient to completely
oﬀset the eﬀects of such competition. In addition, as expected, the capital
and skill intensive plant is less likely to fail at any level of competition from
low wage countries than the low capital plant, i.e. the surface is lower for
every pair of the import measures.
The biggest diﬀerence between the plant types is in the interaction of
low wage imports and capital intensity, i.e. the slope of the surfaces. The
probability of death increases dramatically for the low capital intensity
plant as the share of imports from low wage competition rises. For the high
capital plant the increase in imports raises the probability of shutdown, but
23
We limit the interactions to the most important of our three competition terms to
manage the number of reported coeﬃcients. Coeﬃcients on other variables in the base
specification are suppressed but do not change sign, significance, or magnitude.
24
The possibility remains that plant productivity plays a role in diﬀerentiated product
industries facing competition from comparable high skill countries.
25
High capital plants also have higher skill intensity as measured by both wages and
non-production worker shares. We adjust the skill intensity characteristics as well. Our
high capital plant has a non-production worker share 0.07 standard deviations above the
mean, non-production wages 0.29 standard deviations above the mean, and production
wages 0.50 standard deviations above the mean.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

29

by a far lower amount. In 1992, moving from the median industry in terms
of low wage import shares, i.e. glass products SIC 3231, to the industry
at the 90th percentile, canvas products SIC 2394, raises the probability of
failure for the low capital plant by 4.4 percentage points to 30.1% while it
raises the probability of failure for the high capital plant by 2.0 percentage
points to 23.7%.
5.2.2.

Robustness

To further evaluate the robustness of our results, we consider two additions to our multivariate specification. First, we include a measure of industry import penetration to address the concern that our low wage import
shares are merely reflecting overall import activity rather than a change in
the source of imports. Second, we include industry fixed eﬀects. Industry
fixed eﬀects perform two roles: first, they control for the possibility that low
wage imports are entering precisely in industries where the ex-ante probability of death is highest. In addition, they soak up all time-invariant
industry eﬀects.
In Table 8, we report the coeﬃcients from four probits. Column 1
contains our multivariate specification with the low wage measures and
their interactions with plant characteristics, i.e. the probit reported in
Table 6.26 Column 2 includes a measure of industry import penetration,
calculated as the average ratio of imports to domestic absorption over the
preceding five years (production less exports plus imports). Column 3
includes industry fixed eﬀects while Column 4 has both import penetration
and industry fixed eﬀects.
The results are quite stable. None of the coeﬃcients on the plant,
firm or industry characteristics changes sign or significance.27 Low wage
import shares continue to be positively correlated with the probability of
plant death, even when both industry fixed eﬀects and import penetration
are included. The signs of the interactions of plant characteristics and low
wage measures are unchanged, although the magnitude of the interaction
with capital intensity is reduced and is no longer significant one industry
26

The numbers in the table are the coeﬃcients oﬀ the probit, rather than the marginal
probabilities, to facilitate ease of comparison.
27
The unchanged coeﬃcient on the measure of entry cost suggests that industry fixed
eﬀects may not be an eﬀective way to proxy for industry sunk entry costs.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

30

fixed eﬀects are included.28
6.

Conclusions

Our goal in this paper has been to provide an in-depth look at the
determinants of plant failure. To do this, we have expanded the set of factors that aﬀect plant shutdowns to include factor input intensities, product
market characteristics, firm structure, and import shares from low wage
countries. Using data on the entire U.S. manufacturing sector from 19771997, we find that each of our four areas of focus provides important new
insights into the plant shutdown decision.
We confirm previous research in finding that plant size, age and productivity are important determinants of plant survival. Even controlling for
these attributes, we find that the input mix at the plant is also correlated
with survival. Death rates are greater for plants with low capital-labor
ratios and those with relatively low skilled workers. In particular, high capital, high skill plants are better able to survive increases in import shares
from low wage countries.
The characteristics of product markets are strongly associated with the
likelihood of exit. Single-product plants are much more likely to fail in any
five year period than plants producing multiple goods. The probability of
survival increases as the number of products made at the plant rises, even
controlling for other plant attributes. Exporting plants are far less likely
to die than non-exporters, as much as 15% even after accounting for plant
size, productivity, factor intensity and ownership structure.
Our research emphasizes the diﬀerence between multi-unit firms and
single establishment firms in the shutdown process. We provide direct
evidence that multi-plant firms use the shutdown margin more often than
their single plant counterparts. The nature of the firm plays a crucial role in
plant shutdowns. Plants that are part of a larger firm are unconditionally
far less likely to shut down than a single-plant firm. However, this finding
is completely reversed once we condition on other plant characteristics such
as age, size, productivity and capital intensity. For similar plants, we find
that multi-plant firms are actually more likely to close a plant. Similarly,
28

Import penetration does raise the probability of plant death, although is it not signficant once industry fixed eﬀects are included.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

31

plants that have changed ownership have positive attributes that make
them less likely to die. However, conditioning on the plant’s qualities,
a new owner is significantly more likely to close the recent acquisition.
Finally, we investigate the relationship between multinational ownership
and plant closure. For comparable plants, we find that a U.S. multinational
is significantly more likely to close a plant than a domestic firm.
A major goal of the paper is to examine the role of import competition
from low wage countries on plant survival. We use new industry-specific
measures on the share of imports from low wage countries and find that such
import penetration sharply increases the probability of plant death. We
also find that low wage imports do not aﬀect all plants equally. Within
an industry, the least skill and capital intensive plants have the greatest
increase in their shutdown probabilities when low wage countries enter their
markets. Interestingly, there is no interaction eﬀect of low wage import
competition with plant productivity, unlike the predictions of several recent
plant-based models of trade. These results suggest that increased imports
from low wage countries have played a role in the dramatic shift of US
manufacturing towards plants with higher skill and capital intensity and
higher wages.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

32

References
Albuquerque, Rui and Sergio Rebelo (2000) “On the Dynamics of Trade
Reform”, Journal of International Economics, 51, 21-48.
Baden-Fuller, Charles W. F., (1989) “Exit from Declining Industries and
the Case of Steel Casings,” Economic Journal, 99, 949-961.
Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathon Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel
S. Kortum (2000). “Plants and Productivity in International Trade.”
NBER working paper #7688.
Braconier, Henrik and Karolina Ekholm, (2000) “Swedish Multinationals
and Competition from High- and Low-Wage Locations”, Review of International Economics 8(3), 448-461.
Brainard, Lael and David Riker, (1997a) “Are U.S. Multinationals Exporting U.S. Jobs?”, NBER Working Paper # 5958.
Brainard, Lael and David Riker, (1997b) “U.S. Multinationals and Competition from Low Wage Countries”, NBER Working Paper # 5959.
Deily, Mary, (1991) “Exit Strategies and Plant-closing Decisions,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 22(2), 250-263.
Doms, Mark E. and J. Bradford Jensen, (1998) “Comparing Wages, Skills,
and Productivity between Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States” in Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, Baldwin, Robert E; Lipsey,
Robert E; Richardson, J. David, eds, NBER Studies in Income and
Wealth, vol. 59. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward L Glaeser, (2002) “Geographic
Concentration as a Dynamic Process”,
Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 84(2), 193-204.
Dunne, Timothy, and Mark J. Roberts, (1991) “Variation in Producer
Turnover Across US Manufacturing Industries,” in Entry and Market Contestability: An International Comparison, P.A. Geroski and J
Schwalbach, Ed.s, Basil Blackwell.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

33

Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, (1988) “Patterns
of firm entry and exit in US manufacturing industries”, Rand Journal
of Economics, Vol. 19(4), 495-515.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, (1989) “The
Growth and Failure of US Manufacturing Plants”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 104(4), 671-698.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga, (2000) “Diversity and Specialisation in
Cities: Why, Where and When Does It Matter?” Urban Studies, vol.
37, no. 3, pp. 533-55.
Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes, (1995) “Markov-perfect industry dynamics: a framework for empirical work.” Review of Economics Studies, 62,
53—82.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and CJ Krizan, (1998) “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence”, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 6803, November.
Gibson, John K. and Richard I. D. Harris, (1996) “Trade Liberalization
and Plant Exit in New Zealand Manufacturing.” Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 78(3), 521-529.
Ghemawat, Pankaj, and Barry Nalebuﬀ, (1985) “Exit”, Rand Journal of
Economics, 16(2), 184-194.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, (1992a) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run
Equilibrium.” Econometrica, 60(5), 1127-1150.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, (1992b) “ Exit, Selection and The Value of Firms.”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 16, 621-653.
Jovanovic, Boyan, (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica, 50, 649-670.
Lieberman, Marvin, (1990) “Exit from Declining Industries: “Shakeout”
or “Stakeout”? RAND Journal of Economics, 21(4), 538-554.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

34

Melitz, Marc J., (2002) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity”, NBER working paper
#8881.
Olley, Steven G. and Ariel Pakes, (1996) “The Dynamics of Productivity
in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6),
1263-97.
Rodrik, Dani, (1997) Has Globalization Gone Too Far. Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.
Schott, Peter K., (2002), “Moving Up and Moving Out: Product Level
Exports and Competition from Low Wage Countries.” Yale School of
Management mimeo.
Whinston, Michael, (1988) “Exit with Multi-Plant Firms.” RAND Journal
of Economics, 19(4), 568-588.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

A

Appendix - Low Wage Countries 1972-1992
Afghanistan
Albania
Angola
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Benin
Bhutan
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Central African Rep
Chad

China
Comoros
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti

India
Kenya
Lao PDR
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Moldova
Mozambique
Nepal
Niger

Pakistan
Rwanda
Samoa
Sao Tome
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Sri Lanka
St. Vincent
Sudan
Togo
Uganda
Vietnam
Yemen

Not all countries are categorized as low wage in every year.
For details on the specific years, see Schott (2002).

35

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

36

Table 1: Means and Pooled Univariate Probits, 1977-1997

Entry Cost
Age (years)
Size (log employment)
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
log Total Factor Productivity
Exporter
Takeover
Multi-plant firm
Sibling
Orphan
US Multinational
# of products
2 products
3 products
4+ products
Relative Regional Specialization
Relative Regional Diversity
Product Share - Low Wage Imports
Value Share - Low Wage Imports
Product Share×Value Share
29

(1)
Survivors
(mean)
-.32
11.7
3.71
3.14
.301
3.30
2.86
.0086
.221
.083
.341
.274
.067
.085
3.52

(2)
Deaths
(mean)
-.35
8.6
3.22
2.87
.300
3.17
2.73
-.0242
.120
.073
.276
.206
.070
.062
2.56

29

(3)
Probability Change
∂Φ/∂x
-.755*
-.008*
-.056*
-.047*
-.013*
-.114*
-.084*
-.078*
-.126*
-.029*
-.036*
-.070*
-.010*
-.062*
-.057*
-.111*
-.156*
-.0002*
.0751*
-.301*
.027*
.966*

Means are calculated separately for survivors and deaths in Columns 1 and 2 respectively, pooled across all years in the sample. Double lines indicate a probit with multiple
independent variables. Bold indicates a significant diﬀerence (5%) between survivors
and deaths. Column 3 reports results from a probit of death(=1) on the variable and
year dummies. Coeﬃcients on year dummies are suppressed. The reported number is
the marginal probability change at the mean of the independent variable. * indicates
significant at the 1% level.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

37

Table 2: Eﬀects of Low Wage Import Competition on The
Unconditional Probability of Shutdown30

Percentage Points
< -2.5
[-2.5, 2.5)
[2.5, 7.5)
[7.5, 12.5)
[12.5, 17.5)
> 17.5

30

1977
2
287
32
11
2
3

1992
20
226
44
16
8
23

Ranges in column 1 represent the increase (or decrease) in the probability of death
relative to an industry with median levels of low wage competition controlling only for
year eﬀects. Columns 2 and 3 contain the number of industries in each range for 1977
and 1992 respectively.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

38

Table 3: The Probability of Plant Death - Pooled Multivariate
Probits 31

Entry Cost
Age (years)
Size (log employment)
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
log Total Factor Productivity
Exporter
Takeover
Sibling (multi-plant firm)
Orphan (multi-plant firm)
US Multinational
2 products
3 products
4+ products
Relative Regional Specialization
Relative Regional Diversity

31

(1)
1977-97
∆Prob.
∂Φ/∂x
-.485*
-.004*
-.041*
-.010*
.012*
-.040*
-.027*
-.053*
.062*
.031*
.080*
.036*
-.028*
-.064*
-.088*
-.0002*
.049*

(2)

(3)
∆%

std.err.
.0076
.0000
.0006
.0007
.0039
.0018
.0014
.0024
.0028
.0019
.0031
.0030
.0017
.0020
.0016
.0000
.0047

-3.3
-5.2
-0.8
0.6
-1.6
-1.2
-1.5

(4)
1987-97
∆Prob.
∂Φ/∂x
-.491*
-.004*
-.035*
-.011*
.038*
-.043*
-.020*
-.050*
-.048*
.068*
.023*
.086*
.050*
-.014*
-.068*
-.089*
-.0002*
.052*

Columns 1-3 report results from a probit of death(=1) on the complete multivariate
specification excluding the exporter dummy for 1977-1997. Columns 4 and 5 report
results from a comparable specification including the exporter dummy for 1987-1997.
Coeﬃcients on year dummies are suppressed. The reported number in Columns 1 and 4
is the marginal probability change at the mean of the independent variable or the change
in probability for a dummy variable switching from 0 to 1. The reported number in
Column 3 is the percentage point change in the probability of death for a 1 standard
deviation increase in the variable from its mean. * indicates significance at the 1% level.

(5)

std.err.
.0114
.0001
.0009
.0010
.0052
.0026
.0020
.0031
.0025
.0037
.0027
.0045
.0046
.0024
.0028
.0022
.0000
.0063

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

39

Table 4: Pooled Multivariate Probits with Import Competition
Variables 32

Entry Cost
Age (years)
Size (log employment)
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
log Total Factor Productivity
Exporter
Takeover
Sibling (multi-plant firm)
Orphan (multi-plant firm)
US Multinational
2 products
3 products
4+ products
Relative Regional Specialization
Relative Regional Diversity
Product Share - Low Wage Imports
Value Share - Low Wage Imports
Product Share×Value Share

32

(1)
∆Prob.
∂Φ/∂x
-.468*
-.004*
-.042*
-.009*
.021*
-.038*
-.026*
-.054*
.062*
.029*
.079*
.037*
-.026*
-.062*
-.087*
-.0002*
.047*
-.015*
.077*
.107*

(2)
std.err.
.0079
.0000
.0006
.0008
.0039
.0019
.0014
.0024
.0028
.0019
.0031
.0030
.0017
.0020
.0016
.0000
.0047
.0031
.0297
.0414

(3)
∆Prob.
∂Φ/∂x
-.453*
-.004*
-.037*
-.009*
.052*
-.041*
-.020*
-.051*
-.048*
.068*
.020*
.085*
.051*
-.011*
-.066*
-.085*
-.0002*
.049*
o
-.017x
.077*
.139*

Columns 1 and 2 report results from a probit of death(=1) on the complete multivariate specification plus the levels of the three import competition variables excluding
the exporter dummy for 1977-1997. Columns 3 and 4 report results from a comparable
specification including the exporter dummy for 1987-1997. Coeﬃcients on year dummies
are suppressed. The reported number is the marginal probability change at the mean
of the independent variable or the change in probability for a dummy variable switching
o indicates significance at the 10% level. * indicates significance at the 1%
from 0 to 1. x
level.

(4)
std.err.
.0121
.0001
.0009
.0010
.0053
.0026
.0020
.0031
.0025
.0037
.0027
.0045
.0046
.0024
.0029
.0022
.0000
.0063
.0043
.0441
.0540

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

40

Table 5: Eﬀects of Low Wage Import Competition on The
Conditional Probability of Shutdown33

< -2.5
[-2.5, 0)
[0, 2.5)
[2.5, 5.0)
[5.0, 7.5)
> 7.5

33

1977
0
117
203
9
7
1

1992
0
106
183
23
14
11

Ranges in column 1 represent the increase (or decrease) in the probability of death
relative to an industry with median levels of low wage competition, controlling for all
plant, firm and industry variables in the basic multivariate specification (see Table 4).
Columns 2 and 3 contain the number of industries in each range for 1977 and 1992
respectively.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

41

Table 6: Probits with Import Competition Variables and
Interactions with Plant Characteristics 34

Product Share - Low Wage Imports
Value Share - Low Wage Imports
Product Share×Value Share

(1)
∆Prob.
∂Φ/∂x
-.010*
.096*
.676*

Interactions w/ (Product×Value)
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
log Total Factor Productivity

o
-.021x
-.518*
-.048
-.106*
.017

(2)
std.err.
.0032
.0304
.0906

.0129
.0875
.0246
.0246
.0356

34
Columns 1 and 2 report results from a probit of death(=1) on the complete multivariate specification. Coeﬃcients on plant and firm characteristics and year dummies
are suppressed. The reported number is the marginal probability change at the mean
of the independent variable or the change in probability for a dummy variable switching
o indicates significance at the 10% level. * indicates significance at the 1%
from 0 to 1. x
level.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

42

Table 7: Probability of Plant Death: Summary of Univariate
and Multivariate Results35
Unconditional
Entry Cost
Age (years)
Size (log employment)
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
log Total Factor Productivity
Exporter
Takeover
Sibling (multi-plant firm)
Orphan (multi-plant firm)
US Multinational
Multiple products
Relative Regional Specialization
Relative Regional Diversity
Product Share - Low Wage Imports
Value Share - Low Wage Imports
Product Share×Value Share
Interactions w/ (Product×Value)
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
log Total Factor Productivity

35

+
+
+

Conditional

(+)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
{-}

-

({+})

Columns 1 and 2 summarize the results from the univariate and multivariate probits.
A minus [-] or plus [+] sign indicates that the variable is negatively or positively correlated
with the probability of plant death. Parentheses indicate that the result was the opposite
sign from that expected, while curly bracket {} indicate that the coeﬃcient was not
significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 10% level.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

Table 8: Robustness Checks 36
(1)
Entry Cost
-1.461*
-.012*
Age (years)
-.132*
Size (log employment)
-.024*
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
Non-Production/Total Employment
.098*
-.117*
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
-.072*
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
-.164*
log Total Factor Productivity
.187*
Takeover
Sibling (multi-plant firm)
.088*
.235*
Orphan (multi-plant firm)
.112*
US Multinational
-.082*
2 products
-.209*
3 products
-.283*
4+ products
Relative Regional Specialization
-.001*
0.148*
Relative Regional Diversity
-0.032*
Product Share - Low Wage Imports
0.301*
Value Share - Low Wage Imports
2.132*
Product Share×Value Share
Interactions w/ (Product×Value)
o
Capital Intensity (lnK/L)
-0.067x
-1.633*
Non-Production/Total Employment
-0.150*
Production Wage (log 1000$/worker)
Non-Production Wage (log 1000$/worker) -0.3350*
0.055
log Total Factor Productivity
Import Penetration
Industry Fixed Eﬀects
36

43

(2)
-1.049*
-.012*
-.141*
-.030*
.095*
-.113*
-.087*
-.164*
.189*
.081*
.228*
.120*
-.092*
-.221*
-.281*
-.001*
0.162*
-0.021*
0.389*
1.950*

(3)
—1.808*
-.012*
-.177*
-.022*
.095*
-.115*
-.099*
-.164*
.185*
.086*
.218*
.099*
-.079*
-.196*
-.264*
-.001*
0.135*
0.071*
0.330
1.182*

(4)
—1.440*
-.012*
-.178*
-.021*
.089*
-.119*
-.102*
-.158*
.184*
.082*
.222*
.109*
-.084*
-.206*
-.270*
-.001*
0.147*
0.078*
0.191
1.271*

-0.126*
-1.750*
-0.162*
-0.260*
0.038
0.370*

-0.008
-1.479*
-0.232#
o
-0.138x
0.011

-0.008
-1.445*
-0.233#
-0.110
-0.005
0.060
Y

Y

Columns 1 reports results from a probit of death(=1) on the complete multivariate
specification. Column 2 includes the measure of average industry import penetration..
Columns 3 includes industry fixed eﬀects. Column 4 includes both import penetration
and industry fixed eﬀects.
Coeﬃcients year dummies are suppressed. The reported numbers are the actual coeﬃo indicates significance at the 10% level. # indicates significance
cient from the probit. x
at the 5% level. * indicates significance at the 1% level.

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

44

Annual average over the previous 5 years
year==77

year==82

year==87

year==92

1
.8

Share of Imports - Products

.6
.4
.2
0

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

0

Share of Imports - Value

.2

.4

.6

Import Competition from Low Wage Countries

Figure 1:

.8

1

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

45

The Effect of Low Wage Competition on the Probability of Plant Shutdown

0.65
0.6
0.55
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

Figure 2:

0.01

0.11

0.31

0.21

0.51

Product Share of Imports from Low
Wage Countries

0.41

0.71

-0.15
-0.2
0.61

0.91

0.81

0
-0.05
-0.1

Probability of Plant Shutdown
(deviation from median industry)

0.5

0.01

0.11

0.21

0.31

0.41

0.51

0.61

0.81
0.71

Value Share of Imports from Low
Wage Countries

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

46

The Effect of Low Wage Competition on the Probability of Plant Shutdown
(Conditional on Plant Characteristics)

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

0.76

0

0.61

-0.02

0.46
0.96
0.91
0.86
0.81
0.76
0.71
0.66
0.61
0.56
0.51
0.46
0.41
0.36
0.31
0.26
0.21
0.16
0.11
0.06
0.01

Probability of Plant Shutdown
(deviation from average plant in median industry)

0.2

Product Share of Imports from Low Wage Countries

Figure 3:

0.31
0.16
0.01

Value Share of Imports
from Low Wage Countries

The Deaths of Manufacturing Plants

47

Low K/L Plants and Low Wage Competition - 1992

0.45

0.4
0.375
0.35
0.325
0.3
0.275

0.11

0.01

0.31

0.21

0.2
0.51

Product Share of Imports from Low
Wage Countries

0.41

0.71

0.225
0.61

0.91
0.81

0.25

Probability of Shutdown for low K/L plant
(+1 st.dev below mean)

0.425

0.01

0.11

0.21

0.31

0.41

0.51

0.61

Value Share of Imports from Low Wage
Countries

High K/L Plants and Low Wage Competition - 1992

0.45

0.4
0.375
0.35
0.325
0.3
0.275

0.11

0.01

0.31

0.21

0.51

0.71

0.2
0.41

Product Share of Imports from Low
Wage Countries

0.225
0.61

0.91
0.81

0.25

Probability of Shutdown for high K/L plant
(+1 st.dev above mean)

0.425

0.01

Figure 4:

0.11

0.21

0.31

0.41

0.51

0.61

Value Share of Imports from Low Wage
Countries

