                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BEYOND MARKETS AND HIERARCHIES:
            TOWARD A NEW SYNTHESIS OF AMERICAN BUSINESS HISTORY


                                         Naomi R. Lamoreaux
                                          Daniel M.G. Raff
                                            Peter Temin


                                          Working Paper 9029
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9029


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002

Many colleagues have provided us with helpful criticisms and suggestions. We would especially like to
express our appreciation to Ivan Berend, Ruth Bloch, Charles Calomiris, Sally Clarke, Patrick Fridenson,
Louis Galambos, Oscar Gelderblom, David Kirsch, Christophe Lécuyer, Daniel Levinthal, Walter Licht,
Ghislaine Lydon, Wallace Mullin, Eric Rasmusen, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Philip Scranton, Kenneth
Sokoloff, Jonathan Steinberg, Stephen Usselman, Sidney Winter, and Mary Yeager. We would also like to
thank participants in seminars and conference sessions at Cambridge University, Copenhagen University,
Harvard University, the Norwegian School of Management (BI), the Stockholm School of Economics, the
University of California, Los Angeles, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Warwick, and
annual meetings of the Business History Conference and the Economic History Association. Raff thanks the
Reginald Jones Center at Wharton for financial support. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel M.G. Raff and Peter Temin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Beyond Markets and Hierarchies:
Toward a New Synthesis of American Business History
Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel M.G. Raff and Peter Temin
NBER Working Paper No. 9029
July 2002
JEL No. N0, M0, L2, D2



                                               ABSTRACT

        We sketch a new synthesis of American business history to replace (and subsume) that put
forward by Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., most famously in his book The Visible Hand (1977). We see the
broader subject as the history of the institutions of coordination in the economy, with the management
of information and the addressing of problems of informational asymmetries representing central
problems for firm- and relationship design. Our analysis emphasizes the endogenous adoption of
coordination mechanisms in the context of evolving but specific operating conditions and opportunities.
This naturally gives rise both to change and to heterogeneity in the population of coordination
mechanisms to be observed in use at any moment in time. In discussing the changes in the population
of mechanisms over time, we seek to avoid the tendency, exemplified by Chandler’s work but
characteristic of the field, to see history of adoption in teleological rather than evolutionary perspective.
We see a richer set of mechanisms in play than is conventional and a more complex historical process
at work, in particular a process in which hierarchical institutions have both risen and, more recently,
declined in significance.




Naomi R. Lamoreaux                   Daniel M.G. Raff                      Peter Temin
Department of Economics              Department of Management              Department of Economics
UCLA                                 The Wharton School                    MIT
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477           University of Pennsylvania            Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER                             Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370           and NBER
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu              and NBER                              ptemin@mit.edu
                                     raff@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                                                            1




                                   Beyond Markets and Hierarchies:

                      Toward a New Synthesis of American Business History



        In this essay, we offer a new synthesis of American business history to replace, but also

to subsume, the dominant Chandlerian framework.1 Writing in the mid 1970s, Alfred D.

Chandler, Jr., attributed the success of the U.S. economy in the twentieth century to the rise of

large, vertically-integrated, managerially directed enterprises in the nation’s most important

industries. These enterprises, Chandler argued, were dramatically more efficient than the small,

family owned and managed firms that had characterized the economy earlier. Small firms had to

depend on the market to coordinate their purchases of raw materials and the sale of their output,

but large firms took on these supply and marketing functions themselves, coordinating them

internally by means of managerial hierarchies. This visible hand of management, Chandler

claimed, was such a vast improvement over the invisible hand of the market that firms that

exploited its capabilities were able not only to dominate their own industries but to diversify and

attain positions of power in other sectors of the economy as well.2

        A new synthesis is needed because these kinds of large-scale enterprises no longer look

so superior from the perspective of the early twenty-first century. Indeed, as the economic

environment changed during the 1980s and 1990s, classic Chandlerian firms increasingly found

        1
           This effort at synthesis grows out of a series of conferences we organized at the National Bureau of
Economic Research. For the revised proceedings, see Peter Temin, ed., Inside the Business Enterprise: Historical
Perspectives on the Transformation and Use of Information (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992); Naomi
R. Lamoreaux and Daniel M. G. Raff, eds., Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the
Organization of Enterprise (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995); and Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel M. G.
Raff, and Peter Temin, eds., Learning by Doing in Organizations, Markets, and Nations (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1999).
         2
           See especially The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1977); but also Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1990).
                                                                                                                  2


themselves outperformed, even in their home industries, by smaller, more specialized, vertically

disintegrated rivals. Many of the enterprises that now rose to the top succeeded by substituting

for the visible hand of management alternative means of coordinating vertically and horizontally

linked activities—most notably long-term relationships that were intriguingly similar to those

that prevailed before the “rise of big business” or even before the so-called “market revolution.”

Large Chandlerian firms in turn sought to improve their competitiveness in this new environment

by refocusing resources on their “core” businesses, selling off subsidiaries and even entire

divisions and, in the process, reducing significantly the range of economic activity subject to

managerial coordination.

         At the very least, therefore, recent experience requires us to modify Chandler’s

framework so that we can explain why large vertically integrated, diversified enterprises did not

perform as well under late twentieth-century conditions as they did earlier on. Our synthesis

aims to do more, however. It aims to provide an alternative methodology for writing business

history that avoids the tendency (exemplified by Chandler but also generally characteristic of the

field) to view the present as the final stage in an evolutionary process and thus, effectively, the

endpoint of history.3 With this goal in mind, we move beyond the simple markets versus

hierarchies model that underpins Chandler’s analysis to focus attention on the broad range of

techniques that business people have developed over time to coordinate their activities. Using

recent economic theory to array these mechanisms along a one-dimensional analytical scale, we

offer some generalizations about their relative advantages and disadvantages under different

sorts of circumstances. We then describe the uses to which these devices have been put over the

         3
          This method for avoiding teleology is one of the most important features (in addition, of course, to
substantive differences in interpretation) that distinguishes our synthesis from alternatives that see the economy of
the 1990s to be the last stage in a historical evolution. See, for example, Richard N. Langlois, “The Vanishing
Hand: The Changing Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism,” unpublished paper, 2001.
                                                                                                  3


course of American history, emphasizing both the diversity of the mechanisms in operation at

any given point in time and the heterogeneity of the ways in which people with different kinds of

businesses and experiences have adjusted their practices to changing economic circumstances.

       There appears in hindsight to have been a clear economic logic to the pattern of

successful and unsuccessful responses, yet in fact there was nothing predetermined about these

outcomes. The advantage of our focus on heterogeneity—on the multiplicity of ways in which

businesses have responded to change—is that it enables us to maintain a dual perspective

whereby we can both elucidate the economic logic of the choices and, at the same time, regain a

sense their contingency. In the end, this dual perspective will allow us not only to explain why

Chandlerian enterprises suffered declining fortunes in the late twentieth century, but also to

situate the “new-economy” firms of that period in the broad sweep of history—a history whose

patterns can be understood retrospectively, but which also is still unfolding in ways that are by

no means clear.



The Chandlerian Synthesis and Our Alternative Approach

       Chandler’s starting point was the observation that technological change had made it

possible for firms to reap substantial economies of scale in a number of key industries by the late

nineteenth century. His main intellectual contribution was to recognize that, in order to achieve

the lower unit costs that technical economies of scale made possible, firms had to do a lot more

than simply build large plants. They had to be able to maintain a high rate of throughput through

their factories—that is, to keep their plants operating consistently at high levels of capacity

utilization. In order to maintain a high rate of throughput, firms had to insure that shortfalls in

supply did not disrupt their production processes and that output did not pile up in their
                                                                                                  4


warehouses unsold. The solution, as Chandler saw it, was for firms to bring these activities

under their direct control by integrating backward into raw-material production and forward into

distribution, and by building a managerial hierarchy capable of coordinating smoothly the flow

of inputs and outputs from raw material to final sale.4

       Chandler claimed that firms that took these steps improved upon the workings of the

market, captured the resulting efficiency gains, and reaped enormous competitive advantages.

The only firms that could compete with them head to head, he argued, were those that

completely duplicated their vertically integrated structures and managerial hierarchies. Because

relatively few firms could raise the enormous amounts of capital required, these kinds of

industries quickly took on oligopolistic structures. Moreover, because large firms could exploit

economies of scope as well as of scale by diversifying their operations into other industries, over

time larger and larger portions of the economy became subject to their managerial authority.5

       When The Visible Hand was first published in 1977, Chandler’s synthesis represented an

extraordinary achievement. It provided a respectable alternative to the robber-baron view of big

business that still figured prominently in the literature. It also offered business historians for the

first time a framework that made sense of the many (often antiquarian) histories of individual

firms and industries that to that point largely constituted the field. Most significantly, it focused

attention on a central economic problem—understanding the changes that had occurred over time

in the way the provisioning of goods and services was organized—and drew out the implications

of these changes for the structure of the American economy and for the place of the United

States in the world.



       4
           See The Visible Hand.
       5
           Chandler, The Visible Hand; and Scale and Scope.
                                                                                                              5


        Chandler’s achievement was largely descriptive, however. Chandler never provided a

clear theoretical rationale for his claim that the visible hand of management was more efficient

than the invisible hand of the market in coordinating the flow of output in industries

characterized by economies of scale. Rather, he based his account largely on the observation

(derived from his voluminous reading of the literature on individual industries and firms) that

vertically integrated, managerially directed enterprises had come by the early twentieth century

to dominate these kinds of industries but generally not others. This lack of theory prevented

Chandler from considering systematically other possible explanations for the dominance of large

firms—for example, the role potentially played by barriers to entry that did not derive from

superior organizational efficiency.6 More important for our purposes, the lack of theory made it

very difficult for Chandler to explain the erosion that occurred in the position of these giant firms

during the late twentieth century.7

        After Chandler published The Visible Hand, other scholars jumped in to supply the

missing theoretical rationale. The most notable among these was Oliver Williamson. Following

a trail blazed initially by Ronald Coase, Williamson deliberately broke with the neoclassical

view that firms’ main function was to equate marginal revenue and marginal cost, postulating

instead that firms were fundamentally devices to reduce transaction costs.8 Transaction costs

arise, Williamson argues, because economic actors have only imperfect information to guide

their behavior and because the information they possess is often asymmetric—that is, people

        6
           On this point, see Naomi R. Lamoreaux, The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895-1904
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 118-86.
         7
           In his one serious (but again essentially descriptive) attempt to confront this problem, Chandler argued
that some large firms made the mistake of overdiversifying during the 1960s and 1970s and that their subsequent
problems were a necessary correction. See Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., “The Competitive Performance of U.S.
Industrial Enterprises since the Second World War,” Business History Review, 68 (Spring 1994), pp. 1-72.
         8
           Coase’s seminal paper was “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, 4 (Nov. 1937), pp. 386-405. For
Williamson’s analysis, see Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study of the Economics
                                                                                                            6


know more about their own attributes and actions than they know about those of others with

whom they interact. The existence of such asymmetries makes it possible for economic actors to

take advantage of one another when they exchange goods or services—that is, to extract more

income from a transaction than they would receive if all the parties had full information.

Moreover, this possibility is important because the fear that one party may use his or her

informational advantage to exploit another may severely restrict the scope of exchange or even

completely prevent business people from entering into otherwise mutually advantageous

economic relationships.9

        Williamson’s goal was to understand how business activities could be organized to

reduce the risk of exploitation and encourage economically productive relationships to be

formed. In his view, the modern corporation (by which he meant the Chandlerian firm) was the

“product of a series of organizational innovations that have had the purpose and effect of

economizing on transaction costs.”10 For example, firms learned to integrate backward to solve

the problem of “asset specificity,” the case where a supplier to a firm had to make investments

that were highly specific to the transaction. Because the resulting assets could not be used easily

for other purposes, the supplier was susceptible to “hold up”—to pressure to agree to less

favorable contract terms once the investment was sunk—and, therefore, was unlikely to make the

investment unless this possibility could be prevented.11 Because it was extremely difficult to


of Internal Organization (New York: Free Press, 1985); and The Economic Institutions of Capitalism (New York:
Free Press-Macmillan, 1995).
         9
           For a cogent example, see George Akerlof, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 85 (Aug. 1970), pp. 488-500. The 2001 Nobel Prize in
Economics was awarded for this and other pioneering work along these lines.
         10
            See Williamson, “The Modern Corporation: Origins, Evolution, Attributes,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 19 (Dec. 1981), pp. 1537-68. The quotation is from p. 1537. Chandler responded ambivalently to
Williamson’s reformulation of his narrative along transactions-cost lines, encouraging his efforts but in the end
remaining aloof.
         11
            See also Benjamin Klein, R.A. Crawford, and Armen Alchian, “Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents,
and the Competitive Contracting Process,” Journal of Law and Economics, 21 (October 1978), pp. 297-326.
                                                                                                             7


write ordinary contracts that would eliminate this risk, Williamson argued, the solution was for

the firm to make the investment itself. Similarly, forward integration, Williamson hypothesized,

was a solution to the “externality principle”—the possibility that the actions of one distributor

might affect the ability of others to sell a good. If a distributor’s poor record in installing or

servicing a product could negatively affect the reputation of the product in consumers’ eyes, then

distributors would be reluctant to make the investments necessary to market the product

properly, and manufacturers therefore would have to take on this function themselves.

        Because Williamson’s theory implies that the vertically integrated managerial enterprise

always should be superior to alternative forms of contracting in industries where problems such

as “asset specificity” and the “externality principal” arise, it would seem to be no more able than

Chandler’s account to explain recent shifts in such industries away from vertical integration. In

fact, however, Williamson’s theoretical reformulation of Chandler’s narrative is an improvement

because it allows for the possibility that environmental changes can affect the level of the

transaction costs associated with, and thus the relative advantages and disadvantages of, different

kinds of economic arrangements. Moreover, there is nothing in Williamson’s transaction-cost

theory that prevents one from moving beyond the dichotomous markets versus hierarchies

approach that structured both his and Chandler’s work to consider alternative ways of organizing

business activity using essentially the same analytical framework.12

        In the analysis that follows, we retain Williamson’s core assumption that imperfect

information gives rise to problems of exploitation whenever people attempt to exchange goods or

services with each other—that is, to transact—but argue that economic actors have attempted to


        12
           Indeed, in “Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of Discrete Structural Alternatives,”
Williamson modified his markets versus hierarchies approach to include intermediate forms of organization that he
called “hybrids.” Administrative Science Quarterly, 36 (June 1991), pp. 269-96.
                                                                                                 8


resolve these kinds of problems in a wide variety of ways. For simplicity, we present these

efforts to coordinate economic activity as mechanisms arrayed along a one-dimensional scale

according to the permanence of the resulting relationships between the transacting parties. At

one extreme of the scale lies pure market exchange—that is, transactions that are discrete in the

sense that there is no ongoing connection between the parties involved. At the other extreme is

pure hierarchy—a permanent, or at least very long-lived, command relationship in which

superiors issue orders to subordinates (obvious examples include rank-and-file soldiers and

slaves), who face draconian punishment for non-compliance. In the middle are long-term

relationships among otherwise independent economic actors—an intermediate form important

enough to be identified as a third major type of coordination mechanism.

       It is important to realize none of these ideal types of coordination mechanisms works

perfectly. Each one does certain things (and not others) well. Moreover, there are circumstances

under which these relative advantages will be undermined by imperfect information. This point

can be seen most clearly by focusing on the extremes of our one-dimensional scale. For

example, the benefits of arms-length (market) transactions as a form of coordination lie chiefly

in their ability to minimize costs. Under conditions of imperfect information, however, some

buyers (for instance, those located far away) may not be able to ascertain the quality of the goods

being sold; and hence a seller may be able to foist a good on a buyer that is of lower than

contracted quality. The more complex the good, the more likely this problem. Because there is

no expectation of a repeat interaction in this pure-market setting, there is no way for a buyer to

punish such behavior by refusing to deal with the seller again.13 For similar reasons, a buyer

cannot punish a supplier who fails to deliver goods in a timely fashion (perhaps because he chose


       13
            For the famous example, see Akerlof, “The Market for ‘Lemons.’”
                                                                                                               9


to fulfill a more remunerative contract first) or even determine reliably whether the supplier in

fact misbehaved or simply experienced unavoidable delays.14

         The advantage of hierarchical control lies in its potential to eliminate these kinds of

problems by internalizing and more firmly controlling the transactions so that the quality of

goods and the timing of their delivery can be adjusted to meet the firm’s needs. For hierarchies

to work well as coordination mechanisms, however, the directives issued by superiors must be

obeyed. The problem is that subordinates may follow only those orders that they perceive to be

in their own interests, or in the interests of their part of the organization, and ignore other

instructions. Or they may have different ideas about what to do. If the organization is large or if

the contributions of individual workers are difficult to disentangle from those of other

employees, superiors may have only imperfect knowledge of what their subordinates are doing

and may not be able to detect and punish such deviations. Subordinates, therefore, may be able

to exploit this “principal-agent” problem to engage in behaviors that are contrary to the wishes of

their superiors.15

         Particular coordination mechanisms can sometimes be made more effective by combining

them with other mechanisms from different parts of the spectrum. Hence problems of

asymmetric information in markets can be reduced by adding elements of hierarchy (for

example, by creating a regulatory authority to oversee the exchange), and problems in

hierarchies can be reduced by adding elements of market competition (as, for example, when

         14
             For a related example, see Thomas N. Hubbard, “Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking,”
Rand Journal of Economics, 32 (Summer 2001), pp. 369-86.
          15
             For the germ of this idea, see Herbert Simon, “A Formal Theory of the Employment Relationship,”
Econometrica, 19 (July 1951), pp. 293-305. For a more extensive discussion, see J. W. Pratt and R. Zeckhauser,
eds., Principals and Agents (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1985). Even organizations as highly
disciplined as the military can be affected by such problems, as is suggested by Wellington’s lament that “nobody in
the British Army ever reads a regulation or an order as if it were to be a guide for his conduct, or in any manner
other than as an amusing novel.” Quoted in Elie Halévy, England in 1815 (New York: Barnes & Noble, 1961), p.
                                                                                                         10


plant managers are evaluated according to their relative ability to reduce unit costs). Long-term

relationships can also be used to improve the workings of markets and hierarchies. For example,

in order to insure that goods are of desired quality, buyers may prefer to deal with suppliers with

whom they have dealt satisfactorily in the past and with whom, therefore, they have been able to

establish relations of trust. These relationships may prove so valuable that buyers may prefer to

continue to purchase from these suppliers even when it is possible to get goods on the spot

market more cheaply, and sellers will go to great lengths to maintain their reputations for quality,

even when it is costly to do so. Similarly, superiors in hierarchies may find (as executives of

many large firms have discovered in recent years) that certain kinds of economic activities are

better coordinated outside the firm—not by spot markets but by means of long-term relationships

in which the need to build and maintain trust disciplines the parties’ behavior to their mutual

benefit. Of course, long-term relationships are no more immune to information problems than

markets or hierarchies. Hence they too are often combined with elements of one or the other of

these two extreme forms in order, for example, to prevent one party in a relationship from taking

advantage of another or to enable the terms of relationship to change in response to economic

needs.

         The extent to which particular coordination mechanisms (or combinations thereof)

effectively solve problems of asymmetric information also depends on the institutional

environment, which (following Douglass North) we define broadly to include not only formal

rules (such as laws) and the procedures to enforce them, but also moral and ethical norms.16

Thus markets, and also long-term relationships, may work better in situations where buyers and



85.
         16
              Douglass C. North, Structure and Change in Economic History (New York: W. W. Norton, 1981), pp.
201-2.
                                                                                                           11


sellers are members of the same religious group and believe that God will punish them if they

cheat each other. Similarly, subordinates in hierarchies may be more likely to respond

obediently to instructions if the authority of their superiors is legitimated by broader cultural

values, whether they be meritocratic or ascriptive. In addition, the extent to which the legal

system efficiently punishes violations of contract can affect the utility of markets relative to

long-term relationships (or hierarchies), which can be thought of as substitutes for effective

contract enforcement.17

        Coordination mechanisms that successfully mitigate problems of asymmetric information

in one period may not operate effectively in the next if economic conditions or the institutional

environment changes. Under such circumstances, economic actors may be forced to alter the

way they do business in the face of a great deal of uncertainty about the kinds of solutions that

are likely to work. Some will innovate—that is, experiment creatively with entirely new types of

solutions. Others will imitate arrangements that seem to be working for others or try out ideas

that are “in the air.” Regardless, their search for workable solutions to the new information

problems they face will proceed in a manner that is more like Herbert Simon’s concept of

“satisficing” than a standard neoclassical optimization calculus—that is, confronted with a

problem, they will try out responses until they find something that seems to work adequately and

then stop.18 Moreover, because it is difficult to remake completely existing organizations and

relationships, the solutions that economic actors adopt will be affected to some extent by what

they have done in the past. The search for more effective coordination mechanisms, in other

        17
            See, for example, Avner Greif, “Self-Enforcing Systems and Economic Growth: Late Medieval Genoa,”
in Analytic Narratives, eds. Robert H. Bates, et al. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), pp. 23-63; and
“Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and
Individualist Societies,” in The New Institutionalism in Sociology, eds. Mary C. Brinton and Victor Nee (New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 1998), pp. 77-104.
         18
            See, in particular, Simon’s Models of Man: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human Behavior in a
                                                                                                        12


words, will be path dependent in the sense that the choices that business people make are likely

to be affected by the ways they organized their activities previously and also by the particular

range of options conspicuously available to them at that point in history.19



The Setting

        Because starting points affect the ways in which economic processes unfold, we begin

with a survey of the main coordination mechanisms in place at the beginning of the nineteenth

century—that is, before dramatically falling transportation and communication costs forced

business people to develop new ways of coordinating their activities. Most exchange at this time

was necessarily local. In 1800, only about six percent of the nation’s approximately five million

people resided in urban areas, and 60 percent of these lived in towns with less than 25,000

residents.20 The vast majority of the population was spread thinly across the rapidly expanding

countryside, organized into households that functioned as the economy’s main production units.

        Production within households was coordinated hierarchically, although there was also a

division of labor along gender lines. The father was the head of the family and, as such, was

responsible for training and disciplining children, especially sons, and assigning them tasks. The

father represented the family’s interests in the outside world, marketing most of its output and

purchasing supplies that it could not produce for itself. He also controlled the distribution of the

family’s income and wealth and had full property rights to the labor of his minor children.


Social Setting (New York: Wiley, 1957), pp. 196-206, 241-60.
         19
            As this language suggests, our approach owes much to the work of Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G.
Winter. See especially An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982).
See also Paul David, “Why Are Institutions the ‘Carriers of History’?: Path Dependence and the Evolution of
Conventions, Organizations and Institutions,” Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 5 (Dec. 1994), pp. 205-
20.
         20
            U.S. Census Bureau, Historical Statistics of the United States on CD-ROM: Colonial Times to 1970—
Bicentennial Edition (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997), Series A57-72.
                                                                                                           13


Indeed, he could sell this labor to others if he did not wish to exploit it himself. Because the

father spent most of his time in the household, he could easily detect and punish disobedience.

Sometimes a child ran away to escape the father’s authority, but more often there were

significant rewards to be earned by staying in the household and obeying the father. In addition,

the affective bonds that formed between parents and children mitigated (and, of course, also

reinforced) the hierarchical nature of patriarchal authority.21

        The mother functioned as the father’s second in command. She was supposed to be

subservient to his wishes whenever he was present, but had to be able to substitute for him and

run the family enterprise in his absence. The mother also managed her own domain, which

might include home manufactures and involve both supervising girls in various production tasks

and dealing independently with outside suppliers and purchasers. In the Ballard family of

Hallowell, Maine, for example, the husband, Ephraim, took charge of farm production and other

enterprises such as saw milling. The wife, Martha, was a midwife, and in addition to her

extensive medical practice, directed her daughters (and the other young girls who were sent from

time to time to live and work with them) in the home production of textiles and other goods.22

        Economic activity within shops and stores was an extension of that within families. As a

result, these enterprises could exploit the family’s gendered division of labor. In the early shoe

industry, for example, masters’ wives provided board and other household services for

apprentices and journeymen and also engaged in the production of goods that contributed

directly to the business, for example, spinning flax into the linen thread that the men needed to

        21
            For an example of a father who exercised his property right by selling his son’s labor, see David
Crockett, A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett of the State of Tennessee (Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1987). The narrative was originally published in 1834. More generally, see Robert A. Pollak, “A Transaction
Cost Approach to Families and Households,” Journal of Economic Literature, 23 (June 1985), pp. 581-608.
         22
            Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard, Based on her Diary, 1785-1812
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1990); and Ulrich, Good Wives: Image and Reality in the Lives of Women in
                                                                                                            14


sew shoes. Moreover, women gradually took on other production tasks as well, most notably the

job of “shoebinding”—that is, sewing together the leather “uppers” of the shoe. They performed

these new functions in the same way as other household tasks, working in their kitchens and

interspersing their work on shoes with child-rearing and other domestic responsibilities.23

         Apprentices, journeymen, and clerks typically lived in the master’s household and were

subject to his discipline in the same way as children were. Their incentive to obey was

somewhat different, however, as it depended on the future rewards to be earned by accumulating

skill or knowledge in the business and the extent to which a good relationship with the master

might help the young man get a start in his field. Clerks, for example, often moved into

positions as junior partners after a period of training, and thus had a powerful motive to stay on

their master’s good side. In occupations where these kinds of future rewards were meager,

where the amount of training required for technical mastery was modest, or where young men

had other opportunities that did not require such a lengthy period of training, apprentices tended

to run away. Thus in industries where technological change during the early nineteenth century

reduced skill requirements, apprenticeship tended to decline and a more impersonal labor market

to develop.24

        Although activity within households, shops, and stores was generally coordinated

hierarchically, interactions among these various economic units were more typically mediated by

long-term relationships. When farmers did business with local storekeepers and craftsmen, they


Northern New England, 1650-1750 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1982).
         23
            Mary H. Blewett, Men, Women, and Work: Class, Gender, and Protest in the New England Shoe
Industry, 1780-1910 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1990), pp. 3-19.
         24
            Gillian Hamilton, “Enforcement in Apprenticeship Contracts: Were Runaways a Serious Problem?
Evidence from Montreal,” Journal of Economic History, 55 (Sept. 1995), pp. 551-74; Bernard Elbaum, “Why
Apprenticeship Persisted in Britain but not in the United States,” Journal of Economic History, 49 (June 1989), pp.
337-49; W. J. Rorabaugh, The Craft Apprentice: From Franklin to the Machine Age in America (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1986); and Tristan Traviolia, “White Male Apprenticeship in the Early Republic,” unpublished
                                                                                                          15


dealt with kinsmen or neighbors with whom they had close multidimensional relationships. The

need to deal with each other repeatedly in a number of different contexts discouraged one party

from taking advantage of another. In addition, a variety of customary practices governed these

local transactions. When cash was not available, for example, payment took the form of book

debt, which did not bear interest charges and was likely to be paid off over a long time horizon

through offsetting book credits. These credits might result from goods provided or services

performed by the borrower himself or they might derive from exchange with third parties (also

typically from the same local network) who were indebted on the borrower’s books. Borrowers

were socially obligated to pay off their debts, but lenders similarly were obligated not to pressure

those who owed them for goods.25

        Farmers periodically traveled to more distant markets to sell their output and buy

manufactured goods and other commodities. In the course of these journeys, they learned about

the prices their goods commanded in regional and even international markets, information that

then affected the terms under which they were willing to engage in local exchange. As Winifred

Rothenberg has shown for late-eighteenth-century Massachusetts, prices in different towns

tended to converge and to exhibit similar movements over time.26 Although exchange was still

primarily local and governed by customary practices and personal relationships, there was still

some danger that buyers would try to pay too little or sellers charge too much for goods. The




paper, 2000.
         25
            Christopher Clark, The Roots of Rural Capitalism: Western Massachusetts, 1780-1860 (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1990), pp. 21-38. These social conventions might break down, however, during periods of
severe economic strain. For an example, see Thomas Stuart Allen, “Commerce, Credit and Community: The
Transformation of Economic Relationships in Rhode Island, 1771-1850,” unpub. Ph.D. diss., Brown University,
1994, pp. 101-2.
         26
            Winifred Barr Rothenberg, From Market-Places to a Market Economy: The Transformation of Rural
Massachusetts, 1750-1850 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 80-111.
                                                                                              16


market provided a source of information that limited the extent to which such behavior could

occur.

         Households bought most goods that they could not produce for themselves from local

shopkeepers and artisans, but some of these products (mainly manufactures and agricultural

commodities that could only be grown in other climates) came from far away. This long-

distance exchange was facilitated by networks built up by merchants in port cities—networks

that incorporated both storekeepers in the countryside and merchants in other ports throughout

the trading world. Because trade over long distances posed difficult principal-agent problems

when transportation and communication costs were high, the earliest links among merchants in

different locations were mainly familial. For example, a member of a trading family would

journey to a distant port and there commence business on the family’s account. Agents who

were family members were less likely to pursue their own interests at the expense of their

principals because they would not want to risk their claim on familial resources. Other kinds of

personal connections could also provide a basis for the creation of long-distance trading

relationships. Members of minority religious groups, such as the Quakers, had duties toward co-

religionists, even if they were otherwise strangers, that they did not have toward people of other

faiths. Moreover, connections could be built up over time through letters of introduction and

repeat dealing. A merchant might trust a colleague in another location who had been

recommended to him for a small amount, and if the outcome was within expectations, continue

the relationship, gradually expanding both the amount and type of business transacted. The

resulting business “friendship” brought with it social expectations that were in many ways
                                                                                                        17


similar to those between kinsmen and neighbors and helped to insure that the relationship would

proceed according to terms acceptable to both parties.27

        Merchants who invested in factories during the early part of this period exploited these

trading networks both to sell output and to process intermediate goods using the putting-out

system. A good example is Almy & Brown, the enterprise that combined the technical expertise

of British mechanic Samuel Slater with the commercial know-how of Providence merchant

Moses Brown to establish the first successful cotton-spinning mill in the United States in 1790.

Almy & Brown sold some of their machine-spun thread on the market, making use of trading

connections that the Brown family had painstakingly built up over the previous half century, but

they consumed much of it as an intermediate good in the production of cotton cloth, which they

also sold through their trading network. Almy & Brown initially had employed a number of

handloom weavers in their factory, but they were not able to concentrate enough workers in one

place to absorb the output of their spinning machines. Very quickly they shifted their energies

into transforming the rural shopkeepers with whom they had long done business into

intermediaries who would distribute their thread to farm households to be woven into cloth. But

the enormous coordination problems that this system entailed (just to mention one, unsupervised

workers weaving in their homes turned out fabrics of vastly varying qualities) spurred




        27
            Bernard Bailyn, The New England Merchants in the Seventeenth Century (New York: Harper
Torchbooks—Harper & Row, 1955); David Hancock, Citizens of the World: London Merchants and the Integration
of the British Atlantic Community, 1735-1785 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995); Thomas M.
Doerflinger, A Vigorous Spirit of Enterprise: Merchants and Economic Development in Revolutionary Philadelphia
((New York: W.W. Norton, 1986), pp. 47-62; T. H. Breen, Tobacco Culture: The Mentality of the Great Tidewater
Planters on the Eve of Revolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), pp. 84-123. For a more general
theoretical treatment, see Pollak, “A Transaction Cost Approach”; and Yoram Ben-Porath, “The F-Connection:
Families, Friends, and Firms and the Organization of Exchange,” Population and Development Review, 6 (Mar.
1980), pp. 1-30.
                                                                                                            18


manufacturers to reconcentrate production in factories as soon as technological innovation in the

form of the power loom enabled them to expand capacity sufficiently.28

          Within their factories, Almy & Brown, Slater, and other early textile manufacturers who

followed their example initially attempted to coordinate their workers using traditional

patriarchal means of control. Their labor forces consisted for the most part of the children and

unmarried daughters of local farmers, and Slater in particular recognized the value of the father’s

authority over his dependents. Before the 1830s, he rarely employed children who were not

subject to the discipline of a local household, and insisted on negotiating their labor contracts

with (and paying the children’s wages to) household heads, who obligated themselves to provide

Slater with an agreed upon supply of workers, promised to find substitutes if their children could

not go into the mill, and undertook to insure that their children worked diligently. This strategy

ultimately proved unworkable, however, for fathers often had different ideas from factory

owners about what their children should do in the factory and how hard and long they should

work.29

          The much larger textile factories built during the second and third decades of the

nineteenth century by Francis C. Lowell, Nathan Appleton, and others collectively known as the

Boston Associates, used a very different labor system. Because they needed many more workers

than could be obtained from local farm households, they had to convince young, unmarried

women from all over New England to come work temporarily in the mills. In order to make

          28
           Barbara M. Tucker, Samuel Slater and the Origins of the American Textile Industry, 1790-1860 (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1984), pp. 57-8, 104-5; Alison Wheeler, “The Forces of Industrialization and the
Blackstone Manufacturing Company, 1808-1864,” Senior Honors Thesis, Brown University, 1991; Thomas Dublin,
Transforming Women’s Work: New England Lives in the Industrial Revolution (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1994), pp. 37-48. For a theoretical treatment of the shift from putting-out to factory production, see Joel Mokyr,
“The Rise and Fall of the Factory System: Technology, Firms, and Households Since the Industrial Revolution,”
unpublished paper, 2000.
        29
           Tucker, Samuel Slater, pp. 147-162; Teresa Anne Murphy, Ten Hours’ Labor: Religion, Reform, and
                                                                                                             19


factory employment more attractive to this group, they invested in boarding houses and

educational institutions. They eschewed the traditional coordination mechanisms of the Slater-

type mills and contracted directly with their female employees, paying them wages on their own

account. Although sometimes the women dutifully turned their earnings over to their families,

often they retained control of the money they earned and chose how to allocate it themselves—

how much to save, how much to consume, and what to consume it on.30

        The difficulties involved in coordinating such sizeable factory labor forces encouraged

manufacturers to invest in religious institutions that would inculcate in their workers the values

of hard work and responsibility.31 They also spurred managers to develop new information

systems that would enable them to monitor (and hence control) their workers’ activities.

Merchants involved in the putting out system had used traditional commercial accounting

systems designed to keep track of debits and credits, and these methods were employed by early

manufacturers as well. Very quickly, however, the managers of larger enterprises devised new

systems of accounts to keep track of their labor costs. For example, Lowell-type textile mills

generated production-expense reports that mainly concerned labor and were used to evaluate the

efforts both of individual workers and of those who supervised them. In addition, they adapted

to the new factory environment the putting-out custom of paying by the piece, creating an

incentive for operatives to tend their machines diligently by making their income proportional to



Gender in Early New England (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992), pp. 9-31.
         30
            Thomas Dublin, Women at Work: The Transformation of Work and Community in Lowell,
Massachusetts, 1826-1860 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1979), pp. 23-57.
         31
            Indeed, some scholars have argued that manufacturers encouraged the spread of evangelical
Protestantism during this period in order to increase the discipline of their workforces. See, for example, Anthony
F. C. Wallace, Rockdale: The Growth of an American Village in the Early Industrial Revolution (New York: W.
W. Norton, 1971), pp. 296-471; Tucker, Samuel Slater, pp. 163-185; and Judith A. McGaw, Most Wonderful
Machine: Mechanization and Social Change in Berkshire Paper Making, 1801-1885 (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1987), pp. 81-88. Other scholars, however, have argued that religion could also play a subversive
role. See Murphy, Ten Hours’ Labor, pp. 73-100.
                                                                                                          20


output.32

        Even though transportation and communication systems were primitive at the beginning

of the nineteenth century, the rural economy was productive and farmers relatively prosperous.

Local shopkeepers stocked goods (supplied by merchants in port cities) for which there was a

predictably steady demand—for example, the machine-made textiles that British and later New

England factories were turning out increasingly cheaply. But shopkeepers could not afford to

maintain inventories of goods, particularly expensive durable goods, for which there was only

sporadic local demand, and this inability created an incentive for merchants to find new ways of

tapping farmers’ buying potential. One important innovation was to hire as peddlers young men

eager to escape the drudgery of farming and send them wandering through the countryside

loaded down with merchandise.

        Two lessons quickly became apparent from this innovation. The first was that there was

indeed a broad rural market for consumer durables like clocks, if such items could be produced

at a cost that brought them within range of the “middling sort” of farmer. Connecticut merchants

Levi and Edward Porter attempted to follow up on this lesson by contracting in 1807 with

clockmaker Eli Terry for the production of 4,000 inexpensive, wooden-movement clocks in three

years’ time. In order to fill this contract Terry had to learn how to simplify the clock’s

mechanisms and develop special purpose machinery to produce the component parts. He spent

the first year of the contract designing and building machinery, made 1000 clocks the second

year, simplified his clock design further, and made 3000 clocks the third year of the contract.

Until this point, no clockmaker could have made this many clocks in a lifetime, let alone in a

        32
           Steven Lubar, “Managerial Structure and Technological Style: The Lowell Mills, 1821-1880,” Business
and Economic History, Second Series, 13 (1984), pp. 20-30; H. Thomas Johnson, “Early Cost Accounting for
Internal Management Control: Lyman Mills in the 1850’s,” Business History Review, 46 (Winter 1972), pp. 466-
474; Dublin, Women at Work, p. 66. These innovations appear to have been adopted by Slater-type mills during the
                                                                                                               21


single year. Thus the ability to distribute goods to a broad market of farmers stimulated

technological change in the direction of the “American system” of mass-production—that is, the

use of special-purpose machinery to produce components that could be relatively easily

assembled into a finished good.33

         The second lesson that merchants learned from their experience with peddlers was that

there were serious agency problems associated with this means of distribution. Merchants had

no way of insuring that the peddlers they hired would treat expensive and delicate merchandize

like clocks with suitable care or that they would report accurately the prices at which they sold

their merchandise to farmers. Similarly, farmers whose experience with manufactured goods

was relatively limited had good reason to suspect that peddlers, whom they were likely never to

see again, would misrepresent the quality of their wares or overcharge them for items they

wished to purchase. Not surprisingly, after one or two bad experiences farmers might greet

traveling salesmen in the way that one did the young James Guild—with threats of violence if

they did not leave their property immediately.34 The experience of peddlers thus illustrates the

difficulties associated with marketing goods over long distances in an economy where

transportation and communications costs were high. In the absence of networks based on family,

religion, or long-term association, exchange was difficult to conduct.




1830s. See Tucker, Samuel Slater, pp. 153, 204-6, 228-9.
          33
             Donald R. Hoke, Ingenious Yankees: The Rise of the American System of Manufactures in the Private
Sector (New York: Columbia University Press, 1990).
          34
             Guild quickly learned some of the tricks in trade of the Yankee peddler—for example, repackaging
identical scissors so that they appeared to represent gradations in quality and playing upon farmwives’ desires to buy
superior merchandise. See “The Journal of James Guild,” Proceedings of the Vermont Historical Society, New
Series, V (Sept. 1937), pp. 249-314. For a general treatment, see Joseph T. Rainer, “The ‘Sharper’ Image: Yankee
Peddlers, Southern Consumers, and the Market Revolution,” Business and Economics History, 26 (Feb. 1997), pp.
27-44.
                                                                                            22




The Market Revolution

       By the middle of the nineteenth century, a series of transportation and communication

innovations—first the steamboat and the canal and then the railroad and the telegraph—

dramatically reduced the cost of transacting over long distances. These improvements did not

automatically effect a market revolution, however. In order for consumers to be willing to buy

goods from producers located far away, business people had to develop new coordination

mechanisms to solve the inevitable problems of asymmetric information. The best way to

understand this point is to look at the example of a basic commodity like wheat.

       During the antebellum period, farmers in the expanding agricultural regions of the

Middle West shipped their wheat to market in essentially the same way that farmers everywhere

had done for decades—that is, they packed it into sacks which then made the full journey from

production site to final market.35 Because each sack contained wheat from a particular farm, the

name of which was preserved by the merchants who bought the grain, the identity of the farmer

served as an assurance of the quality of the product. As Chicago’s hinterlands expanded with the

construction of the railroad network, however, the costs associated with handling an ever larger

volume of shipments in this manner mounted, and merchants began to take wheat out of the

sacks and pour it into grain elevators and railroad cars. The problem was that as grain from one

farm became intermixed with, and indistinguishable from, grain from all the others, consumers

had no way of determining in advance whether they were buying the quality of product they

desired. The Chicago Board of Trade (the organization to which merchants involved in this

business belonged) grappled with this problem during the 1850s by dividing wheat into three
                                                                                                    23


categories—white winter wheat, red winter wheat, and spring wheat—and measuring the

quantity of grain by weight rather than volume.

        This remedy proved inadequate, however, because farmers no longer had any incentive to

devote care and effort to cleaning their wheat. To the contrary, the incentive structure

encouraged them to adulterate their wheat with cheaper grains or even with inedible materials

that would increase its weight and hence the payment they received at market. The result was a

general fall in the average price earned by the region’s farmers. When the situation worsened

during the hard times that followed the Panic of 1857, the Board of Trade responded by dividing

the three categories of wheat into finer gradations based on quality (including “rejected” for

wheat deemed too inferior to be marketed). Then, to convince buyers that the wheat they

purchased would indeed be of advertised grade, the Board hired inspectors with the authority to

enter storage elevators and make sure that merchants were adhering to the new standards—that

is, it added an element of hierarchy to coordination by the market.

        As the case of wheat suggests, broad geographic markets did not emerge automatically as

a result of falling transportation and communication costs; rather they had to be actively created.

In order for such markets to work effectively, the information problems associated with

exchanging goods in quantity among actors physically remote from one another had to be solved.

If the personal identity of the producer could no longer provide an assurance of quality, new

ways of guaranteeing standards had to be designed. As the merchants of Chicago quickly

learned, moreover, consumers would only accept these standards as informative if some person

or group with something at stake stood behind them. The Chicago Board of Trade would have



        35
         This example is drawn from William Cronon, Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New
York: W.W. Norton, 1991), pp. 104-119.
                                                                                               24


squandered a palpably valuable reputation if it had not devised administrative mechanisms

adequate to insure that merchants adhered to its standards.

       The techniques developed by the Chicago Board of Trade worked well for agricultural

commodities that could relatively easily be sorted into standard grades. But the marketing of

more complex goods to remote consumers required different methods. One solution was the

emergence of large wholesaling firms. These enterprises functioned very differently from the

merchants of the previous period. In the first place, they bypassed the networks of personal

connections that earlier merchants had so painstakingly built up over time, and instead opened

offices throughout the country, constructing their own internal networks of purchasing and sales

agents. These they coordinated hierarchically, creating lines of authority radiating from a

national office to regional and local offices whose managers were responsible for monitoring

agents in their respective areas. More important, unlike earlier merchants who typically operated

on a commission basis, the new national wholesalers took formal title to the goods they handled.

Often they branded them with their own trademarks and, by thus putting their own reputations on

the line, assumed responsibility for the quality of the goods they marketed.36

       Consumers rarely bought goods directly from wholesalers but instead typically purchased

their wares from the retailers who were the wholesalers’ main customers. The growing

concentration of population in cities during the late nineteenth century made it possible for urban

retailers to expand and diversify their offerings. It was during this period that department stores,

dime stores, and other types of mass retailers (the largest of whom were able to bypass

wholesalers and create their own purchasing networks) began to provide urban residents with a

cornucopia of goods at both cheaper prices and guaranteed quality. The buyers for these large


       36
            Chandler, The Visible Hand, pp. 215-224.
                                                                                                       25


retailers took on the role, in Regina Blaszczyk’s apt phrase, of “fashion intermediary” for the

economy.37 It was their job to collect information about customers’ tastes and communicate this

knowledge to the wholesalers and manufacturers who supplied their stores. In this way, they

helped to insure that manufacturers would make, and wholesalers would stock, the goods that

consumers really wanted to buy. Moreover, because the business of these stores was so valuable,

suppliers had good reason to meet the buyers’ expectations about quality.

       Tapping the consumption potential of America’s large numbers of prosperous farmers

depended on another innovation of the period—the catalog mail-order firm. First Montgomery

Ward, and then Sears, Roebuck & Company, took advantage of the new national railroad

network to create a distribution system that supplanted the itinerant peddlers of the previous

period. Having mailed rural Americans catalogs that listed a wide variety of merchandise, they

took orders by return post, and then shipped the goods to purchasers with a money-back

guarantee. As in the case of urban retailers, their buyers served the dual function of

communicating information about consumers’ tastes to suppliers and enforcing standards of

quality.

       Large wholesalers and retailers thus solved the problem of trading a large volume of

goods over long distances by substituting hierarchical coordination for the networks and itinerant

peddlers that earlier merchants had employed. Hierarchies, however, were no more likely to

work automatically than markets were. These organizations too had to confront serious

information problems in order to live up to the promises they made to consumers and still earn a

profit sufficient to attract and retain investors. Sears, for example, had to redesign completely its

distribution system. Initially the firm had goods shipped directly to consumers from the factories

       37
            Regina Lee Baszczyk, Imagining Consumers: Design and Innovation from Wedgwood to Corning
                                                                                                         26


in which the goods were made. The products frequently arrived in damaged condition, and it

was difficult for the company to determine the extent to which the factory had been responsible

for the problem by packing merchandise improperly or even by shipping damaged goods.

Factories, moreover, were often slow to process orders. They were supposed to report to Sears

when and what they had shipped, but these messages too were often slow in coming. When a

customer complained to Sears that a product had arrived damaged or had not arrived at all, Sears

sent the factory another order to ship. In that age of handwritten ledger books, there was no easy

way to check the new order against the records of outstanding older ones, and so orders

frequently were sent out more than once. The cost to Sears of all these errors was large because

Sears paid the freight for returns and because duplicate and damaged shipments affected

consumers’ perceptions of the company’s competence.38

        Sears dealt with these problems by expanding its activities to take on functions that

hitherto had been the responsibility of its suppliers (that is, it integrated vertically). In 1906, it

opened a massive new mail-order warehouse in Chicago. Henceforth the company would ship

goods from this facility and not from the individual manufacturer. For this expensive investment

to pay off, however, Sears had to confront its own internal principal-agent problems. To this

end, Sears divided its warehouse into departments overseen by supervisors who were linked in a

chain of command to top company officials. It also simultaneously created an incentive structure

to keep departmental managers on their toes. When an order arrived, a clerk assigned it to an

individual shipping room for a particular fifteen-minute period and directed each department

responsible for supplying an item to deliver the good to that room in the allotted time. At the end


(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000).
         38
            Daniel M. G. Raff and Peter Temin, “Sears, Roebuck in the Twentieth Century: Competition,
Complementarities, and the Problem of Wasting Assets,” in Lamoreaux, Raff, and Temin, eds., Learning by Doing,
pp. 221-5.
                                                                                                             27


of the fifteen minutes, the goods were packaged together and shipped out. Items that did not

arrive in time had to be shipped separately at the expense of the supplying department. This cost

of late delivery motivated supplying departments to maintain adequate inventories and to

organize them so they could find products quickly on demand.39

        The growth of large-scale business enterprises also increased the principal-agent

problems associated with the coordination of labor. It had been a relatively simple proposition to

pay an employee in a small artisanal workshop, or even a laborer in a small factory, according to

the value of his or her marginal revenue product. (Piece rates could be an effective way of

gauging effort.) In large firms, however, the value of an individual worker’s marginal product

might be neither well defined nor easy to measure, improvements in accounting practice

notwithstanding. Moreover, such knowledge as could be obtained by direct observation about

the effort individual employees expended was often the property of foremen, who might not

think that it was in their interests to transfer this knowledge in any complete fashion to superiors.

Taylorism was in essence an attempt to bypass foremen, secure direct information about the

effort it was reasonable to expect from workers on an ongoing basis, and create incentives for

workers to fulfill expectations. It quickly became apparent, however, that in complex production

situations that required team efforts, individual incentives could be counterproductive if

employees did not respond by working at the same pace. Consequently, firms in industries with

this characteristic tended to shift away from individual toward group incentives.40 Yet another


        39
            Raff and Temin, “Sears, Roebuck in the Twentieth Century,” pp. 221-5. Like these late charges,
accounting systems could be used to improve the functioning of managerial hierarchies. For example, Andrew
Carnegie developed sophisticated cost accounting techniques that not only allowed him to pinpoint inefficiencies in
the production process but also to pit his plant managers against one other and thus use competitive pressures to
make them function more effectively. See Harold C. Livesay, Andrew Carnegie and the Rise of Big Business
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1975), pp. 149-50.
         40
            The type of group compensation varied with the type of production. For example, producers like the
Baldwin Locomotive Works that produced custom-designed products tended to rely on inside contracting schemes.
                                                                                                           28


type of compensation system emerged in mass-production enterprises where machines controlled

the pace of work. At Ford, for example, assembly lines made it easy to detect when a worker

was not able to maintain the pace. By paying wages that were high enough so that workers

wanted to keep their jobs, and dismissing workers who could not make the grade, Ford was able

to secure a high level of effort from its workforce.41

        The kinds of cultural formations that had earlier reinforced networks based on long-term

relationships could also be used to make hierarchies work. At the most obvious level, firms

might amass workforces whose ethnic or gender heterogeneity operated as a barrier to labor

organization.42 Such divisions, however, could also be deployed to inculcate a sense of loyalty

to the organization or to encourage employees to work hard. Southern textile mills’ refusal to

hire African-Americans aimed to give white workers a sense that they were privileged to work in

unhealthy conditions at low wages.43 For similar reasons, the Ford Motor Company hired very

few women during the early twentieth century. Ford deliberately coded assembly-line work as

masculine, denigrating the manhood of those that could not keep up the pace while at the same




Firms that produced consumer goods like automobiles experimented with group piece rates. See John K. Brown,
The Baldwin Locomotive Works, 1831-1915: A Study in American Industrial Practice (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1995), pp. 115-19; Daniel Nelson, Managers and Workers: Origins of the New Factory System in
the United States, 1880-1920 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1975), pp. 34-78; Ernest J. Englander, “The
Inside Contract System of Production and Organization: A Neglected Aspect of the History of the Firm,” Labor
History, 28 (Fall 1987), pp. 429-46; Nelson, “Industrial Engineering and the Industrial Enterprise, 1890-1940,” in
Lamoreaux and Raff, eds., Coordination and Information, pp. 35-50; Daniel M. G. Raff, “The Puzzling Profusion of
Compensation Systems in the Interwar Automobile Industry,” in Lamoreaux and Raff, eds., Coordination and
Information, pp. 13-29.
         41
            On Ford, see Raff, “Wage Determination Theory and the Five-Dollar Day at Ford,” Journal of Economic
History, 48 (June 1988), pp. 387-99. For a more general discussion of the use of “technical control,” see Richard
Edwards, Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in the Twentieth Century (New York: Basic
Books, 1979), pp. 111-29.
         42
            See, for an example, David Brody, Steelworkers in America: The Nonunion Era (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1960).
         43
            David L. Carlton, Mill and Town in South Carolina, 1880-1920 (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 1982).
                                                                                                        29


time giving those who could a wage that, as one of his managers put it, would help them “to be

better men.”44

        By replicating in their organizations the ethnic, gender, and class structure of society,

firms were able to make their hierarchies seem more natural—as if those on top were destined to

be there. But businesses could get more out of their work forces if they could manage

nonetheless to provide all of their employees with opportunities for advancement. The solution

many firms adopted was separate job ladders that gave workers evidence that hard work and

loyalty would be rewarded, even if there were severe limits on the positions to which they could

aspire. Insurance companies, for example, developed what were effectively separate promotion

tracks for men and women, each of which made use of appropriate gender stereotypes to elicit

high levels of effort.45 Other firms had separate tracks for blue-collar and white-collar workers.

For these various job ladders to have the desired effect, however, workers had to have

confidence that promotions would be made on the basis of merit, not favoritism. As Walter

Licht has shown for the case of railroads, foremen’s tendency to award plum jobs to, or

otherwise favor, cronies (that is, to build their own networks of long-term relationships and

exploit them for personal advantage) was a major source of labor unrest during the late

nineteenth century. When railroads curbed the power of the foremen and put in place a more

bureaucratic system of promotion, this source of grievance died down.46




        44
            Wayne A. Lewchuk, “Men and Monotony: Fraternalism as a Managerial Strategy at the Ford Motor
Company,” Journal of Economic History, 53 (Dec. 1993), pp. 824-56.
         45
            See Angell Kwolek-Folland, Engendering Business: Men and Women in the Corporate Office, 1870-
1930 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1994).
         46
            Licht, Working for the Railroad: The Organization of Work in the Nineteenth Century (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1983). See also Edwards, Contested Terrain, pp. 130-162.
                                                                                                  30




Industrial Districts and Chandlerian Firms

       The large wholesalers and retailers that emerged during the second half of the nineteenth

century solved many of the information problems associated with long-distance commerce, but

they also created new problems, stimulating manufacturers to attempt to bypass their services

and deal directly with customers. One problem was the discrepancy in size and power between

wholesalers and the many small producers who depended upon them for access to national

markets. This discrepancy potentially subjected the latter to exploitation, and, not surprisingly,

manufacturers complained of a litany of abuses, ranging from abrupt cancellation of orders,

returns of goods on suspect claims that their quality was substandard, and theft of intellectual

property. Manufacturers attempted to protect themselves by using market competition (in the

form of direct sales) to gain sufficient bargaining power to induce wholesalers to behave. The

emergence of large retailers, such as department stores and mail-order firms, facilitated their

efforts, because it was in the interests of these new kinds of businesses to deal directly with

suppliers.47

       Attempts by small manufacturers to discipline wholesalers were most likely to be

successful, however, where producers of similar goods were concentrated near each other in

“industrial districts.” Whatever initially caused firms to locate in close proximity (access to

markets or the availability of low-cost raw materials or other inputs), such clusters often

persisted over time because they attracted businesses that supplied complementary products or

services—for example, machinery firms that built or maintained equipment specific to the

industry—and because the networks that manufacturers formed among themselves and with
                                                                                                           31


related businesses became an important source of competitive advance. Firms located in such

districts tended to be smaller and more specialized than those in more isolated locations. In

1870, for example, Philadelphia’s textile sector included over 600 firms, each of which tended to

focus on a single step (weaving or spinning or dyeing) in the process of producing final goods,

contracting with other firms in order to fill buyers’ orders. This ability to join forces with a wide

variety of other highly specialized producers enabled firms in such districts to customize their

products to meet the needs of specific buyers and also to respond flexibly to changes in style.

Moreover, because participation in such multi-firm deals was vital to success, producers had an

incentive to deal fairly with each other.48

        Much like tradesmen in the early nineteenth century, business people in these industrial

communities interacted socially as well economically, and the resulting multidimensional

relationships facilitated cooperation in other endeavors besides production. Thus manufacturers

in industrial districts were able to join together to develop new ways of marketing their goods

that helped them discipline wholesalers and sell directly to retailers. In Philadelphia, for

example, textile manufacturers collectively built the “Bourse,” a nine-story building which

showcased the wares of hundreds of local firms in a central location convenient for buyers from

large retailers to visit. Similarly, furniture producers in Grand Rapids, Michigan, exploited

market forces by organizing huge biannual expositions to sell their wares to the trade.49



        47
             See Philip Scranton, Endless Novelty: Specialty Production and American Industrialization, 1865-1925
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997).
          48
             See Scranton, Endless Novelty; Scranton, Proprietary Capitalism: The Textile Manufacture at
Philadelphia, 1800-1885 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983); and Scranton, Figured Tapestry:
Production, Markets, and Power in Philadelphia Textiles, 1885-1941 (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1989). For a more theoretical treatment, see Michael J. Enright, “Organization and Coordination in Geographically
Concentrated Industries,” in Lamoreaux and Raff, Coordination and Information, pp. 103-42.
          49
             See Scranton, Endless Novelty, for these and other examples. See also Blaszczyk, Imagining Consumers,
pp. 24-6.
                                                                                                       32


        The use of wholesalers to reach national markets could pose problems for larger firms as

well. The Singer Sewing Machine Company found, for instance, that consumers were reluctant

to buy relatively expensive items like sewing machines unless they had instruction in how to use

them effectively and also assurance that broken devices would be speedily and inexpensively

repaired. Wholesalers proved to be unwilling to provide these costly but necessary teaching and

repair services. In other words, Singer faced what Williamson has called the “externality

principal”—that is, the likelihood that distributors would not make the investments required to

market a product properly if the poor performance of one or more of their number could affect

the reputation of the product (and hence the profitability of these investments). As Williamson’s

analysis would predict, Singer had to integrate vertically into distribution and take on these tasks

itself if it was to build demand for its product. Beginning in the late 1850s, the company built a

national system of sales offices, each staffed at minimum by a manager, a female demonstrator, a

mechanic, and a salesman.50 These investments in distribution paid off in a growing stream of

orders for sewing machines, forcing Singer to streamline its manufacturing process in order to

deliver the machines in a timely fashion. In much the same way as Eli Terry had earlier

innovated in the production of clocks in order to fulfill his contract, Singer redesigned both its

product and its production process along American system lines, using special-purpose machine

tools to turn out standardized parts that could be assembled with predominantly unskilled labor.51

        Chandler’s great contribution was to generalize from cases such as Singer’s and argue

that, in certain kinds of mass-production industries, wholesalers were not adequate to the task of

national distribution and so firms had to integrate forwards into sales in order benefit from


        50
         Chandler, The Visible Hand, pp. 302-305.
        51
         David A. Hounshell, From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932: The Development of
Manufacturing Technology in the United States (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984), pp. 67-123.
                                                                                                               33


economies of scale. These industries included not only producers of complex machinery (sewing

machines, harvesters and other farm equipment, and later automobiles), but also manufacturers

of goods for which it was necessary to build demand, such as cigarettes (a new product in the

late nineteenth century), or goods which required special handling, such as dressed beef and

other perishable foods.52 Furthermore, Chandler argued, in order to avoid bottlenecks in supply

(or holdup by suppliers), firms in such industries often had to integrate backwards as well as

forwards. Problems with suppliers were especially likely to occur, as Williamson has pointed

out, where investments had to be made in assets that were highly specific to the transaction. For

example, meatpackers such as Gustavus Swift needed a predictable supply of refrigerator cars to

ship dressed beef from their slaughterhouses in Chicago quickly around the country. Because

meat would spoil if the specialized carriers were not available precisely when they were needed,

it made sense for the meatpackers to integrate backwards and acquire their own fleets of cars.

For similar reasons they also built their own networks of icehouses.53

         As already noted, one advantage of industrial districts was the flexibility with which

producers could respond to customers’ needs and changing tastes. The integration of mass

distribution with mass production in large Chandlerian firms enabled producers to lower

dramatically the cost of the goods they manufactured, but the tradeoff was a significant loss of

flexibility. An extreme but nonetheless instructive example is the Ford Motor Company. Henry

Ford had recognized that there was potentially a huge demand for a low-priced, good-quality,


         52
            The Visible Hand, Ch. 9. Although Chandler generalizes from the cigarette case and argues that the
development of new mass production techniques led firms to integrate vertically into mass distribution in order to
keep their plants running at full capacity, some of his cases (for example, sewing machines and meat packing)
suggest that innovations in mass distribution came first.
         53
            See Daniel M. G. Raff and Peter Temin, “Business History and Recent Economic Theory: Imperfect
Information, Incentives, and the Internal Organization of Firms,” in Inside the Business Enterprise, ed. Temin, pp.
23-5. For the history of organizational change in the meatpacking industry, see Mary Yeager, Competition and
Regulation: The Development of Oligopoly in the Meat Packing Industry (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1981).
                                                                                                     34


rugged, adequately powered car. He and a team of mechanics and engineers designed an

automobile with simple components that could be cheaply machined and then developed a

production system to manufacture this car on a mass scale by combining, on one hand, the

American-system technique of using dedicated machine tools to produce highly uniform

components with, on the other, the moving assembly lines that had already enabled firms in

industries like meatpacking to profit from an extensive division of labor. At that time, most

automobile firms bought parts from independent suppliers, but from early on Ford pursued a

strategy of vertical integration in order to reduce costs and insure a ready supply of parts that

precisely fit his specifications. When he moved from his Highland Park factory to the colossal

River Rouge complex in Detroit, he pushed this strategy even further, producing not only parts

but also most of the materials that went into them. He also invested in building a distribution

system capable of selling and servicing the cars that “the Rouge” could turn out in such large

quantities. By single-mindedly pursuing this strategy of mass production and vertical

integration, Ford successfully lowered the cost of automobiles to a point where their purchase

price was within range of the majority of American consumers.54

        The Model T, produced starting in 1909, was ostensibly a “platform” car that enabled

Ford to put several different body types on top of a generic chassis and power train.

Nonetheless, the range of choices that the company offered consumers was extremely limited.

Whether or not Ford actually spoke the famous words that customers “can have any color they

want so long as it’s black” matters little, for the quote accurately captured the company’s

philosophy. The whole thrust of Ford’s system was to achieve lower costs through relentless


        54
          Hounshell, From the American System to Mass Production, pp. 217-301; and “Why Corporations Don’t
Learn Continuously: Waves of Innovation and Desperation at Ford Motor Company, 1903-1996,” unpublished
paper.
                                                                                                        35


standardization. Indeed, not until the firm’s market share had dropped precipitously in the late

1920s did Ford even offer consumers a choice of colors.55

        Ford, of course, was an extreme case. In the 1920s, General Motors (GM) began to

develop a similar platform system to give consumers considerably more choice, but here too the

company’s drive to keep costs low by achieving long production runs severely constrained its

ability to respond to the desires of different consumers and even to changes in taste over time.56

Forecasting the demand for various models and colors was a serious problem, and GM

assiduously tracked dealer sales and also experimented with new techniques of market

research.57 Inevitably, however, the need to make production decisions far in advance of actual

sales meant that firms like GM increasingly resorted to advertising to shape buyers’ tastes—that

is, to make into objects of desire the highly standardized products that they were turning out in

such quantity.

        The large, vertically integrated firm arose initially in a relatively small number of mass-

production industries—industries where firms were compelled by problems such as the

externality principle to bypass wholesalers in order to market their output effectively. From the

perspective of late nineteenth century, these kinds of enterprises were something of a special

case and consequently did not attract much scholarly attention. Indeed, writing in the late 1880s

the great economist Alfred Marshall scarcely noticed them. Although he recognized that large

firms were emerging in certain sectors of the economy, he attributed their growth to the

substitution of machinery for skilled labor and emphasized the continued importance of the

        55
           Hounshell, “Why Corporations Don’t Learn Continuously.” See also Richard S. Tedlow, New and
Improved: The Story of Mass Marketing in America (New York: Basic Books, 1990), pp. 112-81.
        56
           On the development see Daniel M.G. Raff, “Making Cars and Making Money in the Interwar
Automobile Industry: Economies of Scale, Economies of Scope, and the Manufacturing that Stood Behind the
Marketing,” Business History Review, 65 (Winter 1991), pp. 721-53.
        57
           Sally Clarke, “Consumers, Information, and Marketing Efficiency at GM, 1921-1940,” Business and
                                                                                                            36


market in coordinating their inputs and outputs. Marshall denied that large firms were invariably

more efficient than small, arguing that there were both advantages and disadvantages to the

extended division of labor and reliance on professional managers that greater size entailed.

Moreover, he devoted an entire chapter to the economic benefits (in the form of external or

agglomeration economies) that followed from the clustering of small firms in industrial

districts.58

        One hundred years later, however, the focus of scholarly attention had dramatically

shifted, and firms in such specialized clusters were generally relegated to the “periphery” of the

economy. Instead business historians concentrated their attention almost exclusively on the giant

firms that dominated the economy’s “center,” accepting Chandler’s view that the large, vertically

integrated, managerially directed corporation was the archetypal modern industrial enterprise.59

What had changed in the interim was a series of merger waves that not only altered the size

distribution of firms in the economy in ways that gave large-scale businesses considerably more

prominence, but were taken by Chandler and his followers as confirmation of the superiority of

the visible hand of management as a mechanism of economic coordination.

        The earliest waves of mergers, the most important of which was the Great Merger

Movement of 1895-1904, were dominated by horizontal combinations whose primary motive

was to reduce price competition by increasing market power.60 But later waves consisted for the


Economic History, 25 (Fall 1996), pp. 186-95.
          58
             Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics (London: Macmillan, 1890), Book IV, Chs. 8-12. Of course,
the early examples of vertically integrated firms were primarily American, which may explain why Marshall, a
British academic, overlooked them.
          59
             See Chandler’s summary of his argument in Scale and Scope, pp. 3-46. The language of center and
periphery is from Robert T. Averitt, The Dual Economy: The Dynamics of American Industry Structure (New York:
W. W. Norton, 1968). For early attempts to redirect attention back toward industrial districts, see Scranton,
Proprietary Capitalism; and Michael J. Piore and Charles F. Sabel, The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for
Prosperity (New York: Basic Books, 1984).
          60
             Chandler argued that the actual reason for these mergers was inconsequential but that, in order to
succeed, the consolidations has to integrate vertically and develop a managerial apparatus capable of smoothly
                                                                                                                37


most part of acquisitions for the purpose of diversification According to Chandler, once firms

built managerial hierarchies capable of coordinating multi-unit, vertically linked activities

efficiently, they could exploit the economies of scope that these capacities made possible by

taking on additional functions. First, however, an organizational innovation was necessary

because the highly centralized organizations that large firms initially created tended to suffer

from information overload when they expanded into new kinds of business activity. Chandler

developed this point by recounting the experience of Du Pont during the period following the

First World War.61

         Du Pont, a gunpowder producer, had flourished during the war, but its officers expected

the firm to suffer from severe excess capacity after the armistice. In order to avoid this

eventuality, they decided to diversify into new markets, such as paint, that would exploit the

firm’s expertise in chemicals but also promised substantial potential for growth during

peacetime. It quickly became apparent, however, that the firm’s centralized managerial

hierarchy could not effectively coordinate its newly diversified operations. After some halting

efforts to address the problems by incremental means, the company developed and implemented

a multidivisional form of organization. What the company did in effect was to form each distinct

product line into a separate business, albeit one wholly owned by Du Pont. The Du Pont board

determined the amount of capital to be allocated to each division, as well as the identity and

tenure of the divisional heads. Like the chief executive of a company, the head of each division


coordinating the flow of inputs and outputs (see The Visible Hand, pp. 334-44). As noted above, he did not even
entertain the possibility that the consolidations that integrated vertically may have succeeded, not because they were
more efficient, but because they were able to erect barriers to new competition. For evidence on this point, see
Lamoreaux, The Great Merger Movement, Chs. 5-6. For a theoretical rationale for this possibility, see Oliver Hart
and Jean Tirole, “Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics, 1990 (1990), pp. 205-76.
         61
            The following account is from Chandler, Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of Industrial
Enterprise (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1962), pp. 52-113.
                                                                                               38


controlled all the functions required to support its operations, from product development and

procurement on through marketing and sales, and was accountable to the owners for its profit-

and-loss performance. Although this change inevitably involved some loss of scale economies

(functions like procurement and marketing, for example, were no longer consolidated in the

central office), it gave divisional executives the wherewithal and the incentives to respond to

changing conditions and opportunities in their particular business areas, at the same time freeing

top managers in the central office to focus on resource allocation and long-run strategic

concerns. By forcing divisional managers to compete for capital, it introduced elements of the

market into the businesses’ hierarchical organizations.

       Although a small number of firms adopted similar managerial structures around the same

time, it was not until the second half of the century that this organizational innovation came into

widespread use. As the economy recovered from the twin disruptions of the Great Depression

and the Second World War, the first impulse of many of the nation’s largest enterprises was to

follow the trail that Du Pont had blazed after World War I to protect its long-run profitability:

diversify into new areas of business and adopt the decentralized multidivisional (M-form)

organizational structure to manage them. Like Du Pont, these firms initially diversified into

businesses that were closely related to their main production lines. In that way they could deploy

more fully capabilities that they had already developed and exploit potential economies of scope.

An important ancillary aim of firms that pursued this strategy was to smooth profits over the

business cycle by producing goods that had complementary time patterns of demand.62

       Firms could move into new product lines by building their own plants from scratch, but it

was often more efficient to acquire a producer that had already developed a market niche in the


       62
            Chandler, Strategy and Structure, pp. 324-96.
                                                                                                              39


area. Once firms began to use their surplus capital for the purposes of acquisition, however, it

was hard to stop. If an important goal of diversification was to enable managers to stabilize

earnings by producing goods for which demand was uncorrelated, then it was tempting for them

to conclude that they could better accomplish this end by amassing a broad portfolio of

companies in much the same way as investors might choose a portfolio of securities. Firms

began to acquire companies in industries completely unrelated to their core businesses, and the

result was a merger mania that grew to enormous proportions during the 1960s and early ‘70s.

During the high tide of the conglomerate movement, some companies acquired more firms than

there were days in a year.63

         Thus, by the time Chandler sat down to write The Visible Hand during the mid 1970s, the

large vertically integrated, horizontally diversified, managerially coordinated enterprise had

come to account for a broad swath of the nation’s economic activity. Not only had large firms

apparently translated success in their core businesses into other economic activities, but they had

managed to maintain their positions of dominance for unprecedentedly long periods of time.

Richard Edwards, also writing during the mid-1970s, found that there had been remarkably little

change in the ranks of the nation’s largest corporations between 1919 and 1969: virtually all the

firms that dominated their industries in 1919 were still at the top of the list in 1969. Moreover,

these same American corporations (or foreign companies that appeared to be structured along

similar lines) had triumphed by the 1970s in the international arena as well.64 Given this record,


         63
             According to Bruce Kogut and David Parkinson (“Adoption of the Multidivisional Structure: Analyzing
History from the Start,” Industrial and Corporate Change 7 (1998), pp. 249-73), use of the M-form was relatively
limited in 1950, higher in 1960, and much higher after that. For a case study of one of the most active conglomerates
of this period, see George P. Baker, “Beatrice: A Study in the Creation and Destruction of Value,” Journal of
Finance, 47 (July 1992), pp. 1081-119.
          64
             Richard C. Edwards, “Stages in Corporate Stability and the Risks of Corporate Failure,” Journal of
Economic History, 35 (June 1975), pp. 428-57; and Thomas K. McGraw, Prophets of Regulation: Charles Francis
Adams, Louis D. Brandeis, James M. Landis, Alfred E. Kahn (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1984), pp. 74-
                                                                                                       40


it is perhaps not surprising that Chandler’s view that the vertically integrated, managerially

coordinated firm was the modern industrial enterprise swept the profession.



Market Revolution II

        Things would soon change, however. When Leslie Hannah revisited the subject during

the late 1990s, he found that the relative position of once dominant American firms had

deteriorated dramatically. Of the 54 U.S. firms that ranked among the top 100 in the world in

1912, only 17 retained that status in 1995. Moreover, despite large numbers of mergers in the

intervening years, only 26 of the 54 actually had capitalizations in 1995 that were greater

(adjusting for price changes) than they had been in 1912. In other words over half of the firms

had lost ground in absolute as well as in relative terms during the intervening years.65

        At the root of this deteriorating performance were changes in the economic environment

that necessarily affected the adaptability of the hierarchical coordination mechanisms employed

by large vertically integrated, horizontally diversified firms. The sudden onslaught of

international competition during the 1970s highlighted the seriousness of problem, but the

underlying sources of the firms’ difficulties were largely domestic. Rising per capita income had

shifted consumers’ preferences toward higher quality, more individuated goods, but the firms’

hierarchical organizations proved rigid and unresponsive. At the same time, the circumstances

that had encouraged vertical integration in the first place had to a large extent disappeared. As

transportation and communications costs continued to fall, markets became thicker and problems

such as asset specificity and the externality principle became less pressing. Firms found that it


7.
        65
         Leslie Hannah, “Marshall’s ‘Trees’ and the Global “Forest’: Were ‘Giant Redwoods’ Different?” in
Lamoreaux, Raff, and Temin, eds., Learning by Doing, pp. 253-86.
                                                                                                  41


was now in many cases more efficient to buy inputs than to make them. They also found that, by

shifting from in-house production to markets and long-term relationships, they were able to

respond more nimbly to rapidly changing and increasingly varied consumer tastes.

       The disadvantages of the hierarchical coordination techniques employed by Chandlerian

firms appeared earliest and most obviously in the case of conglomerates. These mergers had

been rationalized on the grounds that executives in the central office would be able to make their

subsidiary companies more profitable than they had been on their own and, therefore, that

investors were better off buying shares in a conglomerate than in an assortment of free-standing

companies. In the beginning, there may have been some truth to this notion. Systematic

education in business administration was not widespread in the United States, even during the

1950s, and many of the early conglomerates were able to improve performance by buying up less

than professionally managed firms and immediately putting in place up-to-date accounting and

reporting systems and a managerial staff instructed to achieve specific measurable outcomes.66

       These kinds of gains were relatively quickly exhausted, however, and the effectiveness of

this kind of managerial structure was soon called into question. Top executives in the central

office had only summary knowledge of the businesses that they acquired and, as a result, found it

difficult to review critically the opportunities, decisions, and outcomes of their many divisions in

detail. Over time they increasingly restricted themselves to setting performance targets in terms

of easily interpreted financial variables like revenue, profit, and return on invested capital,

allocating capital among their many divisions not on the basis of their superior understanding of

the choices at issue but rather strictly by the numbers.




       66
            Baker, “Beatrice,” pp. 1091-3.
                                                                                                          42


        In effect, what top executives were attempting to do was to evaluate divisional managers’

performance by using rate-of-return accounting to mimic market competition. Not only did this

kind of direction add less and less value over time, it could be downright harmful. In the first

place, the organizational routine of target-setting and frequent evaluation tended to focus

executives’ attention on specific short-term targets rather than the sort of longer-term strategic

planning needed to ensure the firm’s continued success. Second, as the underlying businesses

grew more complex—that is, as the divisions’ own product offerings grew more diversified in

response to emerging consumer wants—accounting systems that were well suited to monolines

became grossly inappropriate, giving useless and sometimes positively misleading information

about the structure of costs and ultimately about the sources of profits. In other words, the

metrics that the firm used internally to mimic market competition were increasingly poor

indicators of how the market was in fact evaluating the division’s performance. Finally,

management by the numbers created incentive structures that rewarded subsidiaries for achieving

long production runs that spread fixed costs over a large output, compounding the measurement

problem by encouraging managers to sacrifice quality in the interests of quantity production.67

        Perhaps unsurprisingly, by the 1980s the capital markets had begun to discount the value

of central-office control as a coordination mechanism and impose a penalty (in the form of

relatively lower share prices) on diversified firms.68 Also not surprisingly, shareholders began to

take action to break up these concerns. During the 1980s these break-ups largely took the form


        67
            See Robert H. Hayes and William J. Abernathy, “Managing Our Way to Economic Decline,” Harvard
Business Review, 58 (July-Aug. 1980), pp. 67-77; Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, “The Takeover Wave of
the 1980s,” Science, 249 (17 Aug. 1990); and H. Thomas Johnson, “Managing by Remote Control: Recent
Management Accounting Practice in Historical Perspective,” in Temin, ed., Inside the Business Enterprise, pp. 41-
66.
         68
            See Larry H. P. Lang and Rene M. Stulz, “Tobin’s Q, Corporate Diversification, and Firm Performance,”
Journal of Political Economy, 102 (Dec. 1994), 1248-80; and Philip G. Berger and Eli Ofek, “Diversification’s
Effect on Firm Value,” Journal of Financial Economics, 37 (Jan. 1995), pp. 39-65.
                                                                                                          43


of hostile takeovers and leveraged buyouts (LBOs) because entrenched managerial hierarchies

seemed unable or unwilling to reform themselves in response to changed economic conditions.

By the next decade, however, the use of hostile methods had declined as large firms strove to

internalize the lessons of the preceding decade. By tying executive compensation to the

performance of the corporation’s stock and giving shareholders a greater role in monitoring the

firm’s activities, they attempted to decrease the managerial autonomy that characterized the

Chandlerian firm in favor of a mixture of hierarchical with more market-based methods of

coordination. By relying on financial marked signals to determine the direction and even the

identity of management, business leaders today have brought markets into the heart of the

Chandlerian firm.69

        Regardless of the method of reform, the end result of the restructuring of the 1980s and

1990s was a striking retreat from conglomeration. According to one calculation, by 1989 firms

had divested as many as 60 percent of the acquisitions they had made outside their core

businesses between 1970 and 1982. The deals that led to these divestments generally took one of

two major forms. In the first, one large firm bought another which had substantial investments in

its core business, increasing its market share in that activity and spinning off unrelated

subdivisions at the same time. In the second, the so-called “bust-up,” the various parts of a

conglomerate were sold off separately, usually to firms specializing in the same line of business

as the division. In either case, the end result was to increase the extent to which large firms

focused their energies and resources on their core businesses. Although most of the nation’s

        69
            See Bengt Holmstrom and Steven N. Kaplan, “Corporate Governance and Merger Activity in the United
States: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15 (Spring 2001), pp. 121-44;
Michael C. Jensen, “Takeovers: Their Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2 (Winter
1988), pp. 21-48; Jensen, “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal Control Systems,”
Journal of Finance, 48 (July 1993), pp. 831-80; and George P. Baker and George David Smith, The New Financial
Capitalists: Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and the Creation of Corporate Value (New York: Cambridge University
                                                                                                             44


largest enterprises continued by historical standards to be highly diversified, these deals marked

a significant shift back in the direction of specialization.70

        There was also during this period a significant retreat from vertical integration. Although

reliable quantitative measures of the extent of the trend are not available, the anecdotal evidence

is suggestive. The steel industry is a good example. The large firms that dominated this industry

since early in the century had managed to forestall entry by integrating backward into ore

reserves and other raw-material resources, effectively preventing potential domestic entrants

from gaining access to the inputs they needed to compete effectively. Protected as well from

foreign sources by high transportation costs, U.S. firms had little incentive to stay abreast of

technological developments around the world. By the 1970s, however, the development of new

kinds of bulk-capacity ships had caused transportation costs to fall, allowing low-cost sources of

iron ore to be exploited in distant parts of the world. Imports surged, and in the face of

competition from new more technologically sophisticated rivals, U.S. firms collapsed. When the

domestic industry began to recover during the next decade, it was organized very differently.

The giant integrated firms of the previous era were in retreat and in their place had emerged a

relatively large number of smaller, more specialized firms, each of which tended to focus on a

particular stage of the production process and on one or two types of outputs.71

        In the automobile industry the limitations of the large, vertically integrated firm had

become increasingly apparent by the 1970s as well. Detroit had experienced something of a


Press, 1998).
         70
            Sanjai Bhagat, Andrei Schleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Hostile Takeovers in the 1980s: The Return to
Corporate Specialization,” in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1990 (1990), pp. 1-72. On
the extent to which firms continued to be diversified, see Cynthia Montgomery, “Corporate Diversification,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8 (Summer 1994), p. 164. Montgomery calculated that, in 1992, only about 12
percent of the 500 largest U.S. companies operated in a single (four-digit) SIC industry, whereas nearly 70 percent
operated in more than five and more than 40 percent in excess of 10.
         71
            See Christopher G. L. Hall, Steel Phoenix: The Fall and Rise of the U.S. Steel Industry (New York: St.
                                                                                                     45


golden age during the quarter century after World War II, but organizational routines at the Big

Three auto makers had become increasingly dysfunctional. Seduced by the vastness of the

seemingly secure domestic American market, top executives increasingly evaluated divisional

performance strictly by the numbers, and divisional managers responded predictably by focusing

on short-term returns. Relatively superficial product differentiation and extended production runs

became the main paths to profits, and, in the pressure to exploit economies of scale, quality

suffered. The main incentive to invest in improving quality was the cost of honoring warranties

to customers. This cost proved to be not much of an incentive, and manufacturers simply shifted

the problem to their dealers. Blaming the company’s large numbers of defective automobiles on

the low quality of its workforce, Ford’s president Lee Iacocca asserted that there was nothing

manufacturers could do to solve the problem: “We can’t change a man,” he claimed, “so what

we’re going to do at Ford is create a dealer organization that will fix up the cars and guarantee

that they’ll function right. We’ll give you a dealer who will repair what we produce.”72 Rather

than work to improve quality, the company was going to depend on its dealers to pick up the

slack!

         Toyota became a force in the American automobile market in the aftermath of the oil

crisis of the early 1970s. As the price of gasoline climbed, consumers found small, fuel-efficient

imported cars increasingly more attractive than the powerful, heavy American models. As the

market share of U.S. firms in their home market dropped, students of the industry observed that

Japanese producers, and Toyota in particular, were not only selling what Americans wanted at

the time but were actually better than the U.S. companies at manufacturing. Japanese firms were



Martin’s Press, 1997).
         72
            David Halberstam, The Reckoning (New York: Avon Books, 1986), p. 467. See also Hounshell, “Why
Corporations Don’t Learn Continuously”.
                                                                                                            46


in a better position to compete in the changed U.S. economic environment because they were

able to provide consumers with higher quality cars and also to respond flexibly to the more

individuated structure of demand. By 1989 they accounted for 27 percent (by number) of the

cars sold in the U.S. market but fully 41 percent of the different models of cars available. The

impact of the wider choice they introduced to the market is indicated by the sharp drop in the

share captured by the six largest-selling automobiles from 73 percent in 1955 to 24 percent by

1989. Over the same period the number of different cars on the market increased from 30 to

142.73

         Originally a textile firm with a history of innovation, Toyota had moved into automobile

manufacturing during the difficult interwar years. The Japanese automobile market was not

large to begin with, and the presence of local assembly plants of the giant American firms Ford

and General Motors had obliged the company, government assistance notwithstanding, to

address differentiated demand in a flexible way from the very start.74 It also led the firm to

invest in its suppliers and in its relations with them.75 These investments were partly financial,

but they had an important operational side that included support for a significant devolution of

responsibilities for component design to suppliers, as well as for the training of suppliers’

         73
             The data are from James P.Womack, Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos, The Machine That Changed the
World (New York: Rawson Associates, 1990), p. 125. The authors defined a product as a vehicle selling more than
1000 units in the U.S. market annually that shared no external panels with, and had a different wheelbase from, any
other product that the company sold. Cars were assigned to countries according to the location of the company’s
headquarters.
          74
             William Mass and Andrew Robertson, “From Textiles to Automobiles: Mechanical and Organizational
Innovation in the Toyoda Enterprises, 1895-1933,” Business and Economic History, 25 (Winter 1996), pp. 1-37;
Takahiro Fujimoto The Evolution of a Manufacturing System at Toyota (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000);
Stephen Spear and H. Kent Bowen, “Decoding the DNA of the Toyota Production System,” Harvard Business
Review, (Sept.-Oct. 1999), pp. 96-106; Michael Cusumano, The Japanese Automobile Industry: Technology and
Management at Nissan and Toyota (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1984). For a more detailed account of the
contrast to the American approach, see Charles H. Fine and Daniel M. G. Raff, “Internet-Driven Innovation and
Economic Performance in the American Automobile Industry,” in Robert Litan and Alice Rivlin, eds., The E-
Business Transformation: Sectoral Developments and Policy Implications (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 2001), pp.
62-86.
          75
             We abstract here from the details of a complex tiered system. See, for example, Toshihiro Nishiguchi,
                                                                                                            47


workforces, help with the organization of production, and the development of just-in-time

routines for coordination and delivery of the components—all in the context of a committed and

ongoing relationship in which problems were resolved via voice rather than exit.76 Toyota

functioned, and conceived of itself, as the hub of a network of distinct companies. It could not,

for many years, have afforded anything else; but in a dynamic world, it profited greatly from the

capabilities for change and improvement that this network arrangement gave them.

        As the market share of Toyota and other Japanese firms increased relative to domestic

producers in the decade following the oil shock, American firms tried to figure out the source of

the newcomers’ advantage. Executives went on factory tours, knowledgeable consultants

developed busy practices and published books for executives to study, and GM undertook a joint

venture with Toyota.77 But the organizational structures of the big three American auto makers

could not so easily be transformed. U.S. firms in general were much more vertically integrated

than their Japanese counterparts. Moreover, such long-term relations as they had with outside

suppliers tended to be more hierarchical, with U.S. firms using control of designs, short-term

contracts, multiple sourcing, and other similar tactics to force their suppliers into a passive role.78

Chrysler went furthest in the Japanese direction, mainly because its financial crisis during the

late 1980s forced it to develop more egalitarian relationships with its suppliers. At the other

extreme, General Motors, found change much more difficult. Despite the opportunity for


Strategic Industrial Sourcing: The Japanese Advantage (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994) for details.
         76
            Susan Helper, “Strategy and Irreversibility in Supplier Relations: The Case of the U.S. Automobile
Industry,” Business History Review, 65 (Winter 1991), pp. 781-824.
         77
            See James P, Womack, Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos, The Machine that Changed the World (New
York: Rawson, 1990); and Joseph L. Badaracco, “General Motors’ Asian Alliances” (Harvard Business School Case
No. 9-388-094). A close reading of this case suggests that Toyota got more out of the venture than General Motors
did.
         78
            Helper, “Strategy and Irreversibility in Supplier Relations”; Michael Schwartz, “Markets, Networks, and
the Rise of Chrysler in Old Detroit, 1920-1940,” Enterprise and Society, 1 (March 2000), pp. 63-99; Robert
Crandall, “Vertical Integration in the United States Automobile Industry,” unpublished Ph.D. diss., Northwestern
University, 1968.
                                                                                                           48


learning provided by a joint venture with Toyota in California, and despite its success in setting

up a wholly-owned subsidiary to manufacture a new product (the Saturn car) using Japanese

methods, the company was unable to diffuse what it learned to other facilities. Indeed, GM’s

main response to its falling market share seems to have been to implement even more aggressive

arms-length and price-oriented relations with suppliers.79

        Although auto makers found it difficult to reorganize their supply systems along lines

similar to Toyota, firms in other manufacturing industries like computers have extensively

exploited the possibilities for flexible production inherent in just-in-time inventories and network

relations with suppliers. The Dell Computer Company is an excellent example. Dell uses these

techniques to enable it cheaply to custom-build computers for individual purchasers. Dell takes

orders by phone, fax, mail, or internet, and then immediately requests components from its

suppliers—components that typically are delivered and assembled into computers that same day.

A reporter for Fortune followed an order called in one morning at 10:49AM and reported that a

driver for Airborne Express put the finished product on a truck at 9:25 that same night. Five of

the intervening hours were spent testing the computer for defects.80

        Dell buys parts from a relatively small number of suppliers who are willing to make the

investments necessary to keep technologically up to date and also to meet the company’s

rigorous just-in-time delivery needs. Through a process it calls “virtual integration,” Dell signals

its suppliers to provide specified types and numbers of components at various times throughout


        79
             Badaracco, “General Motors’ Asian Alliances.” For a time series on return on assets, profit per unit
production, and market share suggesting the progress the big three auto makers made over the decade 1988 to 1998,
see Jeffrey H. Dyer, Collaborative Advantage: Winning through Extended Enterprise Supplier Networks (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 147.
          80
             See Stephanie Losee, “Mr. Cozzette Buys a Computer,” Fortune, 129 (18 April 1994), p. 113. For some
limits to the extent of customization, see Joe Abernathy, “Customize . . . or Compromise?” PC World, 13 (July
1995), p. 72. The Dell firm was created—in a University of Texas dormitory room—with this sort of production
model in mind. It had no burden of the past to throw off.
                                                                                                              49


the day to specific factory locations. Suppliers that do not make deliveries on time risk penalties

much more drastic than those faced earlier in the century by Sears’s internal departments, which

only had to shoulder extra shipping costs in their budgets. Dell’s suppliers risk losing these

lucrative contracts entirely. But Dell helps them out by giving them direct, “real-time” access to

its order books so they can plan their production and delivery schedules effectively.81

         In other parts of the computer industry, networks of long-term connections among firms

have become so dense and so geographically concentrated that they have taken on all of the

characteristics of a Marshallian industrial district. Silicon Valley, of course, is the pre-eminent

example. Firms in the Valley are generally small and highly specialized. Although they

compete with each other vigorously, they also share technological information and cooperate in

joint ventures in order to meet specialized consumer needs—just as firms did in the textile

industry in late-ninteenth-century Philadelphia. According to Annalee Saxenian, in

technologically dynamic industries like computers, large managerial enterprises are at a

competitive disadvantage. She contrasted the experience during the 1980s of the more

hierarchical firms located along Boston’s “Route 128” with those in the Silicon Valley and found

that the latter’s fluidity better enabled the local industry to weather swings in demand and also

stay abreast of technological developments.82

         Although most firms in the Silicon Valley region are small, a few large enterprises have

emerged—the most notable being Intel and Hewlett-Packard (HP). Interestingly, these firms

attempted in their internal structures to mimic the openness of the Valley in general. For


         81
            “You’ll Never Walk Alone,” Economist, 351 (26 June1999); Joan Magretta, “The Power of Virtual
Integration,” Harvard Business Review (Mar.-Apr. 1998).
         82
            Annalee Saxenian, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994). For the history of the Silicon Valley’s industrial-district structure,
see the essays in Chong-Moon Lee, William F. Miller, Marguerite Gong Hancock, and Henry S. Rowen, eds., The
Silicon Valley Edge: A Habitat for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000).
                                                                                                       50


example, Hewlett-Packard tried to foster a spirit of community rather than hierarchy among its

employees. There were no fancy offices or perks for top executives. All employees ate in the

same cafeteria and were given the same stock options, profit-sharing arrangements, and benefits.

In order to maintain flexibility HP adopted a decentralized organizational structure, in which

each major product line was managed as a separate, semi-autonomous division. Unlike

traditional M-form executives, divisional managers at HP had “ownership” rights to their

businesses. They could formulate their own competitive and product-development strategies

without waiting for orders from above, and they could reinvest the capital generated by their

divisions as they saw fit. Even so, HP was not able completely to escape the disadvantages of

hierarchy. By the last decade of the twentieth century, declining profits and complaints by

industry analysts about growing bureaucratization had forced the firm to cut its size and refocus

its energies. As part of this effort, it spun off its measurement instruments division (the original

business of the firm) into a separate company called Agilent.83

        Another large firm in the computer industry is Microsoft. While not integrated backward

into manufacturing or forward into sales, Microsoft dominates the market for applications like

word-processing, spread-sheets, and internet browsers, as well as its core business of producing

operating systems. A federal appeals court found Microsoft guilty of illegally using its power in

the latter market to monopolize the former, implying that it was not the logic of costs that

accounted for Microsoft’s imposing share of both sectors. Nonetheless, the possibility remains

that the network character of the software business compels monopoly and even some degree of

vertical integration. If so, then the Microsoft case underscores the diversity of ways in which


        83
           Saxenian, Regional Advantage, pp. 50-1; Alan Deutschman, “How H-P Continues to Grow and Grow,”
Fortune, 129 (2 May 1994), p. 90; “Reinventing Company of Inventors,” Financial Times (16 Nov. 1999), p. 35;
“HP Problems ‘Will Take Time to Fix,” Financial Times (18 Nov. 1999), p. 19.
                                                                                               51


firms successfully responded to the changing conditions of the late-twentieth-century economy.

We do not at all mean to suggest that large firms do not continue to play an important role in the

nation’s economic life, though it should be noted that Microsoft is significantly less vertically

integrated than the firms that Chandler celebrated.

       Large, vertically integrated, diversified manufacturing firms were not the only

hierarchical enterprises to suffer from the changes of the late twentieth century. National

retailers like mail-order firms and department-store chains were affected as well. Since the late

nineteenth century, such enterprises had employed professional buyers to track changing

fashions and to stock inventories accordingly, but the long lead time that manufacturers required

to produce the desired goods meant that orders had to be placed substantially in advance of the

period in which they would be consumed, increasing the possibility that buyers would misjudge

the direction of consumer tastes. Stores traditionally dealt with errors of judgment by selling

unsold merchandise at clearance prices at the end of each season. Beginning around the mid-

1960s, however, the problem suddenly got worse as rising per capita income made Americans

less tolerant of standardized commodities and more interested in purchasing goods that expressed

their individual tastes. To give one example, the market share of white bed sheets dropped from

about 75 percent in 1960 to about 20 percent by the mid-1970s, whereas the share of fancy

patterned sheets showed precisely the opposite trend. Men similarly shifted away from white

shirts, women from tailored clothing, and there was a general move toward more casual clothing

in a greater variety of styles, fabrics, and colors. As tastes became more diverse and merchants

strove to satisfy them, the chance that buyers would make errors in stocking merchandise

increased. Department stores coped with this problem in two ways: by increasing the general

markup they charged on merchandize and by putting items that did not sell on sale more
                                                                                                               52


frequently. But they made no fundamental changes to their organization or to their abilities to

capture and process information and to act upon it.84

         This situation offered new national chains of specialty boutiques an opportunity to take

substantial chunks of business away from more traditional retailers. In apparel, the two leading

examples were The Limited and The Gap. Riding the wave of bar codes, scanners, and the new

information technology more broadly, these innovative retailers learned how to manage their

inventories flexibly so as to reduce errors in stocking merchandise. Their checkout scanners,

which read barcodes that contained detailed information on each item sold, generated immense

amounts of data (style, color, and size) on precisely what was selling when in every store

location. Managers analyzed the patterns—local, regional, and national—in the data, and

continually adjusted orders (and sometimes prices), rerouted shipments, and revised the

assortments offered by particular stores.85 Similar techniques led to the success of other

“category killers” like Toys R Us, Circuit City, and Borders—thus called because of the

consequences they had for the range of goods department stores profitably could stock and sell.

These businesses used sophisticated analysis of local sales histories and related information to

tailor and support unprecedentedly broad assortments of goods. By relying upon just-in-time,

supply-chain relationships similar to those of Toyota and Dell, moreover, they were able to




         84
            In addition to demand-side shifts favoring variety, there were also supply-side changes (for example, the
spread of the shuttleless loom) that made it possible to produce patterned fabrics more cheaply. B. Peter Pashigian,
“Demand Uncertainty and Sales: A Study of Fashion and Markdown Pricing,” American Economic Review, 78
(Dec. 1988), pp. 936-953; and Pashigian and Brian Bowen, “Why Are Products Sold on Sale?: Explanations of
Pricing Regularities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (Nov. 1991), pp. 1015-1038.
         85
            See Raff and Temin, “Sears, Roebuck in the Twentieth Century,” pp. 241-2, summarizing unpublished
research by Raff and Walter Salmon, for an account of how the coordination systems differ and for estimates of the
dramatically superior economic performance the new model could induce.
                                                                                                             53


manage all this variety far more profitably than was possible even for a narrower set of offerings

under the old department-store system of ordering.86

        The result of all these innovations was to provide consumers with a vastly greater

selection of choices within any particular product category. The advance of communications

technology pushed this development even further by ushering in the age of internet marketing,

where—in a fashion reminiscent of the early years of Sears and other mail-order firms, but

without the ensuing communication disadvantages—retailers consisted of little more than

customer interfaces. In the book trade, Amazon.com pointed the way. When Jeffrey Bezos

started the company in 1995, he located it in Seattle near a distribution center operated by

Ingram, at the time the industry’s largest and most efficient wholesaler. Amazon maintained very

few books in its own inventory—perhaps as little as four hundred at the beginning—but it made

enormous investments in advertising and in developing for its website a search engine that could

speedily locate items in a massive database of books in print that it purchased from trade sources.

Amazon’s website made it possible for anyone with access to the internet to order any book from

this database, most at substantial discounts from prices charged in brick-and-mortar stores, and

sales grew rapidly. (Profits were much slower in appearing though the company claimed its

book-selling division was showing an operating profit by the fourth quarter of 1999.).87

        The internet is not itself a coordination mechanism but rather a coordination

infrastructure—the most recent development in a long history of infrastructural improvements

that have brought down the costs of communication. Yet the speed and ease with which the


        86
            Supply-chain management has also been a key factor in the success of a new generation of mass retailers.
Wal-Mart, for example, provides direct computer feeds from its individual checkout scanners to its leading
suppliers, leaving it to them to manage efficiently the shelf space they are allocated.
         87
            Daniel M. G. Raff, “Revolution in the Book Trade” typescript case study, Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania. Note well that operating profit is not what stock analysts or investors generally regard as profit—it
excludes various charges on the enterprise legitimately regarded as costs of doing business.
                                                                                                        54


internet makes search and information transfer possible suggests that its effect on the incidence

of specific coordination mechanisms may be profound. As vendors accumulate information on

the interests and preferences of individual consumers, it may be possible for them to present both

individualized offerings (economizing on the customers’ search time) and individualized pricing

(economizing on the amount of the resultant surplus with which the consumer walks away) in

much the same way as craftsmen in the early nineteenth understood local buyers’ wants and

could price accordingly.88 Amazon has pushed ahead on both frontiers. For example, it makes

recommendations to customers on the basis of their past purchases, as well as on the selections

of other customers who, its data bases suggest, have similar tastes. Moreover, its consumer

electronics department has experimented (disastrously) with so-called “dynamic pricing”—that

is, with charging higher prices to buyers who the company estimates (on the basic of the past

behavior) are willing to trade off price for convenience. What Amazon did not properly

appreciate, however, was that the same coordination infrastructure that made it possible to learn

so much about individual consumers’ preferences also enabled individual consumers to learn

about Amazon’s pricing practices. Just as customers in an early period might have dealt with

worries about overcharging by telling each other about the prices they were charged, Amazon’s

customers exchanged information with each other. The mechanisms were somewhat different—

internet chat rooms versus conversations at local gathering places—but the end result was very

similar. Amazon’s violation of consumers’ trust was publicly exposed, and the company had to

apologize and make amends.89




        88
           Eric J. Johnson, Wendy Moe, Peter S. Fader, Steven Bellman, and Jerry Lohse “On the Depth and
Dynamics of Online Search Behavior,” Wharton School Marketing Department Working Paper 00-019.
        89
           Michael J. Martinez, “Amazon Error May Shut the Door on ‘Dynamic Pricing,’” Associated Press State
and Local Wire, 28 September 2000, Lexis-Nexis Academic Universe (http://web.lexis-nexis.com/universe/)
                                                                                             55




Retrospect and Prospect

       The overview of American business history that we have offered in this paper is still

sketchy and incomplete. We have been largely silent about a number of issues that clearly

matter—most obviously, the role that government has played in the economy during the

twentieth century—and we have not provided any quantitative measures of the relative

importance of different kinds of coordination mechanisms over time. Moreover, because our

space is limited and the main purpose of our narrative has been to describe the great variety of

techniques that were successfully in use at each point in American history, we have not been able

to convey the trial and error processes by which real economic actors, with sunk investments in

existing ways of doing things and only imperfect information about alternative courses of action,

confronted (sometimes unsuccessfully) the ongoing coordination problems they faced.

       Nonetheless, by expanding on the familiar opposition between markets and hierarchies

we have been able to provide a more complex history of American business than is available in

the literature. This complexity is important because the considerable heterogeneity that we have

observed, both cross-sectionally and over time, provides raw material for generalizing about the

relative advantages and disadvantages of different forms of business organization. More

importantly, at the same time as it enables us to draw lessons from our survey of American

business history, it allows us to maintain both a backward- and a forwarding-looking perspective

on the nature of organizational change.

       A backward-looking perspective is valuable because it allows us to study the secular

patterns that underpinned changes over time in the predominant ways in which business activity

has been coordinated. Our survey, for example, has revealed an intriguing juxtaposition of
                                                                                               56


trends. On the one hand, there has been, since the early nineteenth century, a more or less steady

decline in transportation and communication costs and also a more or less steady rise in per

capita income. Yet despite these cumulative unidirectional, almost linear, trends, the degree of

hierarchical coordination in what have conventionally been regarded as the center parts of the

economy has followed a pronounced hump-shape pattern over time. That is, as transportation

and communication costs fell with the spread of the railroad and telegraph in the second half of

the nineteenth century (the first market revolution) firms responded by substituting hierarchical

for other forms of economic coordination, integrating forward into distribution and backward

into supply and developing managerial organizations to coordinate these activities (organizations

which, in the next period, were used to take on additional activities). But then as transportation

and especially communication costs continued to fall in the computer era (the second market

revolution) firms responded by shifting away from both conglomeration and vertical integration,

increasingly substituting for their managerial hierarchies coordination by long-term relationships.

       The perspective of hindsight enables us to see that this puzzling combination of trends

can be attributed in part to the effects of communication and transportation costs on the location

and organization of economic activity. When these costs are high, economic activity tends to be

local and consequently small in scale. At the other extreme, when communication is virtually

free, as on the internet, and transportation is very cheap, then economic activity can be located

anywhere and even tailored to individual needs. In the middle, however, when communication

and transportation costs are neither prohibitive nor trivial, there are advantages to be obtained

from concentrating productive activity in specific locations and in large firms.90




       90
            See Paul Krugman, Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MIT Press, 1991).
                                                                                                         57


        Trends in per capita income had a similar effect on the organization of economic activity.

During the nineteenth century, most households had relatively small surpluses to spend on

products not required for basic subsistence, and their ability to expand the range of goods they

consumed was largely a function of cost. In a situation where the price of most manufactured

items put them beyond consumers’ reach, there were big rewards to be earned by lowering the

cost of production. By the late twentieth century, however, rising per capita income had shifted

the reward structure toward firms that were able to respond more flexibly to consumer wants. As

we have seen, large vertically integrated mass-production firms were able to produce goods at

low cost but the tradeoff was an increase in standardization. This was an exchange that

consumers were willing to make in the late nineteenth century, but they were less willing to

accept this tradeoff a hundred years later. When new firms emerged in the late twentieth century

that substituted long-term relationships for vertical integration and were thus better able to

accommodate preferences for greater quality and choice, consumers voted with their feet.

        This explanation for the origins of the “new economy” is itself a valuable contribution to

the literature. Not only does it significantly modify the Chandlerian framework, it forces us to

reassess other unidirectional theories of change that have influenced historical writing. For

example, members of the so-called market-revolution school have argued that the economy

underwent a transition to capitalism during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, as

a result of which the personal connections that hitherto had governed exchange (and kept

rapaciousness under control) were disrupted by the growth of broad, impersonal markets in

which there was little or nothing to restrain human greed.91 Our analysis suggests, by contrast,

        91
           See Michael Merrill, “Cash is Good to Eat: Self-Sufficiency and Exchange in the Rural Economy of the
United States,” Radical History Review, 4 (1977), pp. 42-71; Christopher Clark, The Roots of Rural Capitalism:
Western Massachusetts, 1780-1860 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990); James Henretta, The Origins of
American Capitalism: Collected Essays (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1991); and Charles Sellers, The
                                                                                                         58


that long-term connections (and the informal restraints on self-interested behavior with which

they are associated) have continued to play an important role in exchange—indeed that they can

be considered a third major type of coordination mechanism whose significance has waxed as

well as waned over time. In a similar vein, our analysis allows us to contextualize the assertion

that, by the early twentieth century, vertically-integrated corporations were able to exert a

Gramscian-style hegemony over Americans’ consumption choices.92 By emphasizing the links

between different kinds of coordination mechanisms and particular marketing arrangements, we

have provided an alternative to the increasingly sterile debate over this claim—that is, we have

provided historians with a means of understanding the shifts that have occurred over time (and

are still occurring) in the relative power of producers and consumers.

        Although our analysis also helps us understand the forces at work in the economy (and

therefore presumably is of some use in predicting the direction of economic change), we believe

that it would be a serious mistake to consider the organizations that appear to be characteristic of

the present era as a new endpoint toward which history has been evolving.93 Although the long-

term relationships that are at the heart of the new economy certainly offer advantages of

flexibility, in order for them to hold up over time they must be profitable for all parties involved.

Such mutual profitability, however, can be difficult to sustain in a dynamic environment where

fluctuations or downward trends in demand can result in excess capacity. In a market situation,

manufacturers can simply reduce orders from suppliers to bring their production in line with

demand. In case of long-run relationships, however, manufacturers must try to reduce the


Market Revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815-1846 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).
         92
            See Stuart Ewen, Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer Culture
(New York: McCraw-Hill, 1976); Richard Wightman Fox and T. J. Jackson Lears, eds., The Culture of
Consumption: Critical Essays in American History, 1880-1980 (New York: Pantheon, 1983); William Leach, Land
of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture (New York: Vintage, 1993).
         93
            For an example of this kind of analysis, see Langlois, “The Vanishing Hand.”
                                                                                                               59


burden on their contractees in order to maintain their supply network.94 If they cannot steer new

work to their suppliers or help them find other customers, they must shoulder some or all of the

costs of the downturn themselves by accumulating inventory. In more severe downturns,

however, they may be forced to engage in triage, severing their relationship with some of their

suppliers in order to maintain a smaller base of viable partner firms. In the worst depressions,

manufacturers may not be able to do even that.

         Competition in final goods markets can also affect these kinds of network relationships

by putting pressure on manufacturers to obtain their components more cheaply. In a market

environment, manufacturers would simply demand lower prices. In a long-term relationship,

they must help their suppliers make cost-reducing process improvements to their production

processes.95 Stresses of a Schumpeterian character also sometimes arise where manufacturers

must engage in extensive product innovation in order to retain their customer base. Here again,

in order to maintain their network advantages, they must work with their suppliers as well as

engage in product development themselves. Although the costs of retooling production

throughout an entire supply chain can be enormous, there are also potential advantages to be

derived from being able to access the human capital and financial resources of multiple firms.96

         Whether or not networks of long-term relationships, or for that matter any other type of

coordination mechanism, can survive such environmental pressures is likely to vary from

industry to industry and even from firm to firm, as well as with the nature and magnitude of the

         94
            For a study of such a response in the case of the automobile industry, see Toshihiro Nishiguchi, Strategic
Industrial Sourcing: The Japanese Advantage (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
         95
            On Honda practice, see John Paul MacDuffie and Susan Helper, “Creating Lean Suppliers: Diffusing
Lean Production through the Supply Chain ,“ in Jeffrey K. Liker, W. Mark Fruin, and Paul S. Adler, Remand in
America: Transplanting and Transforming Japanese Management Systems (New York: Oxford University Press,
1999), pp. 154-2000.
         96
            For the automobile case, see Kim B. Clark and Takahiro Fujimoto, Product Development Performance:
Strategy, Organization, and Management in the World Automobile Industry (Boston: Harvard Business School
                                                                                                        60


stress. Hence we come to the vital importance of maintaining a forward-looking, as well as a

backward-looking, perspective on the process of economic change. And critical to this task is

acknowledging, first of all, the diversity of coordination mechanisms available to firms at any

given point of time and, second, the enormous uncertainty that business people face in deciding

which mechanisms to choose. The case of AT&T provides an instructive example. Until the

early 1980s, AT&T owned and operated a telephone system that was integrated both horizontally

and vertically. Its subsidary Bell Operating Companies (BOCs) offered local service and

interconnection to AT&T’s long distance network, and Western Electric provided the equipment

from which the network was built (with the aid of research conducted at Bell Labs). Under

pressure from the federal government to reduce its monopoly position, AT&T was forced to

divest itself either of its horizontal or vertical operations. Following a chain of reasoning similar

to Chandler’s, AT&T’s management chose to keep its vertical structure intact. The firm retained

Western Electric and Bell Labs and gave up the BOCs, launching them as seven independent

regional BOCs or RBOCs.97

        This industry structure endured only about a decade. The new AT&T found itself unable

to compete effectively in the rapidly changing telecommunications industry, and like other large

firms at about the same time, shifted toward dis-integration, spinning off its vertical operations

into a variety of separate firms. Western Electric and Bell Labs were reorganized as Lucent

Technologies, which itself fell on hard times by the end of the 1990s. In the meantime, AT&T

expanded (mainly by acquisition) into the wireless and broadband sectors of the

telecommunications market. But, when the synergies it expected between its new and old



Press, 1991). See also Dyer, Collaborative Advantage.
         97
            See Peter Temin with Louis Galambos, The Fall of the Bell System (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1987).
                                                                                                    61


activities failed to materialize or provide any competitive advantage, AT&T again split itself up

into separate firms.

       The confusion displayed by AT&T’s executives was by no means unique. Other

telecommunications giants have gone through similar waves of acquisition and divestiture, as

have firms in other sectors of the economy. The dispute that occurred in the computer industry

during early 2002 between the management of Hewlett Packard (HP) and some of the firm’s

largest shareholders about whether to merge with Compaq is suggestive of the high degree of

uncertainty that actors on the ground have about the best way to respond to economic change.

(The final vote, after months of debate and reflection, was extremely close.) Further evidence

comes from the enormous numbers of international acquisitions made during the late 1990s that,

a few years later, were already being divested. According to one report, fully one third of the

mergers negotiated between 1996 and 1998 had been (or were in the process of being) undone by

2002. As for the chief executives responsible for the deals, about the same proportion had

already been replaced.98

        Mistakes continue to be made because the diversity of ways in which businesses are

succeeding in new competitive environment makes it extremely difficult to predict the direction

of change. Thus, at the same time as AT&T, Worldcom, and other telecommunications giants

were forced to shrink, the RBOCs were expanding by merging with one another, reducing their

number from seven to four. They also extended their business from local to interstate calling and

successfully entered wireless and other new telecommunications markets. Although the major

trend in the steel industry during the last quarter of the twentieth century was toward vertical

specialization, during the 1990s increased integration by successful newcomers like Nucor and

       98
            The survey was conducted by KPMG Consulting. See Dan Roberts, “Survey Casts More Doubt on
                                                                                                           62


the resurgence of some traditional integrated producers such as Wheeling-Pittsburgh suggested

that a counter trend was in the works. The symbiotic relationship in pharmaceuticals between

large firms and small start-ups revealed an ongoing role for the vertically integrated enterprise in

that industry as well, while the continued success of firms like General Electric (GE) served

notice that the conglomerate model was by no means dead. At the same time, however, the

Silicon Valley phenomenon spurred a resurgence of interest in industrial districts, and policy

makers devoted an enormous amount of effort to trying to replicate this vibrant community of

computer hardware and software producers in other locations around the world. Alliances

between big businesses were also on the rise, accounting by 1998 for slightly in excess of 25

percent of the total revenue of the 1000 largest U.S. public companies (up from only 2 percent in

1980). Indeed these kinds of deals were roughly equivalent in volume to mergers and

acquisitions by the late 1990s.99

        We conclude by noting that nothing underscores better the difficulty of predicting the

direction of change in business organizations than the annual survey of CEOs from around the

world conducted by the Financial Times. The ten most respected business leaders of 2001

included people from highly focused companies such as Intel (Andy Grove) and Microsoft (Bill

Gates), as well as gurus of vertical disintegration such as Hiroshi Okuda of Toyota and computer

assembler Michael Dell. But it also included heads of more traditional Chandlerian firms such as

Lou Gerstner of IBM or John Browne of BP Amoco. More intriguing still, nearly a third of the

spots on the top ten list were occupied by CEOs of conglomerates: Jack Welch of GE, Warren

Buffett of Berkshire Hathaway, and Richard Branson of Virgin.100 That business people from


Value of Mergers,” Financial Times (22 Feb. 2002), p. 1.
         99
            J. Harbison and P. Pekar, Smart Alliances: A Practical Guide to Repeatable Success (San Francisco:
Josey-Bass, 1998); and Matthew Schiffrin, “Partner or Perish,” Forbes (21 May 2001), p. 26-28.
         100
             Michael Skapinker, “Business Leaders: Admiration for Those Doing It Their Own Way,” Financial
                                                                                            63


around the world set up such a diverse group as role models is an important indication of the

ongoing uncertainty they face about the direction of change and how to solve the coordination

problems that confront them. Their uncertainty in turn should be a powerful signal to us that the

shift toward long-term relationships that characterized the “new economy” of the late twentieth

century should not be taken as a new ending point for American business history.




Times (17 Dec. 2001), p. II.
