NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THERE AN OPTIMAL INDUSTRY FINANCIAL STRUCTURE?

Peter MacKay
Gordon M. Phillips

Working Paper 9032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9032

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

MacKay is from the Edwin L. Cox School of Business, Southern Methodist University and Phillips is from
the Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland and is a visiting professor at MIT Sloan
School of Management. We wish to thank Murray Frank, Gerald Garvey, Mike Long, Robert McDonald,
Vojislav Maksimovic, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Alexander Reisz, Toni Whited, and seminar participants at
the 2002 American Finance Association, the Atlanta Finance Consortium, the 2001 Rutgers Conference on
Capital Structure, Southern Methodist University, the University of Kentucky, and the University of British
Columbia for helpful comments. MacKay can be reached by email at pmackay@mail.cox.smu.edu,
homepage: http://faculty.cox.smu.edu/pmackay.html. Phillips can be reached by email at
Gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu, homepage: www.rhsmith.umd.edu/Finance/gphillips/. The authors alone are
responsible for the work and any errors or omissions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Peter MacKay and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Is There an Optimal Industry Financial Structure?
Peter MacKay and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 9032
July 2002
JEL No. G3

ABSTRACT
We examine how intra-industry variation in financial structure relates to industry factors and
whether real and financial decisions are jointly determined within competitive industries. We find that
industry and group factors beyond standard industry fixed effects are also important to firm financial
structure. Firm financial leverage, capital intensity, and cash-flow risk are interdependent decisions that
depend on the firm’s proximity to the median industry capital-labor ratio, the actions of firms within its
industry quintile, and its status as entrant, incumbent, or exiting firm. Our results support competitive
industry equilibrium models of financial structure in which debt, technology, and risk are simultaneous
decisions.

Peter MacKay
Edwin L. Cox School of Business
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, TX 75275-0333
pmackay@mail.cox.smu.edu

Gordon M. Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Management
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu

Despite extensive financial structure research since Myers (1984) and Harris and Raviv
(1991), important puzzles remain.1 The importance of industry to firm financial structure and the
simultaneity of financial and real-side decisions are two such related puzzles. Although it is widely
held that industry factors are important to firm financial structure, empirical evidence shows that
there is wide variation in financial structure even after controlling for industries.2 Researchers
routinely remove industry fixed effects by including dummy variables or sweeping out industry
means and use the remaining variation to test how firm characteristics affect financial policy. Yet,
this approach does not tell us how industry affects firm financial structure, nor why financial structure
and real-side characteristics vary so widely across firms within a given industry. Recent theoretical
models (Dammon and Senbet, 1988, Leland, 1998) stress the simultaneity of real and financial
decisions – yet little is known about the empirical relevance of the simultaneity of these decisions.
We thus examine these two unresolved but related questions: How important are industry factors to
firm financial structure? Can industry equilibrium forces explain how firms distribute within
industries – both along real-side and financial dimensions?
We address these questions by directly examining how intra-industry variation in financial
structure relates to industry factors and whether real and financial decisions are jointly determined
within competitive industries.3 We provide broad evidence of how industry affects firm financial
structure, and test predictions of competitive-industry equilibrium models (Maksimovic and Zechner,
1991, Williams, 1995, and Fries, Miller, and Perraudin, 1997). Similar to Miller’s (1977) irrelevance
result, these studies illustrate how conclusions reached in a partial-equilibrium framework are
fundamentally altered, even reversed, as the equilibrium setting is aggregated to the level of an
industry or the economy. In so doing, we go beyond tests of static trade-off and pecking-order
1

2

3

Recent empirical papers on financial structure examine static trade-off and pecking-order theories (Fama and
French, 2002, Frank and Goyal, 2002), taxes (Graham, 2000), risk shifting (Parrino and Weisbach, 1999), and
technology (MacKay, 2002). Bertrand and Schoar (2001) find that manager fixed effects are important to financial
structure. Their results are related to ours in that firms deviate from industry “norms” on multiple dimensions.
An early study that documents wide intra-industry variation in financial structure is Remmers, Stonehill, Wright,
and Beekhussen (1974). Chaplinsky (1983) shows that industry dummies explain a small share of the variation in
financial structure. Bradley, Jarrell, and Kim (1984) find that industry is important, but once regulated industries
are excluded, industry dummy variables add only 10.1 percent additional explanatory power to the 23.6 percent
variation in financial structure explained by firm volatility, non-debt tax shields, and advertising and R&D.
Chevalier (1995), Phillips (1995) and Kovenock and Phillips (1997) show that firms take into account other firms’
financial and real decisions in imperfectly competitive industries. Opler and Titman (1994) show that highly
leveraged firms lose market share in concentrated industries after negative industry shocks.

theories and examine whether the real and financial decisions of individual firms are related to
decisions of industry peers.
We investigate the impact of simultaneity, both as a practical empirical matter and as a test of
recent theory, by estimating single- and simultaneous-equation regressions for financial leverage,
capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility. We test predictions of industry equilibrium models by
including measures of a firm’s position within its industry, such as the similarity of its capital-labor
ratio to the industry median capital-labor ratio, the actions of firms inside and outside the firm’s
industry-year quintile, and its status as an entrant, incumbent, or exiting firm.
We precede these specific tests of industry equilibrium model predictions with a broader
investigation of inter- and intra-industry variation in financial structure. We document extensive
cross-sectional variation in financial leverage within 142 competitively-structured U.S. industries
between 1981 and 2000. A simple analysis of variance shows that most of the variation in financial
structure arises within industries rather than between industries. Two-, three-, and four-digit SIC
industry fixed effects combined account for only 11% of variation in financial structure (7% by twodigit SIC). In contrast, firm fixed effects explain 64% of variation in financial structure, and the
remaining 25% is within-firm variation.
Given the relative unimportance of industry fixed effects in explaining financial structure, we
examine whether other industry factors can account for some of the wide variation observed within
industries. Following industry equilibrium models, we do so by testing the interactions between debt,
technology, and risk, and whether a firm’s industry position affects how it chooses these variables.
Consistent with Maksimovic and Zechner (1991), we find that firms that deviate from the
industry median technology use more financial leverage than firms operating technologies near the
industry median, and that changes in financial leverage are positively related to changes in risk. We
also find that changes to a firm’s financial leverage are positively related to changes in financial
leverage made by other firms within its financial-leverage industry quintile, but not to changes by
firms outside its industry quintile. Similar patterns obtain for capital intensity and risk. These results

2

suggest that even in competitively-structured industries: 1) firms form cohorts within their industry,
and, 2) strategic complementarities arise along real and financial dimensions within these cohorts.
To investigate the dynamic aspects of the industry equilibria developed by Williams (1995)
and Fries et al. (1997), we present transition frequencies for firms entering, staying, or leaving their
industries. Comparing industry quintiles for the first and second periods (1981-1990 and 1990-2000),
we find that for all the variables we consider (financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, cash-flow
volatility, profitability, and asset size), persistence rates for incumbent firms are well above what
would be expected if firms were uniformly randomly redistributed across quintiles in the second
period. This suggests that that even in competitively-structured industries, firm characteristics evolve
slowly, and that firms retain their industry rankings, consistent with the intra-industry diversity
predicted by industry equilibrium theories.
Williams (1995) predicts that because of dissipative perks and differential access to capital,
the equilibrium structure of industries is characterized by a core of large, stable, profitable, capitalintensive, financially-leveraged firms and a competitive fringe of small, risky, non-profitable, laborintensive firms. We find support for this prediction for entrant firms and partial support for exiting
firms, although perhaps not surprisingly, exiting firms carry more debt than incumbents or entrants.
We find that new entrants and incumbents that switch industries operate at the fringe of their
industries, being smaller, riskier, less profitable, and more labor-intensive than core incumbent firms.
However, we find only weak support for Williams’ prediction that entrants carry less debt than
incumbents. In addition, firms that leave their industries are much more indebted than entrants or
incumbents, suggesting that financial distress causes some fringe firms to deviate from the Williams’
equilibrium prototype and exit with high financial leverage and capital-labor ratios.
We make two major contributions in this paper. First, we provide evidence on the importance
of within-industry equilibrium forces. We find that industry and group factors beyond standard
industry fixed effects are also important to firm financial structure. Limited industry-mean reversion
occurs as firms mostly remain in their industry groups – both on real and financial dimensions.

3

Consistent with industry equilibrium models, we find that proxies for a firm’s position within its
industry add statistical and economic significance in explaining a firm’s real and financial decisions.
Second, we identify and account for the interactions between financial structure, technology,
and risk choice. We find that accounting for the simultaneity of these decisions is important
economically – not just econometrically. Accounting for this simultaneity impacts multiple relations,
including the relations between financial structure and risk, and between risk and profitability.
Overall, our paper bridges the gap between empirical studies of partial-equilibrium models,
which simply use firm variation to test representative-firm behavior, and industry equilibrium
models, which endogenize firm variation and link firm-level decisions to broader equilibrium forces.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the financial-structure
literature and develops empirical hypotheses from the industry equilibrium models. Section III
describes our data sources, sample selection, and the variables we use to test these hypotheses.
Section IV discusses our univariate and multivariate results. Section V concludes.

II. The Importance of Industry to Financial Structure
Most financial-structure research is partial-equilibrium, relating firm financial policy to
agency conflicts and capital-market imperfections. This approach has produced important
contributions, including static trade-off and pecking-order theories, and fueled a large body of
empirical research, including recent work by Fama and French (2002) and Frank and Goyal (2002).
We focus on the importance of industry equilibrium forces to firm financial structure.4 The
literature most relevant for our analysis is a recent theoretical body of research that emphasizes
industry equilibrium forces in the spirit of Miller (1977). These industry equilibrium models focus on
how real and financial decisions are jointly determined within competitive industries (Maksimovic
and Zechner, 1991, Williams, 1995, and Fries et al., 1997). The industry equilibrium approach offers
additional insights, namely, that firms make their individual real and financial decisions in reference

4

A recent paper by Almazan and Molina (2001) contrasts multiple explanations for the dispersion in financial
structure within industries. They focus only on the largest firms in each industry and include both competitive
and imperfectly-competitive industries.
4

to the collective decisions of their industry peers, and that equilibrium outcomes imply intra-industry
diversity rather than industry-wide targets.5
Before we test specific models of the industry equilibrium literature, we first explore the
relevance of industry to real-side and financial interactions by providing broad evidence on the
importance of industry to financial structure, technology, and risk choice. Using simple nonparametric and parametric methods, we examine the variation within and between industries in
financial structure as well as technology, risk, profitability, and firm size. This analysis gives a
detailed picture of how these key variables vary, with each other and nonlinearly, within an industry.
Finally, we estimate simultaneous-equation regressions that test whether, as predicted by industryequilibrium theory, a firm’s position within its industry interacts with its real and financial decisions.
The remainder of this section reviews the industry equilibrium models and describes how we
test their empirical predictions. Maksimovic and Zechner (1991), Williams (1995), and Fries et al.
(1997) show that industries can play a subtle role in the determination of within-industry financial
structure. Put simply, these models emphasize the simultaneity of financial structure, technology, and
risk, and endogenize the distribution of firm characteristics within industries. Thus, perhaps more so
than for tests of partial-equilibrium theories, our tests must address the simultaneity of these real- and
financial-decision variables, and the endogeneity of firm characteristics relative to industry peers.
Maksimovic and Zechner (1991) assume that firms can choose between a “safe” technology
with a certain marginal cost, and a “risky” technology with an uncertain cost. In partial equilibrium,
no debt is issued since shareholders would expropriate bondholders by picking the risky technology.
However, each firm has an incentive to finance with debt and adopt the risky technology because by
raising (lowering) output in good (bad) states, the risky technology initially has greater expected
profits and risk than the safe technology. As more firms pick the risky technology, the price of output
more closely tracks that technology’s marginal cost; the risky technology becomes less risky and less
profitable. Equilibrium obtains when the expected value of the ex-ante safe and risky technologies is

5

The jointness of real and financial decisions is also central to a number of partial-equilibrium models such as
Dammon and Senbet (1988), Mauer and Triantis (1994), and Leland (1998). However, the empirical evidence is
limited. MacKay (2002) does find significant interactions between real-side flexibility and financial structure.
5

equal and firms are indifferent between high-debt, high-risk and low-debt, low-risk configurations.
Thus, what Maksimovic and Zechner (1991) show is that in industry equilibrium, firm financial
structure is irrelevant because a technology’s risk and profitability depend not only on ex-ante
characteristics but also on how many firms adopt that technology.
We test the following three empirical predictions from Maksimovic and Zechner (1991).
First, as firms depart from the main industry technology they will also use more debt in their
financial structure. Second, because the equilibrium is characterized by high-debt, high-risk and lowdebt, low-risk configurations, we should observe a positive relation between financial leverage and
cash-flow volatility (our risk proxy). Third, because a firm’s risk and profitability depend on the
technology decisions of all firms in the industry, we should observe an inverse relation between cashflow volatility and a firm’s proximity to the median technology (which we term the “natural hedge”),
and between profitability and the firm’s proximity to the median industry technology. An important
feature of Maksimovic and Zechner’s model is that debt, technology, and risk are chosen
endogenously and simultaneously, a fact that our empirical approach must support.
Williams (1995) extends Maksimovic and Zechner’s (1991) model by endogenizing entry
and exit and adding exogenous perks consumption. Williams assumes that firms produce a
homogeneous good using either a high variable-cost, labor-intensive technology with no capital
outlay, or a low variable-cost, capital-intensive technology requiring capital-market financing.
Because managers cannot credibly commit to forego their perks, capital is rationed in equilibrium
even though the capital market is perfectly competitive. Even as the cost of entry converges to zero, a
core of capital-intensive firms earns positive profits because this agency problem prevents the fringe
of labor-intensive firms from raising capital and dissipating the core firms’ monopoly rents.
Like Maksimovic and Zechner (1991), Williams (1995) characterizes the industry
equilibrium distribution of debt and firm characteristics, and explains firm heterogeneity within
industries. By allowing for entry, Williams predicts an asymmetric equilibrium industry structure
characterized by a core of large, stable, profitable, capital-intensive, financially-leveraged firms
flanked by a competitive fringe of small, risky, non-profitable, labor-intensive firms.

6

We use several empirical strategies to test the Williams (1995) equilibrium industry structure.
First, we report differences between industry-year adjusted means for incumbents and firms that
enter or exit their industries (Table II). Second, we produce separate analyses of variance of industry
and firm effects for incumbents and firms that enter or exit their industries (Table III). Third, we use
transition frequencies to test Williams’ prediction that core (fringe) firms belong to the center (tails)
of the industry distribution for financial leverage, capital intensity, risk, profitability, and size (Table
VI). Finally, we include dummies for entry and exit in our multivariate regressions (Table IX).
Fries et al. (1997) use a contingent-claims approach to analyze optimal financial structure in
a competitive-industry equilibrium that combines features of the previous models. Like Williams
(1995), they allow for endogenous firm entry and exit. Like Maksimovic and Zechner (1991), they
incorporate shareholder-bondholder conflicts and corporate debt tax-shields. Fries et al. (1997) find
that as a result of a trade-off between tax advantages and agency costs, a firm optimally adjusts its
financial leverage upward after inception. To test this prediction, we test for differences in financial
leverage between the year of entry and the years following entry. We also test for differences in
financial leverage between the year of exit and the years preceding exit.
We capitalize on certain similarities between the industry equilibrium models. For instance,
by focusing on capital-labor ratios as a measure of technology, we directly incorporate a feature of
the Williams (1995) model, where firms are either capital-intensive or labor-intensive. We also use
capital-labor ratios to implement Maksimovic and Zechner’s (1991) natural hedge concept, where
firms that depart from the median industry capital-labor ratio experience greater cash-flow volatility.
On a broader level, our major contribution is in examining the central common theme of these
models – that firms’ debt, technology, and risk decisions are jointly determined – not in testing one
model against the others. It is important to note that we are not conducting structural tests of these
models but rather are testing certain predictions that arise out of their industry assumptions and the
central theme that real and financial decisions are simultaneously determined as result of industry
equilibrium forces.

7

To examine this central theme, we estimate simultaneous-equation regression models for
financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility. Empirically, as well as theoretically,
we allow the financial structure decision to depend on risk and technology choice and vice versa. We
account for interactions between these dependent variables by including each of the remaining two
variables as regressors for the dependent variables featured in each equation. We use Generalized
Method of Moments (GMM) to reflect the correlation of the residuals across these equations and to
instrument endogenous right-hand-side variables. We include measures of a firm’s industry position,
such as the similarity of its capital-labor ratio to the industry median capital-labor ratio, the actions of
firms inside and outside its industry-year quintile, and its status as entrant, incumbent, or exiting
firm, to test the idea that firms’ decisions are affected by their industry peers.

III. Data, Variable Construction, and Methodology
A) Data Sources
Our sampling universe comprises active and inactive companies from the merged
COMPUSTAT-CRSP set produced by Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). We use
COMPUSTAT for the financial accounting and operating variables. We use CRSP for historical
industry classifications (COMPUSTAT only reports current industry classifications). We merge in
COMPUSTAT’s business-segment files to compute diversification Herfindahls and quarterly data
files to compute cash-flow volatility. Using segment data limits the sample to 1981-2000.
COMPUSTAT also codifies why firms drop from the sample (footnote 35, “reason for
deletion”). We use this variable to distinguish between true firm exit (Chapter 11 bankruptcy and
Chapter 7 liquidation) and those whose CUSIP changes because of corporate restructuring. This
allows us to examine the behavior of firms that enter, stay, or leave their industry and test the
dynamic industry equilibrium models developed by Williams (1995) and Fries et al. (1997).

8

B) Sample Selection
We focus on competitively-structured industries to comply with the assumptions of the
industry equilibrium models found in Maksimovic and Zechner (1991) and Williams (1995). We
implement this criterion by retaining industries with no fewer than ten firms per year.6 As is common
in studies of financial structure (e.g., Barclay, Morellec, and Smith, 2001), we exclude financial
service industries (SIC 6000-6999) and regulated industries (SIC 4000-4999). We also exclude firms
in industries that are classified as miscellaneous by dropping industries where the fourth digit of the
SIC code ends in a nine.
In addition to dropping observations with incomplete data, we delete observations with
negative sales or assets, and those with a CRSP permanent number or capital-labor ratio equal to
zero. To prevent influential observations from skewing our results, we delete outliers as follows. We
drop observations for which Tobin’s q is over ten, earnings before interest and taxes divided by
assets is less (more) than negative (positive) two, or financial leverage lies outside the [0,1] interval.7
The regressions presented in Section IV control for firm fixed effects by first-differencing the
firm-level variables (year and industry dummies are also included in these regressions). The General
Method of Moment (GMM) regressions appearing in that section use the second lags in levels as
instruments. Hence, observations without at least two lags of data ultimately fall out of the sample.8
The final sample resulting from these various screens forms an unbalanced panel of 4,248 firms
(19,427 firm-years) operating in 142 competitive industries in the period 1981-2000.
C) Proxies and Variable Construction
We measure financial leverage as total debt divided by total assets (book leverage). Using
book values may be justified by a recent survey by Graham and Harvey (2001) who report that
6

7

8

We use this criterion rather than a Herfindahl-based cutoff because we examine how firms respond to decisions
made by firms inside and outside their industry quintile. Our ten-firm criterion ensures that each quintile contains
at least two firms. We find that excluding industries with a sales Herfindahl over 25% produces similar results.
Our base results use the book value of equity to compute financial leverage. Table XI presents results using the
market value of equity to compute financial leverage and relaxes the screening interval to [0,2].
Because the sample is highly unbalanced, with some firms appearing only a few years and others present
throughout the entire panel, this number of lags reflects a trade-off between reducing endogeneity bias, losing
observations and statistical power, and introducing large-firm and survivor biases.
9

managers focus on book values when setting financial structure. Furthermore, Barclay et al. (2001)
show how book leverage is theoretically preferable in regressions of financial leverage, arguing that
using market values in the denominator might spuriously correlate with explanatory variables such as
Tobin’s q. However, Welch (2002) argues against book leverage in favor of market leverage, and
Fama and French (2002) find strikingly different results for book leverage and market leverage. In
light of this recent controversy, we rerun our regressions using total debt divided by the market value
of equity plus the book value of debt and preferred stock minus deferred taxes (market leverage).
These results (presented in Table XI) are qualitatively similar to those found using book leverage.
We use fixed-capital stock (net plant and equipment, in $ millions) divided by the number of
employees as a proxy for capital intensity (the capital-labor ratio, K/L). To measure risk, we use the
standard deviation of operating cash flow divided by total assets using up to twenty quarterly
observations. Profitability is earnings before interest expense and taxes (EBIT) (data item 13 minus
14) divided by total assets. Diversification is one minus the Herfindahl of output across the firm’s
four-digit SIC industries (computed from segment data). This measure equals zero for single-industry
firms and tends toward one for firms that operate in several industries. In light of recent work by
Barclay et al. (2001), we control for the investment opportunity set with Tobin’s q (market value of
equity plus the book value of debt and preferred stock minus deferred taxes, divided by book assets).
Finally, we propose two measures of a firm’s position within its industry. First, we use one
minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capital-labor ratio and the median
capital-labor ratio for its industry-year as a proxy for Maksimovic and Zechner’s (1991) natural
hedge. Maksimovic and Zechner show how firms adopting the mainstream technology share the cost
structure and fortunes of the bulk of the industry, providing them with a natural hedge to industry
shocks. Note that this effect is separate from an operating leverage effect. We focus separately on
operating leverage by including the capital-labor ratio both as a control in our regressions and as a
dependent variable for one of the regression equations. Williams (1995) also classifies firms within
an industry on the basis of their technology, namely, capital-intensive and labor-intensive firms. We
base our natural hedge proxy on the capital-labor ratio to reflect the central features of both models.

10

Thus, our natural hedge measure can be algebraically expressed as follows:

NH f ,i , y = 1 −

(K L ) f ,i , y − mediani , y (K L )
max i , y (K L ) f ,i , y − mediani , y (K L )

∈ [0,1]

where f stands for firm, i stands for industry, and y stands for year.9
Another implication of models by Maksimovic and Zechner (1991), Williams (1995), and
Fries et al. (1997) is that even in competitive industries, decisions made by individual firms are
conditioned on the decisions made by the rest of the industry. For instance, Maksimovic and Zechner
show how firms within an industry adjust their debt levels differently in response to industry-wide
shocks, such as a change in the corporate tax rate, depending on their position within the industry.
Because our natural hedge is built solely around the capital-labor ratio, it may fail to reflect other
dimensions of a firm’s position in its industry. To address this issue, our regressions control for the
mean change in the dependent variables (financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow
volatility) inside and outside a firm’s industry-year quintile (intra- and extra-quintile). Intra-quintile
change is the mean change in the dependent variable for the firm’s industry-year quintile. To avoid
hardwiring a spurious correlation into the analysis, the mean change for each firm’s own quintile
excludes that firm itself. Extra-quintile change is the mean change outside the firm’s industry-year
quintile. We construct the quintiles themselves from the lagged levels of the dependent variables.
D) Regression Model Specification
Our main regressions are simultaneous-equation regressions where financial leverage,
capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility appear both as dependent variables and as regressors in
the other two equations. We include the measures of a firm’s industry position described above,
namely, natural hedge, intra- and extra-quintile change, and dummy variables for firm entry and exit.
These are the main variables of interest in this study. To ensure that these measures of industry
position do not simply reflect static trade-off and pecking-order theories, we also include standard
control variables such as profitability, firm size (log of total assets), diversification, and Tobin’s q.
9

To facilitate comparison across industries, this formulation normalizes the distance between a firm’s capital-labor
ratio and the median industry capital-labor ratio such that a value of one indicates that a firm is at the median
technology, and a value of zero indicates that a firm operates the technology most unlike the rest of its industry.
11

We also control for industry and year fixed effects because we are interested in intra-industry
variation. Finally, we remove firm fixed effects by first-differencing the data to control for all other
unobserved firm-specific sources of variation in the dependent variables. We instrument all the
regression variables by their second lags in levels and the current and once-lagged intra- and extraquintile change variables. We thus estimate the following system of equations using GMM:
Leverage

= f(Capital/Labor, Risk; industry position, controls, fixed effects) + µ~

Capital/Labor = f(Leverage, Risk; industry position, controls, fixed effects) + ε~
Risk

~
= f(Leverage, Capital/Labor; industry position, controls, fixed effects) + ω
~ are random error terms.
where µ~ , ε~ , and ω

IV. Results
A) Variation in Financial Structure
Since we are interested in intra-industry variation, we first examine how much variation in
financial structure arises between and within industries. After a graphical examination of the extent
of variation in financial structure, our research design is then to present summary statistics followed
by an analysis of variance and univariate regressions - both examining the importance of industries.
We follow these simpler tests with multivariate regressions that account for the endogeneity and
simultaneity of debt, technology, and risk choice.
Figures 1a and 1b show the extent of variation in financial structure by grouping industries
into quintiles based on intra-industry dispersion in financial leverage. We average each firm’s debtto-asset ratio over all years it appears in the panel and then measure dispersion by calculating the
standard deviation of these average debt-to-asset ratios across firms in each four-digit SIC industry.
We sort industries into dispersion quintiles and form financial-leverage quintiles within each of these
dispersion quintiles. Figure 1a plots financial-leverage quintile medians by dispersion quintile.
Insert Figures 1a and 1b here

12

Figure 1b shows the same breakdown for one specific year, 1990, arbitrarily chosen from the
middle of our panel, to establish that averaging over time does not materially change the patterns we
observe. Both figures clearly show that there is substantial financial-structure dispersion within fourdigit SIC industries, even within industries with the least dispersion.
To give a more concrete idea of the types of industries found in our sample, Table I presents
the top ten and bottom ten industries in terms of financial-structure dispersion. As above, we measure
dispersion as the standard deviation of firm financial leverage (for each industry) where firms’ debtto-asset ratios are first averaged over time to form a single measure of financial leverage for each
firm. Similar to Figures 1a and 1b, Table I shows that the extent of dispersion is high within
industries, and that even industries with the least dispersion exhibit wide intra-industry variation.
Insert Table I here
B) Summary Statistics
Table II reports summary statistics for six key variables in our analysis that are emphasized
in industry equilibrium models: financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, cash-flow volatility, natural
hedge, profitability, and asset size. To examine the dynamic predictions formulated by Williams
(1995) and Fries et al. (1997), we present results for the entire sample (panel A), entrants and exiters
versus incumbents (panels B & D), and switchers and sellers versus incumbents (panels C & D). We
distinguish entrants from switchers, and exiters from sellers, because we suspect that by creating or
destroying productive capacity, true entry and exit have a deeper impact on industry equilibrium than
entry and exit through acquisition or sale of existing assets, which merely reshuffle the ownership of
productive capacity.10 We report raw values in all the panels but focus on the industry-year adjusted
statistics presented in italics since we are primarily interested in within-industry patterns.

10

Data limitations prevent us from precisely determining the type of firm entry. For instance, we cannot distinguish
between privately-held incumbents that go public and new firms that actually add productive capacity to their
industry. We should point out that by tracking firms by their CRSP permanent number (permno) rather than by
their COMPUSTAT CUSIP, we avoid miss-classifying firms that undergo mergers and acquisitions or name
changes as entrants. By using the historical SIC from CRSP rather than the current SIC from COMPUSTAT, we
can identify incumbent firms that change industry. Thus, we refer to firms that change two-digit SIC industry
between the 1981-1990 and 1991-2000 subpanels as “switchers”. Finally, thanks to COMPUSTAT’s “reason for
deletion” variable (footnote 35), we are able to distinguish between firms that exit through Chapter 11 bankruptcy
or Chapter 7 liquidation and those whose assets are simply redeployed through corporate restructuring.
13

Insert Table II here
Panel A shows that there is wide variation in financial structure and all the other variables,
both in raw levels and in industry-year adjusted levels. The central column of Panel B shows that,
both in industry-year adjusted and unadjusted terms, incumbents are statistically and economically
larger (by a factor of ten) than entrants and exiters.11 Comparing entrants and incumbents, we find
that entrants are smaller, less capital-intensive firms. Entrants and incumbents are equally profitable,
but entrant profitability drops significantly in the years following entry. Except for size, exiters are
very different from entrants: exiters are twice as financially leveraged, four times more capitalintensive, and highly unprofitable, both prior to and upon exit. These results are consistent with
Williams (1995) who predicts that, in equilibrium, industries comprise a core of large, profitable,
capital-intensive, financially-leveraged incumbents, flanked by a fringe of small, unprofitable, laborintensive firms operating at the margin of the industry, i.e., entrants and exiters. However, the
Williams equilibrium does not allow for factors such as financial distress, which may well explain
why exiters accumulate debt prior to exit, pointing to a limitation of the Williams model.
Entrants and exiters differ in how their technology compares to the rest of their industry.
Entrants begin their existence with capital-labor ratios that are significantly closer to the industry
median than the average incumbent firm (natural hedge of 0.835 for entrants versus 0.803 for
incumbents). Although their greater natural hedge theoretically shields entrants from industry shocks,
we find that, in practice, entrants’ cash-flow volatility is not significantly different than incumbents’.
Exiters end their existence with capital-labor ratios that are significantly further from the industry
median than the average incumbent (natural hedge of 0.697 for exiters versus 0.802 for incumbents)
and risk levels about twice as high as incumbents and entrants. This is consistent with Maksimovic
and Zechner’s (1991) prediction of an inverse relation between risk and natural hedge. However,
exiters’ drop in capital intensity might simply reflect distress as they cut back employment prior to
exit. Because this could cause our natural hedge measure to misleadingly correlate with financial
distress, we include controls for financial distress in the multivariate regressions that follow.
11

Note that the means for entrants and exiters only reflect the very first or very last year the firm is in the sample.
The post-entry column shows means for entrants in the years (up to nine) following the firm’s first year. The preexit column shows means for exiters in the years (up to nine) preceding the firm’s last year.
14

The post-entry and pre-exit columns of Panel B report sample means for the years following
entry and preceding exit. Both in industry-year adjusted and unadjusted terms, these columns show
that entrants generally trend toward incumbent averages while exiters trend away. The evolution of
firm characteristics we observe in this sample, namely, entrants’ lower profitability and higher risk
levels following entry, resemble the equilibrium outcome modeled in Williams (1995) which
explicitly considers how capital-market imperfections limit entrants’ financial leverage, capital
intensity, and overall size, putting them at a disadvantage relative to incumbents.
Panel C of Table II reports mean firm characteristics for the first year and years following
entry by switchers (switch and post-switch), and for the last year and years preceding exit by sellers
(sell and pre-sell). Consistent with the idea that true entry and exit have a deeper impact on industry
equilibrium than entry and exit through acquisition or sale of existing assets, we find similar but
smaller differences between switchers, incumbents, and sellers than the differences observed in Panel
B between entrants, incumbents, and exiters. We find that, unlike entrants, switchers are significantly
more risky, less profitable and further from median industry capital-labor ratios than incumbents. The
time path observed between entry and post entry and between pre exit and exit is also evident here:
Switchers generally move toward incumbent-firm characteristics whereas sellers trend away.
C) Decomposing the Variation in Financial and Real-Side Characteristics
Table III uses analysis of variance to examine the importance of industry and firm fixed
effects in explaining financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, cash-flow volatility, natural hedge,
profitability, and asset size. We use nested industry dummies to determine the relative importance of
two-, three-, and four-digit SIC industry fixed effects. We include firm dummies to contrast betweenand within-firm variation (the latter corresponds to the error term reported in the last column of each
panel of the table). We present these results for the entire sample and for subsamples of firms that
enter, stay, or leave their industry over the course of the panel period (1981-2000).
Insert Table III here
Panel A (entire sample) shows that, except for capital-labor ratios, firm fixed effects rather
than industry fixed effects are the main source of cross-sectional variation. In particular, firm fixed

15

effects account for 64% of the variation in financial leverage. Industry effects account for only 11%
of the variation, most of which is explained by two-digit SIC industry effects.12 In other words, most
of the variation in financial structure arises within industries rather than between industries.
In contrast to the results for financial leverage, industry effects explain a large share of the
variation in capital-labor ratios (50%), mainly at the two-digit SIC level (47%). Thirty-nine percent
of the variation in capital-labor ratios is explained by firm fixed effects, and 11% is within-firm
variation. These results suggest that capital intensity is highly industry-specific, with some variation
across firms but little change at the firm-level over time. These findings are consistent with capital
intensity being essentially fixed once technology is chosen. They also suggest that two-digit industry
dummies are reasonable proxies for capital intensity.
The sources of variation in cash-flow volatility are similar to those driving financial-leverage
variation, with a stronger industry component (23% versus 11%) and less within-firm variation (14%
versus 25%). Natural hedge variation is 12% industry-specific, 56% firm-specific, and 31% withinfirm. The breakdown of profitability variation is almost identical to that of natural hedge. Variation
in asset size is 32% industry-specific but still mostly firm-specific (65%), and very persistent over
time (only 3% unexplained within-firm variation).
Panels B through F of Table III present industry and firm effects for incumbents, entrants,
exiters, switchers, and sellers. We find that for exiting firms especially, but also for entering firms,
industry effects are substantially more important than for the entire sample or incumbent firms. For
example, among entrants (switchers) industry factors explain 31% (30%) of the variation in financial
leverage versus only 11% (12%) for the entire sample (incumbents). For exiters, industry fixed
effects actually dominate firm fixed effects, suggesting that industry shocks affect these firms more
strongly than other firms within a given industry. This conclusion is supported by Maksimovic and
Phillips (1998) who show that industry shocks are one of the most important factors influencing the
incidence of Chapter 11. Finally, the greater role of firm effects among incumbents relative to other
12

For a direct comparison with Bradley, Jarrell, and Kim (1984), we perform an unreported analysis of variance by
collapsing the data into firm-specific averages for the panel period. Our conclusions are basically unchanged: The
industry breakdown is 8% (2-digit SIC), 3% (3-digit SIC), and 3% (4-digit SIC) of variation in financial leverage.
We also find that year effects by themselves explain less than one percent of the variation in these six variables.
16

subsamples broadly supports Williams’ (1995) idea that firms operating at the core of their industries
(incumbents) differ substantially from those at the fringe (firms that enter and leave their industries).
D) Influence of Industry on Firm Financial Structure
Our analysis of variance established the relative unimportance of industry in explaining firmlevel financial structure. We now supplement our analysis of variance with a more parametric
approach that explores the relation between firm-level and industry-level financial structure, firm
responses to changes in industry financial structure, and firm reversion to industry financial structure.
Insert Table IV here
Table IV shows regressions of firm-level financial structure on various measures of industrylevel financial structure. As in our analysis of variance, where we use nested dummy variables, we
avoid overlapping industry and firm effects by excluding firms at finer industry definitions from the
calculation of more broadly-defined industry means. For instance, mean four-digit SIC industry
financial leverage for a firm in SIC 3561 excludes that firm. Mean three-digit SIC industry for this
firm excludes firms in SIC 3561, and its two-digit SIC industry mean excludes firms in SIC 356.13
Panel A of Table IV tests the relation between industry and firm-level financial structure by
regressing firm-level debt-to-assets ratios on lagged industry median and mean debt-to-assets ratios.
We lag the industry debt-to-assets ratios to avoid endogeneity problems.14 We present median and
mean industry regressions to check whether influential observations affect our results. This leads to
some differences in findings but not in the overall conclusions. Consistent with our analysis of
variance, we find strongest significance at the two-digit SIC industry level, and the adjusted R-square
ignoring firm fixed effects is under ten percent but climbs to 66 percent when firm fixed effects are
included. Thus, as the magnitude of the coefficients and adjusted R-square statistics show, the ability
of industry to explain financial structure is limited and is in fact overshadowed by firm fixed effects.

13

This causes the degrees of freedom to drop from 19,426 in Table III to 19,374 in Table IV. This is because some
three-digit SIC industries contain a single four-digit SIC industry.
14
Even if we estimate these relations using contemporaneous medians and means for industry financial structure, the
adjusted R-square only increases by one percentage point for the industry-medians regression and two percentage
points for the industry-means regression.
17

Panel B tests how firms respond to changes in industry-wide financial structure by regressing
changes in firm debt-to-assets ratios on concurrent changes in industry debt-to-assets ratios. Our
results are qualitatively similar for changes in industry medians and means, though weaker for the
latter. Although we find statistical significance at the two- and four-digit SIC level, the low Rsquares (2% for medians and 1% for means) suggest that firms adjust their financial structures very
little in response to their industries, consistent with our findings in Table III that both broadly- and
narrowly-defined industries explain a rather small share of firm-level variation in financial leverage.
Finally, Panel C examines firm reversion to industry financial structure by regressing
changes in firm debt-to-assets ratios on lagged differences between firm and mean industry debt-toassets ratios (similar findings also obtain using the median industry debt-to-asset ratio). We also
present a semi-parametric version that uses the decile ranks rather than the actual values of the
lagged differences between firm and mean industry debt-to-assets ratios. The two methods concur
qualitatively, showing that firms do revert to industry debt-to-assets ratios. However, this reversion
occurs at a very slow rate. We find annual industry-mean reversion rates of 5.0% for two-digit, 5.2%
for three-digit, and 7.0% for four-digit industries, not unlike Fama and French (2002) who report that
firms revert to their own leverage targets at rates of 7% to 18% per year. This evidence of slow mean
reversion is consistent with Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), suggesting that there are
substantial transaction costs in adjusting firm financial structure. However, it is also consistent with
industry equilibrium outcomes where firms do not rapidly adjust toward the industry mean but rather
adopt differential financial structures that persist over time within their industry, consistent with our
analysis of variance results and findings described in the sections which follow.
E) Intra-Industry Covariance Patterns
Table V continues our analysis of intra-industry variation by presenting quintile means.15 We
present these quintiles to detect nonlinear relations across firms within industries and investigate the
predictions advanced by Maksimovic and Zechner (1991) and Williams (1995) regarding the
equilibrium structure of industries along the dimensions of debt, technology, and risk. For instance,

15

Nearly identical results obtain for quintile medians.
18

Maksimovic and Zechner predict that firms with atypical technologies carry more debt and exhibit
more risk. If this prediction holds, we should observe non-monotonic relations between financial
leverage, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility. A standard correlation analysis would not
allow us to detect the non-monotonic relations predicted by these studies.
We construct industry-year quintiles for key regressors featured in our multivariate
regressions (natural hedge, asset size, and profitability) and compute quintile means for these
variables and our three dependent variables (financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow
volatility). Quintiles are formed for each of the 142 four-digit SIC industries in each of the 18 sample
years (2,556 industry-years).16 We report industry-year adjusted quintile means as we wish to focus
on within-industry distribution patterns. Having said this, our conclusions are generally unchanged
with or without industry-year adjustments, and most of the quintile means differ significantly in both
cases. To give a better idea of the economic significance of these industry-year adjusted quintile
means, we also present mean sample percentile ranks in parentheses.
Insert Table V here
The top panel of Table V shows how each of our key variables distributes across the first,
third, and fifth natural-hedge industry-year quintiles. We find a U-shaped relation between financial
leverage and natural hedge, and a monotonic inverse relation between risk and natural hedge. These
findings lend mixed support to the monotonic inverse relations Maksimovic and Zechner (1991)
predict between financial leverage and cash-flow volatility and a firm’s proximity to the mainstream
industry technology. The relation between asset size and natural hedge is also U-shaped, indicating
that, contrary to what Williams (1995) predicts, large firms operate not only at the technological core
of their industries but also at the fringe, in other words, with both low and high capital-labor ratios.
Because many of these relations are non-monotonic, we include the squared value of natural hedge in
our multivariate regressions.
The middle panel of Table V shows how the same six variables distribute across profitability
quintiles. The relation between financial leverage and profitability first decreases slightly (industry-

16

Although the panel runs 20 years (1981-2000), two years are lost because our regressions use two lags of the data.
19

year adjusted means of 0.03 and 0.02 for quintiles one and three), then falls steeply (-0.07 in quintile
five). Although our finding of an inverse relation is consistent with existing findings (Long and
Malitz, 1985, Rajan and Zingales, 1995, Graham, 2000, and Fama and French, 2002), the fact that
financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility are all nonlinearly related to
profitability leads us to include the squared value of profitability in our multivariate regressions.
The bottom panel of Table V reports means by asset size quintile. Consistent with a
Williams-style core-fringe industry structure, we find that financial leverage, capital intensity, and
profitability all increase in size. Interestingly, even though the largest firms are significantly less like
their industry than small firms (natural hedge of 0.77 for the top size quintile versus 0.82 for quintile
one), large firms are much less risky than small firms. This suggests that although natural hedge
reduces risk in principle, in practice, this effect is overshadowed by other determinants of firm risk.
Finally, we refined the analysis presented in Table V by splitting the industries based on
intra-industry dispersion. We contrast low- and high-dispersion industries because in some industries
the scope for technological variation might be limited, making it difficult to detect relations between
the variables. We do not report this analysis, as the results were substantially the same as those
shown in Table V. They are simply accentuated in high-dispersion industries.
F) Evolution of Entrants, Exiters, Switchers, Sellers, and Incumbents within Industries
To investigate the dynamic properties of industry equilibrium, as modeled by Williams
(1995) and Fries et al. (1997), Table VI presents transition frequencies for firms that enter, stay, or
leave their industries. For each variable presented, the table panels show the percentage of incumbent
firms that stay in the same industry-year quintile or move to other quintiles between the first half of
the empirical period (1981-1990) and the second half (1990-2000). Each panel also shows the 19902000 quintile distribution of firms that enter an industry in the 1990-2000 time period, either through
new entry (enter) or by changing two-digit SIC industry (switch). Finally, the panels show the 19811990 quintile distribution of firms that leave an industry in the 1990-2000 time period, either through
bankruptcy or liquidation (exit) or by selling assets through corporate mergers or acquisitions (sell).
The quintiles are formed using firm means for each time period (1981-1990 and 1990-2000). The

20

table also reports statistical tests of differences in proportions between the first, third, and fifth
quintiles, and goodness-of-fit tests that industry demographics follow a Uniform distribution.
Insert Table VI here
We note several transition patterns for incumbent firms and for firms that enter or leave their
industries. First, the top-left panel of Table VI shows that 23% of entrants fall in the lowest financialleverage quintile. This percentage falls significantly to 18% in quintiles three and five. In contrast,
switchers tend to enter an industry in the higher financial-leverage quintiles, with 24% and 22% of
switchers in the fourth and fifth quintiles. Among exiters, seven times more firms belong to the top
financial-leverage quintile than the bottom quintile. This pattern also obtains for sellers, though in a
less dramatic but still significant proportion of 37% to 28%. Since most of the quintile frequencies
pertaining to entrants, switchers, sellers, and exiters concur with the section IV.B discussion of firm
means reported in Table II, we now turn our attention to the behavior of incumbent firms over time.
The diagonal elements of each panel represent incumbent persistence rates showing the
percentage of incumbent firms that remain in their industry quintile between the 1981-1990 time
period and the 1990-2000 time period. For all variables, we find that persistence is greatest for
quintiles one, five, or both. This may simply reflect the fact that these quintiles contain the tails of the
distribution for each variable: Firms in these quintiles must change substantially to transit to the inner
quintiles. The highest persistence rates are 38%, 31%, and 52% for the fifth quintiles for capital-labor
ratios, profitability, and asset size, and 44% and 42% for the first asset-size and risk quintiles. These
results suggest that large, capital-intensive, profitable, stable incumbent firms tend to maintain their
dominant industry position over time, and represent a Williams-style industry core. Higher turnover
rates and lower persistence rates arise as capital intensity, profitability, and asset size decrease, and
as financial leverage and cash-flow volatility increase. These results suggest that small, laborintensive, unprofitable, risky, marginal firms tend to move in, around, and out of their industries over
time, and represent a Williams-style industry fringe.
We find for all variables persistence rates that significantly diverge from 20%, the rate
expected if incumbents were uniformly randomly redistributed across quintiles between 1981-1990

21

and the 1990-2000 time period. Consistent with our industry-mean reversion analysis (Table IV), this
finding suggests that firm characteristics evolve slowly and that firms maintain their relative industry
positions, even within competitively-structured industries. Table VI also highlights the high attrition
rate among small firms (fully 41% of firms in the lowest asset-size quintile sell out, 3% exit, and
44% remain in the lowest asset-size quintile) and the staying power of large firms (52% of firms in
the highest asset-size quintile remain in that quintile, 1% exit, and 20% sell out).
G) Multivariate Analysis of the Relation Between Financial Structure, Technology, and Risk
Although informative, the evidence uncovered so far in support of industry equilibrium
models relies on univariate analyses. In this section, we use multivariate regressions to determine
whether this evidence holds up in a simultaneous-equation framework that controls for covariates and
deals with endogeneity in the regressors and simultaneity between three dependent variables featured
in industry equilibrium models: financial leverage, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility.
Table VII presents Ordinary Least Square (OLS) and General Method of Moments (GMM)
regression results. In contrast to OLS, GMM allows for simultaneity among the dependent variables
by incorporating the correlation of residuals across the three equations. This improves the efficiency
and consistency of the estimates. Moreover, as an instrumental-variable estimation method, GMM
mitigates simultaneity bias caused by endogenous explanatory variables by using predicted values
rather than realized values of the variables. We instrument all the regression variables by their second
lags in levels and the current and once-lagged intra- and extra-quintile change variables. Hansen’s
(1982) J-statistic jointly tests that the model is well-specified and that the instruments are valid.
The panel nature of our sample allows us to control for unobserved firm-specific factors.
Instead of the standard deviation-from-means approach, which is invalid when using lagged variables
as instruments, we control for firm fixed effects by first-differencing the variables. However, firstdifferencing introduces first-order moving-average autocorrelation, so we use the Newey-West

22

(1987) procedure to address this issue and also handle heteroscedasticity. To focus on intra-industry
variation, we include dummy variables to control for four-digit SIC industry and year fixed effects.17
Insert Table VII here
We find several differences between the OLS and GMM coefficient estimates, suggesting
that resorting to instrumental-variable, simultaneous-equation estimation methods is important. We
find that the relation between financial leverage and Tobin’s q flips from highly significant negative
for OLS to highly significant positive for GMM. This sign reversal is not a focus of this study since
we simply regard Tobin’s q as a control variable. However, it does suggest that the simultaneity of
financial leverage and Tobin’s q is a real issue and requires proper econometric treatment. The other
sign reversals we observe between OLS and GMM occur in the capital-labor ratio and cash-flow
volatility regressions discussed below. As discussed in the following section, we also find important
differences in economic significance between OLS and GMM. Since the GMM estimates are
econometrically superior, we focus our discussion on these results.
Inspection of the GMM results for financial leverage (column four of Table VII) shows that
financial leverage is positively related to capital-labor ratios, cash-flow volatility, asset size, and
Tobin’s q. The relation between financial leverage and cash-flow volatility is of particular interest as
past empirical work has in turn found this relation to be positive (Kim and Sorensen, 1986), negative
(Bradley, Jarrell, and Kim, 1984), and insignificant (Titman and Wessels, 1988). Besides lending
credence to Maksimovic and Zechner’s (1991) prediction of a positive relation between financial
leverage and risk, our findings also suggest that the mixed results in the literature might depend on
the econometric treatment of simultaneous decision variables and endogenous explanatory variables.
As discussed previously, we construct a number of unique variables to test central predictions
of the industry equilibrium models reviewed earlier. One of these is natural hedge, which measures
how far a firm’s capital-labor ratio departs from the industry-year median. We find a significant
inverse relation between this variable and financial leverage, supporting the Maksimovic and
17

Our results do not hinge on how finely we define industries. Unreported regression results using two- and threedigit SIC industries to measure natural hedge and intra- and extra-quintile changes and to adjust for industry were
qualitatively similar and, perhaps thanks to larger sample sizes, statistically stronger. This suggests that the forces
which explain the distribution of firms within industries operate at several levels within the overall economy.
23

Zechner (1991) prediction that high-debt firms choose technologies unlike the industry mainstream.
Consistent with the finding in Table V of a U-shaped relation between financial leverage and natural
hedge, we find a significant positive coefficient for the squared value of natural hedge. This nonmonotonic relation is not predicted by Maksimovic and Zechner and suggests that other factors
besides those analyzed in their model induce firms at the technological core of the industry to assume
more debt than firms whose capital-labors ratios lie between the core and fringe of the industry.
One possibility is that our natural hedge measure acts as a proxy for financial distress. As
discussed earlier, we observe an increase in capital intensity prior to firm exit (see Table II), arguably
because exiting firms enact cost-cutting measures such as cutting back employment. Thus, because it
is constructed from capital-labor ratios, the natural hedge for exiting firms will reflect this behavior
and trend lower prior to firm exit. We use two methods to avoid confusing financial distress with a
bona fide natural hedge effect. First, we include capital-labor ratios themselves in the financial
leverage regressions; we also control for risk, profitability, and size, which Table II showed to be
good exit predictors and indicators of financial distress. Second, we run separate regressions (Tables
IX and XI) that include dummy variables for exiting firms.
Another implication of the industry equilibrium models is that even in competitive industries,
decisions made by individual firms are not independent of the decisions made by the rest of the
industry. Consequently, our regressions also include the mean change in the dependent variables both
inside and outside a firm’s industry-year quintile (intra- and extra-quintile change) as another
empirical strategy to detect intra-industry linkages.18
We find significant positive relations between the intra-quintile change variables and each of
the three dependent variables. The OLS results show that firms make financial and risk adjustments
inversely related to those of firms outside their quintile. However, these results do not hold up
statistically under GMM. These findings, that firms behave like (unlike) firms inside (outside) their
industry-year quintile, support the asymmetric adjustment patterns predicted by Maksimovic and
18

Intra-quintile change is the mean change in the dependent variable within the firm’s own industry-year quintile.
To avoid hardwiring a positive but spurious relation into the analysis, we exclude each firm from its industry-year
quintile in calculating the intra-quintile mean change. Extra-quintile change is the mean change outside the firm’s
industry-year quintile. The quintiles themselves are based on the lagged levels of the dependent variables.
24

Zechner (1991). Our finding that firms’ actions are correlated with the actions of other firms in their
own industry-year quintile suggests that strategic complementary usually associated with imperfect
competition arises even within competitively-structured industries.
Contrary to the heuristic that real and financial leverage are inversely related, but directly
supporting a Williams (1995) prediction, we find that financial leverage is increasing in capital
intensity.19 Interestingly, column five of Table VII shows that causation does not run both ways: The
relation between capital intensity and financial leverage is positive but not significant. The OLS
results fail to make this distinction, leading one to conclude that causation runs both ways. In fact,
the OLS results suggest that capital intensity is significantly related to all the regressors except
diversification. Many of these relations are insignificant under GMM, attesting to the simultaneity of
capital intensity and the regressors, and the importance of instrumental-variable estimation in
removing simultaneity bias and reducing spurious associations.
Finally, column six of Table VII confirms the positive relation between risk and financial
leverage found in the first equation and the inverse relation between risk and capital intensity found
in equation two. It also shows that cash-flow volatility is directly (inversely) related to profitability
(squared), and inversely related to Tobin’s q. These results are the opposite of those we find under
OLS (column three), again pointing to how simultaneity bias can lead to erroneous conclusions.
Although we have argued that instrumental-variable estimation addresses endogeneity issues,
we have not yet discussed whether our instruments remove simultaneity bias altogether. As
commonly happens, Table VII shows that the Hansen J-statistics strongly reject the over-identifying
restrictions in every GMM equation.20 This could mean that the model is misspecified, that the
instruments are correlated with the residuals, or that both violations occur.21 Experimentation with

19

This might also obtain if capital intensity is a proxy for collateral assets and thereby increases debt capacity.
However, this interpretation is insufficient given that we control for collateral effects by including total assets.
20
The GMM results reported in Table VII are from a simultaneous estimation of the regression equations, yielding a
single J-statistic for the system of equations, which also strongly rejects the over-identifying restrictions. We
produce the equation-specific J-statistics reported in table VII by estimating each equation individually.
21
However, J-tests hold asymptotically and are known to over-reject in finite samples (Ferson and Foerster, 1994).
Moreover, as Stock and Wright (2000) discuss, this problem worsens when the instruments are weakly correlated
with the endogenous variables. Finally, Leamer (1983) shows that large-sample specification tests are sensitive
even to small departures from the “true” model.
25

different model specifications and other sets of instruments neither improved the J-statistics nor
fundamentally altered our results. Thus, although the variables are instrumented with plausible
instruments, we cannot say for sure that even our GMM estimates are free of simultaneity bias.
H) Economic Significance
Table VIII shows the economic significance of the regression results reported in Table VII.
The table presents predicted percentage changes in the dependent variables as each regressor varies
from the 5th to 95th percentile holding all other regressors at their sample mean levels (statistically
insignificant relations are omitted). The percentages we report are relative to the sample range
(maximum less minimum). Panel A (B) uses the OLS (GMM) coefficient estimates from Table VII.
Insert Table VIII here
Table VIII shows that, except for intra-quintile change, all the variables exhibit substantially
more economic significance under GMM than for OLS. Given the econometric issues mentioned
earlier, we focus on the GMM version of the economic significance results. Panel B shows that the
economically most significant determinants of financial leverage are: asset size (going from the 50th
to the 5th (95th) asset-size percentile coincides with a 8.1% (10.9%) drop (rise) in financial leverage),
Tobin’s q (going from the 50th to the 5th (95th) Tobin’s q percentile coincides with a 6.3% (7.0%)
drop (rise) in financial leverage), profitability (going from the 50th to the 5th (95th) profitability
percentile coincides with a 4.1% (3.3%) drop (fall) in financial leverage), and natural hedge (going
from the 50th to the 5th (95th) natural-hedge percentile coincides with a 2.4% (1.3%) rise (drop) in
financial leverage). This last finding confirms that an economically significant fraction of within-firm
variation in financial structure is tied to industry factors other than standard industry fixed effects.
The economic impact that natural hedge and profitability have on financial leverage is
complicated by the non-monotonic relations between these variables and financial leverage. Indeed,
Table VII shows negative coefficients for both variables and positive coefficients for their squared
values, all statistically significant under OLS and GMM alike. Thus, the overall economic impact
that natural hedge and profitability have on financial leverage reflects these opposing signs.
Combining these offsetting relations, both panels of Table VIII concur in showing that, consistent

26

with prior findings in the literature, financial leverage is inversely related to profitability. Likewise,
we find that overall, financial leverage is inversely related to natural hedge. This result attests to the
statistical and economic significance of a firm’s real-side industry position to its financial structure
and lends strong support to the predictions of Maksimovic and Zechner (1991). Panel B also shows
that risk is strongly positively related to profitability: As profitability goes from the 5th to the 95th
percentiles, risk increases from 5.3% below the sample mean to 4.3% above the sample mean.
Table VIII shows that the economic significance of the relations between debt, technology,
and risk is not symmetric. Although capital intensity causes financial leverage to rise 1.38% between
the 5th and 95th capital-labor percentiles, financial leverage does not significantly influence capital
intensity. Conversely, consistent with debt-induced risk shifting, financial leverage is more important
to risk than vice versa: Cash-flow volatility causes financial leverage to rise 3.7% between the 5th and
95th risk percentiles, but financial leverage causes an 11.1% rise in cash-flow volatility between the
5th and 95th financial-leverage percentiles. Finally, capital intensity is about 3.6 times more important
to risk than risk is to capital intensity. These findings confirm that debt, technology, and risk are
significantly related, both economically and statistically, though somewhat asymmetrically.
I) Multivariate Regressions with Entry and Exit
Since our univariate results showed significant differences between firms that enter, stay, or
leave their industries, Table IX extends the analysis of Table VII by adding indicator variables for
entrants, switchers, sellers, and exiters (incumbents are the omitted category). We include these
dummy variables to contrast Maksimovic and Zechner’s (1991) static industry equilibrium model,
which holds constant the number of firms in an industry, and dynamic industry equilibrium models
by Williams (1995) and Fries et al. (1997), which endogenize entry and exit.
Insert Table IX here
The Wald statistics presented across the bottom right panel of Table IX indicate that, except
for cash-flow volatility, these dummy variables add to the statistical power of the regressions.
Focusing on the GMM estimates, these multivariate results are consistent with our Table II findings
that exiters and sellers carry more debt than incumbents whereas entrants and switchers are

27

statistically indistinguishable from incumbents. Contrary to Williams (1995), we find that once we
control for other determinants of capital intensity, entrants (exiters) enter (leave) their industries with
higher (lower) capital-labor ratios than incumbent firms.
Table X analyzes the economic significance of the results presented in Table IX. The
approach is the same as in Table VIII, except that instead of presenting OLS and GMM versions, we
divide the sample into incumbents (top panel) and exiters and sellers (bottom panel). The economic
impact of risk, size, and Tobin’s q on financial leverage is about five times as strong for incumbents
as for exiters and sellers. However, intra-quintile change has a greater economic impact on exiters
and sellers than incumbents, again showing the strong differential influence of industry factors on
exiting firms, consistent with our analysis of variance results.
Insert Table X here
Recent papers find conflicting results depending on whether financial leverage is measured
relative to the book value or market value of assets. For instance, Fama and French (2002) report a
negative relation between market leverage and Tobin’s q but a positive relation for book leverage.
Barclay et al. (2001) find a negative OLS relation between book leverage and Tobin’s q, but
Lyandres (2001) finds a positive relation between market leverage and Tobin’s q within oligopolies.
Insert Table XI here
Table XI replicates Table IX using market leverage instead of book leverage. Not unlike
prior studies, some of our results are affected by how financial leverage is defined, though our main
conclusions are qualitatively unchanged. For instance, the GMM results show that market leverage is
positively significantly related to extra-quintile change; the relation is insignificant for book leverage.
Also, the dummies for exiter and switcher firm status lose statistical significance for market leverage.
However, our GMM results are less affected by how financial leverage is defined than our OLS
results, perhaps because endogeneity is handled better under this estimation method than under OLS.

28

V. Conclusions
We examine the importance of industry to real and financial decisions. Analysis of variance
and simple regressions of firm financial structure on industry financial structure show that industry
fixed effects explain far less of the variation in financial structure than do firm fixed effects.
However, we find evidence that industry equilibrium forces are important in explaining the
substantial intra-industry variation we observe in financial structure.
Our findings lend broad support to the conclusion that industry equilibrium forces affect not
only individual firm decisions but also the joint distribution of real-side and financial characteristics
within competitive industries. We find that accounting for a firm’s position within its industry is
important – economically and statistically – and that the simultaneity arising between real-side and
financial variables affects our conclusions. We thus show that departures from industry norms are
made simultaneously on multiple dimensions.
Our results show the importance of industry interdependence – even in low concentration
industries. Beyond the broad evidence we provide on the importance of industries, our tests support
specific predictions by Maksimovic and Zechner (1991) and Williams (1995). We find a significant
negative (positive) relation between financial leverage (risk) and how far a firm’s technology departs
from the industry median technology. This supports Maksimovic and Zechner’s prediction that highdebt firms choose technologies unlike the industry mainstream and experience greater cash-flow risk.
We also find some support for the industry equilibrium predicted by Williams (1995). There
exists a set of stable “core” incumbent firms that are larger, more capital-intensive, profitable, and
less risky than the “fringe” firms that exit or enter the industry. This fringe of entering and exiting
firms is more sensitive to industry factors than incumbent firms operating at the core of the industry.
Also consistent with industry equilibrium models – and certain partial-equilibrium models –
we find that technology and risk are simultaneously determined with financial structure. Accounting
for the simultaneity between these variables affects the economic significance of the relations we
document between financial structure, capital-labor ratios, and cash-flow volatility.

29

Our research has practical implications for future research. We show that simple measures of
a firm’s position within its industry help us understand how firms choose financial structure. These
measures are easy to construct and economically significant. We also show that simultaneity and
endogeneity are economically important and should thus be addressed in future research. Given
advances in econometric software, these extensions are not difficult for researchers to implement.
Overall, our evidence shows that industry factors help explain firm financial structure, the
diversity of firms that populate industries, and the simultaneity of real and financial decisions. We
conclude that although there is not a single optimal industry financial structure, departures from the
mean industry financial structure are systematically related to technology and risk choices relative to
the industry. When firms depart from industry norms for financial structure they also systematically
depart along technology and risk dimensions.

30

References
Almazan, Andres, and Carlos A. Molina, 2001, “Intra-Industry Capital Structure Dispersion: How Do
Capital Structures Differ Among Competitors”, University of Texas at Austin.
Barclay, Michael J., Erwan Morellec, and Clifford J. Smith, 2001, “On the Debt Capacity of Growth
Options”, mimeo, University of Rochester.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, 2001, Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
Firm Policies, mimeo University of Chicago.
Bradley, Michael, Greg A. Jarrell, and Han Kim, 1984, “On the Existence of an Optimal Financial
structure”, Journal of Finance 39(3), 857-878.
Brander, James A., and Tracy Lewis, 1986, “Oligopoly and Financial Structure: The Limited Liability
Effect”, American Economic Review 76(5), 956-970.
Chaplinsky, Susan, 1983, “The Economic Determinants of Leverage:
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Chicago.

Theories and Evidence”,

Chevalier, Judith, 1995, “Debt and Product Market Competition: Local Market Entry, Exit, and
Expansion Decisions of Supermarket chains.” American Economic Review 85, 415-35.
Dammon, Robert, and Lemma Senbet, 1988, “The Effect of Taxes and Depreciation on Corporate
Investment and Financial Leverage”, Journal of Finance 48(2), 357-373.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, “Testing Trade-Off and Pecking Order Predictions
About Dividends and Debt”, Review of Financial Studies 15(1), 1-33.
Ferson, Wayne, and S. Foerster, 1994, “Finite Sample Properties of the Generalized Method of
Moments in Tests of Conditional Asset Pricing Models”, Journal of Financial Economics 36,
29-55.

Fischer, Edwin O., Robert Heinkel, and Josef Zechner, 1989, “Dynamic Capital Structure
Choice: Theory and Tests” The Journal of Finance 44:1, pp. 19-40.
Frank, Murray and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2001, “Testing the Pecking Order Theory of Financial
Structure”, working paper, University of British Columbia and HKUST.
Fries, Stephen, Marcus Miller, and William Perraudin, 1997, “Debt in Industry Equilibrium”, Review
of Financial Studies 10(1), 39-67.
Graham, John, 1996a, “Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate,” Journal of Financial Economics, 41, 41-73.
-----, 1996b, “Proxies for the Marginal Tax Rate”, Journal of Financial Economics 42, 187-222.
-----, 2000, “How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt?”, Journal of Finance 55, 1901-1941.
-----, and Campbell Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from the
Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, forthcoming.
Hansen, L. P., 1982, “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators”,
Econometrica 34, 646-660.
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, 1991, “The Theory of Financial structure”, Journal of Finance 46,
297-355.
Kim, W. S., and Eric H. Sorensen, 1986, “Evidence on the Impact of the Agency Costs of Debt on
Corporate Dept Policy”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21(2), 131-44.
Kovenock, Dan, and Gordon Phillips, 1995, “Increased Debt and Product-Market Rivalry: How Do
We Reconcile Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review 85(2), 403-408.

31

-----, 1997, “Financial structure and Product Market Behavior: An Examination of Plant Exit and
Investment”, Review of Financial Studies 10(3), 767-804.
Lang, Larry, Eli Ofek, and Rene Stulz, 1996, “Leverage, Investment and Firm Growth”, Journal of
Financial Economics 40, 3-29.
Leamer, Edward D., 1983, “Model Choice and Specification Analysis”, in Griliches, Z. and M. D.
Intrilligator, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume I, Chapter 5, North-Holland, New York.
Leland, Hayne, 1998, “Agency Costs, Risk Management, and Financial structure”, Journal of
Finance 53(4), 1213-1243.
Long, M. S., and I. B. Malitz, 1985, “Investment Patterns and Financial Leverage”, in B. J. Friedman
(ed.), Corporate Capital Structures in the United States, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lyandres, Evgeny, 2001, “Strategic Choices of Capital Structures in Oligopolies: Theory and
Evidence”, mimeo, University of Rochester.
MacKay, Peter, 2002, “Real Flexibility and Financial Structure: An Empirical Analysis”,
forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Joseph Zechner, 1991, “Debt, Agency Costs, and Industry Equilibrium”,
Journal of Finance 46, 1619-1643.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 1998, “Asset Efficiency and the Reallocation Decisions
of Bankrupt Firms” Journal of Finance 53, 1495-1532.
Miller, Merton H., 1977, “Debt and Taxes”, Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.
Myers, Stewart, 1984, “The Financial Structure Puzzle”, Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Myers, Stewart, 1989, “Still Searching for the Optimal Financial Structure,” in Are the Distinctions
Between
Debt
and
Equity
Disappearing?
Richard
W.
Kopcke
and
Eric S. Rosengren, eds., Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 33, 80-95.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, 1987, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55, 703708.
Opler, Tim, and Sheridan Titman, 1994, “Financial Distress and Corporate Performance”, Journal of
Finance 49(3), 1015-1040.
Parrino, Robert, and Michael Weisbach, 1999, “Measuring Investment Distortions Arising from
Stockholder-Bondholder Conflicts”, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 3-42.
Phillips, Gordon M., 1995, “Increased Debt and Industry Product Markets: An Empirical Analysis”,
Journal of Financial Economics 37, 189-238.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 1995, “What Do We Know about Financial Structure? Some
Evidence from International Data,” Journal of Finance 1421-60.
Sharpe, Stephen, 1994, “Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of
Employment”, American Economic Review 84(4), 1060-1074.
Stock, J. H., and J. Wright, 2000, “GMM with Weak Identification, Econometrica 68, 263-292.
Titman, Sheridan and Roberto Wessels, 1988, “The Determinants of Financial Structure Choice”,
Journal of Finance 41(1), 1-19.
Welch, Ivo, 2002, “Columbus’ Egg: The Real Determinant of Capital Structure”,Yale University.
Williams, Joseph, 1995, “Financial and Industrial Structure with Agency”, Review of Financial
Studies 8(2), 431-474.
32

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Debt/Asset
Ratio

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
90th
70th
50th

Debt/Asset
Percentiles

High
30th

10th Low

Medium

Intra-Industry
Debt/Asset Dispersion

Figure 1a. Intra-Industry Dispersion in Financial Leverage 1980 to 2000

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Debt/Asset
Ratio

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
90th
70th
50th

Debt/Asset
Percentiles

High
30th

10th Low

Medium

Intra-Industry
Debt/Asset Dispersion

Figure 1b. Intra-Industry Dispersion in Financial Leverage for 1990

Table I
Financial Leverage Dispersion within Industries

This table presents the ten industries with the lowest and highest dispersion in intra-industry financial leverage
among 142 competitively-structured industries between 1981 and 2000. Financial leverage is total debt divided by
total assets (book values). Dispersion is measured as the standard deviation of industry financial leverage where
firms are averaged over time to form a single cross-section. Each set of industries is sorted by standard deviation.

SIC

Industry Description

Intra-Industry Financial Leverage Statistics
75th
Standard
25th
Mean Percentile
Deviation Percentile Median

Low Dispersion in Intra-Industry Financial Leverage
3420 Cutlery, Handtools, General Hardware
11.4%
2010 Meat and Meat Packing
11.6%
3011 Tires and Inner Tubes
12.1%
5310 Retail Department Stores
12.1%
2751 Commercial Printing
12.9%
13.7%
3561 Pumps and Pumping Equipment
3820 Laboratory and Industrial Instruments
13.8%
5130 Wholesale-Apparel & Notions
13.9%
5730 Retail - Electronics and Computers
13.9%
3811 Search, Detection, Navigation Equipment 14.0%

6.7%
14.8%
16.6%
16.6%
3.3%
17.5%
2.8%
5.9%
3.7%
11.0%

16.7%
25.4%
24.1%
18.2%
20.0%
23.8%
9.1%
18.2%
18.7%
20.5%

16.5%
26.5%
26.3%
20.4%
15.6%
26.3%
14.0%
17.9%
17.3%
22.4%

21.5%
36.3%
30.8%
22.7%
24.3%
35.0%
22.6%
29.9%
26.8%
31.3%

High Dispersion in Intra-industry Financial Leverage
3562 Ball and Roller Bearings
23.4%
2851 Paints, Varnishes, Lacquers, Enamels
23.8%
2810 Industrial Inorganic Chemicals
24.1%
3440 Fabricated Structural Metal Products
24.2%
3540 Metalworking Machinery and Equipment 25.0%
2870 Agricultural Chemicals
25.1%
5051 Metals Service Centers and Offices
25.4%
2844 Perfumes, Cosmetics
26.2%
3572 Computer Storage Devices
27.1%
2670 Converted Paper and Paperboard Products 28.4%

7.5%
13.3%
11.2%
12.6%
21.7%
8.0%
13.7%
8.8%
4.7%
13.3%

24.5%
24.2%
27.6%
27.4%
38.4%
27.9%
28.9%
22.7%
14.1%
28.4%

26.2%
28.8%
30.6%
31.1%
41.3%
32.2%
36.4%
29.9%
24.5%
35.0%

36.9%
39.2%
46.0%
43.7%
64.1%
56.9%
59.4%
49.3%
34.3%
51.8%

Table II
Summary Statistics

Summary statistics for firms operating in 142 competitively-structured industries between 1981 and 2000. Values in
italics are adjusted for industry and year. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets (book values). Capital / labor
is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard deviation of operating cash flow
divided by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capital-labor
ratio and the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. We do not adjust natural hedge because it
is industry-year adjusted by construction. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets.

A: Entire Sample
Leverage

Firm-years
19,427

Capital / Labor

19,427

Risk

19,427

Natural hedge

19,427

Profitability

19,427

Size (log of assets)

19,427

B: Entrants & Exiters
Leverage

Entrants
0.208
-0.011
0.058
-0.016
0.107
-0.016
0.835
n/a
0.034
0.046
3.111
-0.536
818

Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Observations (firm-years)

Mean
0.235
-0.001
0.113
0.003
0.125
-0.010
0.806
n/a
0.019
0.031
4.087
0.163

Median
0.207
-0.032
0.024
-0.008
0.060
-0.034
0.906
n/a
0.060
0.050
3.806
0.021

Post Entry
0.210 0.001 0.081 a
-0.004 b
0.140 a
0.003 a
0.844 n/a
-0.011 a
0.028 c
3.859 a
0.071 a
2,119

Standard
Deviation
0.203
0.192
0.267
0.189
0.155
0.137
0.250
n/a
0.199
0.196
2.143
1.770

Incumbents
0.232 a,a,a,a
-0.008 -,c,a,a
0.118 a,a,c,0.006 a,a,c,0.117 -,a,a,a
-0.015 -,a,a,b
0.803 a,a,b,b
n/a
0.031 -,a,a,a
0.037 -,c,a,a
4.259 a,a,a,a
0.247 a,a,a,a
14,117

Minimum Maximum
0.000
0.999
-0.444
0.873
0.000
1.997
-0.614
1.930
0.001
1.323
-0.360
1.119
0.000
1.000
n/a
n/a
-1.994
0.659
-1.967
1.000
0.013
11.999
-5.431
7.180

Pre Exit
0.396 c
0.123 0.169 -0.036 0.202 0.035 0.734 n/a
-0.103 -0.088 3.289 -0.359 76

Exiters
0.483 a
0.196 a
0.191 a
-0.028 0.203 a
0.038 b
0.697 b
n/a
-0.118 a
-0.102 a
3.302 -0.506 39

Subsample means for entrants, post entry, incumbents, pre exit, and exiters. Entrants are firms that enter the panel in
the last ten years of the sample period (1991-2000). Exiters are firms that leave the panel in 1991-2000 through
bankruptcy (Chapter 11) or liquidation (Chapter 7). Incumbents are firms present throughout the sample period
(1981-2000). Means for entrants (exiters) pertain to their first (last) year in the sample. Means for post entry (pre
exit) pertain to the years after (before) enter (exit). Superscripts show tests of differences in means between entrants
and post entry (column 2), incumbents and all other groups (column 3), pre exit and exiters (column 4), and entrants
and exiters (column 5). a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Table II
Summary Statistics (Continued)
C: Switchers & Sellers
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Observations (firm-years)

Switchers
0.230
-0.002
0.069
0.000
0.146
0.006
0.774
n/a
0.006
0.014
3.209
-0.274
346

Post Switch
0.239 0.019 c
0.066 -0.026 a
0.137 -0.007 0.792 n/a
0.020 0.043 b
3.567 a
0.003 a
1,730

Incumbents
0.232 -,-,a,a
-0.008 -,a,b,a
0.118 a,a,a,a
0.006 -,a,a,0.117 b,a,a,a
-0.015 c,b,a,a
0.803 c,-,-,n/a
0.031 c,b,a,a
0.037 c,-,a,a
4.259 a,a,a,a
0.247 a,a,a,a
14,117

Pre Sell
0.268 a
0.011 a
0.165 0.027 0.150 a
-0.001 a
0.808 n/a
-0.024 a
-0.016 a
3.460 b
-0.268 c
834

Sellers
0.316 a
0.049 a
0.161 a
0.017 0.181 b
0.029 c
0.798 n/a
-0.080 a
-0.071 a
3.249 -0.428 512

Subsample means for switchers, post switch, incumbents, pre sell, and sellers. Switchers are incumbent firms that
change two-digit SIC between subperiods (1981-1990 versus 1991-2000). Sellers are firms that leave the panel in
the last ten years of the sample period (1991-2000) through corporate restructuring (mergers, acquisitions, buyouts,
etc.). Incumbents are firms present throughout the sample period (1981-2000). Means for switchers (sellers) pertain
to their first (last) year in the sample. Means for post switch (pre sell) pertain to the years after (before) they switch
(sell). Superscripts show tests of differences in means between switchers and post switch (column 2), incumbents
and all other groups (column 3), pre sell and sellers (column 4), and switchers and sellers (column 5). a, b, c denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

D: Entrants & Exiters
versus Switchers & Sellers
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Observations (firm-years)

Entrants
0.208
-0.011
0.058
-0.016
0.107
-0.016
0.835
n/a
0.034
0.046
3.111
-0.536
818

Switchers
0.230 c
-0.002 0.069 0.000 c
0.146 a
0.006 0.774 a
n/a
0.006 c
0.014 b
3.209 -0.274 b
346

Incumbents
0.232
-0.008
0.118
0.006
0.117
-0.015
0.803
n/a
0.031
0.037
4.259
0.247
14,117

Exiters
0.483
0.196
0.191
-0.028
0.203
0.038
0.697
n/a
-0.118
-0.102
3.302
-0.506
39

Sellers
0.316 a
0.049 a
0.161 0.017 0.181 0.029 0.798 c
n/a
-0.080 -0.071 3.249 -0.428 512

2-SIC
7%
47%
15%
4%
4%
21%
28
2-SIC
17%
53%
14%
8%
5%
13%
25
2-SIC
11%
29%
5%
9%
5%
10%
28

Panel A: Entire Sample
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Degrees of freedom

Panel C: Entrants
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Degrees of freedom

Panel E: Switchers
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Degrees of freedom

3-SIC
9%
1%
6%
7%
5%
16%
43

3-SIC
6%
16%
7%
10%
3%
12%
44
4-SIC
10%
5%
8%
12%
4%
11%
40

4-SIC
8%
3%
3%
8%
4%
11%
33
Firm
49%
54%
68%
44%
49%
60%
375

Firm
56%
24%
71%
57%
66%
60%
798
Error
22%
12%
12%
27%
38%
3%
1,243

Error
12%
4%
5%
17%
22%
4%
1,218

Sources of Variation
3-SIC 4-SIC Firm Error
3%
2%
64%
25%
3%
0%
39%
11%
4%
4%
64%
14%
5%
3%
56%
31%
1%
2%
58%
35%
4%
7%
65%
3%
58
55
4,248 15,037

Panel F: Sellers
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Degrees of freedom

Panel D: Exiters
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Degrees of freedom

Panel B: Incumbents
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Degrees of freedom

2-SIC
8%
50%
26%
6%
9%
22%
26

2-SIC
16%
42%
23%
32%
10%
58%
12

2-SIC
6%
48%
17%
5%
4%
24%
28

3-SIC
6%
0%
6%
13%
8%
9%
42

3-SIC
24%
11%
24%
15%
14%
4%
10

4-SIC
4%
2%
7%
7%
5%
5%
28

4-SIC
3%
5%
20%
19%
1%
5%
6

Firm
66%
42%
55%
58%
54%
64%
507

Firm
25%
32%
17%
9%
33%
29%
19

Error
16%
6%
7%
17%
24%
1%
742

Error
31%
10%
15%
24%
42%
4%
67

Sources of Variation
3-SIC 4-SIC Firm Error
4%
2%
60%
29%
4%
0%
35%
13%
4%
4%
58%
17%
6%
3%
51%
35%
2%
3%
51%
41%
4%
8%
61%
3%
57
55
2,209 11,767

Analysis of variance for firms operating in 142 competitively-structured industries between 1981 and 2000. Each variable is regressed on nested dummies at the
two-, three-, and four-digit SIC industry levels and firm dummies. We report the percentage of variation explained by each of these factors and the error term for
the entire sample and for each subsample. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets (book values). Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $)
per employee. Risk is the standard deviation of operating cash flow divided by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between
the firm’s capital-labor ratio and the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets.

Table III
Analysis of Variance

Table IV
Influence of Industry on Firm Financial Structure
OLS regressions of firm-level financial structure on various measures of industry-level financial structure for firms
in 142 competitively-structured industries between 1981 and 2000. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets
(book values). Industry means and medians exclude the firm itself, and the three (two)-digit SIC means of industry
financial structure exclude firms in the finer four (three)-digit SIC industries. All regressions contain year fixed
effects. t-statistics in parentheses. a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Industry Financial Structure
2-SIC

3-SIC

4-SIC

Adjusted R2

Adjusted R2
with Firm
FirmFixed Effects years

A: Importance of Industry Financial Structure
Lagged Industry Median Debt/Assets
Firm Debt/Assets

0.149
(4.66) a

0.032
(0.78)

0.118
(2.88) a

9%

66%

19,374

5%

66%

19,374

Lagged Industry Mean Debt/Assets
Firm Debt/Assets

0.105
(3.75) a

0.076
(2.62) a

0.115
(3.38) a

B: Importance of Common Industry Shocks
Change in Industry Median Debt/Assets
Change in Firm Debt/Assets

0.182
(7.28) a

0.059
(1.84) c

0.117
(3.25) a

2%

19,374

1%

19,374

Change in Industry Mean Debt/Assets
Change in Firm Debt/Assets

0.150
(8.82) a

0.016
(0.94)

0.064
(2.78) a

C: Reversion to Industry Mean Financial Structure
Lagged Difference between Firm and Industry Mean Debt/Assets
Change in Firm Debt/Assets

-0.050
(-3.33) a

-0.052
(-3.06) a

-0.070
(-5.00) a

8%

19,374

Lagged Decile Rank Difference between Firm and Industry Mean Debt/Assets
Change in Firm Debt/Assets

-0.004
(-4.00) a

-0.001
(-1.00)

-0.004
(-4.00) a

6%

19,374

Table V
Quintile Means and Mean Percentiles
Industry-year adjusted quintile means (mean percentiles) for firms operating in 142 competitively-structured
industries between 1981 and 2000. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets (book values). Capital / labor is net
plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard deviation of operating cash flow divided
by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capital-labor ratio and
the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets.
Superscripts show difference in means tests between the quintiles. a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Natural Hedge Quintiles
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Firm-years

Quintile 1
0.03 (54)
0.15 (77)
0.00 (51)
0.48 (19)
0.03 (49)
0.69 (57)
3,316

Quintile 3
-0.01 (48) a,b
-0.04 (42) a,a
-0.01 (50) -,a
0.85 (47) a,a
0.03 (49) -,b
-0.09 (45) a,a
4,148

Quintile 5
0.00 (50) a
-0.03 (42) a
-0.02 (48) a
0.98 (83) a
0.04 (50) 0.26 (52) a
3,534

Profitability Quintiles
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Firm-years

0.03 (54)
-0.02 (46)
0.10 (73)
0.80 (49)
-0.23 (12)
-1.01 (30)
3,314

0.02 (52) -,a
0.01 (51) a,a
-0.03 (45) a,a
0.80 (49) -,c
0.06 (52) a,a
0.48 (55) a,b
4,147

-0.07 (39) a
0.00 (49) a
-0.06 (38) a
0.81 (50) c
0.19 (80) a
0.56 (56) a
3,578

Size Quintiles
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Natural Hedge
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Firm-years

-0.01 (48)
-0.04 (39)
0.09 (69)
0.82 (48)
-0.09 (35)
-2.05 (11)
3,314

-0.01 (48) -,a
0.01 (50) a,a
-0.02 (48) a,a
0.82 (51) -,a
0.05 (50) a,a
0.03 (49) a,a
4,147

0.01 (52) a
0.03 (59) a
-0.07 (34) a
0.77 (46) a
0.10 (61) a
2.61 (87) a
3,577

Leverage
Q1
Q2
Enter
23
20
Switch 13
20
Q1
36
19
Q2
14
24
Q3
5
12
Q4
3
10
Q5
2
5
Total
15
16
Capital / Labor
Q1
Q2
Enter
16
19
Switch 26
19
Q1
36
18
Q2
18
24
Q3
7
20
Q4
5
9
Q5
1
3
Total
15
16
Risk
Q1
Q2
Enter
19
20
Switch 19
19
Q1
42
21
Q2
11
29
Q3
6
12
Q4
2
6
Q5
2
5
Total
15
17

Firm Status in 1991-2000
Q3
Q4
Q5 Exit Sell
b,18
20
18 b
b,22
24
22 b
11
4
2
1
29
19
9
4
2
28
21
20
7
2 b,b 32 c,14
18
22
2
30
37 c
5
16
28
7a
a
19 16
17
15
2
Firm Status in 1991-2000
Q3
Q4
Q5 Exit Sell
b,21
21
23 a
-,21
15
20 6
2
1
3
35
12
7
2
2
36
22
13
4
3 -,- 31 -,c
18
27
13
2
26
27 7
21
38
319 b
16
16
15
2
Firm Status in 1991-2000
Q3
Q4
Q5 Exit Sell
-,19
19
22 -,22
19
21 7
2
1
1
27
21
10
4
1
25
22
21
5
4 a,- 31 c,15
24
13
5
35
b
39 a
8
18
26
3
a
19 b
17
17
14
2
Total
29 10 11 a
13 a
13 a
13 a
11 a
100

Total
29 b
10 b
10 a
13 a
13 a
13 a
12 a
100

Total
29 10 c
11 a
13 a
13 a
13 a
11 a
100

Firm
Status
in
1981
-1990

Firm
Status
in
1981
-1990

Firm
Status
in
1981
-1990

Natural Hedge
Q1
Q2
Enter
18
18
Switch 23
24
Q1
33
20
Q2
15
17
Q3
8
14
Q4
3
9
Q5
4
8
Total
15
16
Profitability
Q1
Q2
Enter
21
19
Switch 18
24
Q1
21
13
Q2
16
20
Q3
10
20
Q4
4
11
Q5
5
7
Total
15
17
Size (log of assets)
Q1
Q2
Enter
12
20
Switch 25
24
Q1
44
9
Q2
24
25
Q3
4
23
Q4
2
5
Q5
1
2
Total
15
16
Q3
24 a,a
16 b,2
10
25
24
4
17

Q3
17 c,17 -,8
13
21
22
12
16

Q3
20 -,21 -,5
19
17
18
10
17

Firm Status in 1991-2000
Q4
Q5 Exit Sell
21
23 b
13
19 7
3
3
28
11
7
2
29
13
11
2 -,- 35 a,24
14
3
29
16
25
235 c
16
16
2
19 Firm Status in 1991-2000
Q4
Q5 Exit Sell
22
20 21
20 3
3
5
48
8
4
5
34
16
5
2 b,- 27 a,22
16
1
23
19
31
1a
25 a
a
17
15
2
19 a
Firm Status in 1991-2000
Q4
Q5 Exit Sell
26
18 a
16
19 c
1
0
3
41
1
0
2
37
11
2
4 -,a 32 -,a
28
12
2
26
b
21
52
1
20 a
17
15
2
19 a

Total
29 a
10 b
11 a
13 a
13 a
13 a
12 a
100

Total
29 10 11 a
13 a
13 a
13 a
12 a
100

Total
29 c
10 b
11 a
13 a
13 a
13 a
11 a
100

Quintile transition frequencies for firm-period means between 1981-1990 and 1991-2000 for firms that enter or switch industries, incumbents, and firms that
leave the panel through exit or sale. Except for column totals, all percentages shown are relative to row totals. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets (book
values). Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard deviation of operating cash flow divided by assets. Natural
hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capital-labor ratio and the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year
range. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets. Superscripts in the last column and bottom row of each panel show Chi-square goodness-of-fit tests that industry
demographics follow a Uniform distribution. Superscripts in quintile three test whether the percentages for quintiles one and three and quintiles three and five are
equal. Superscripts in quintile five test whether quintiles one and five are equal. a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Table VI
Transition Frequencies – Percentage Counts

Table VII
Multivariate OLS and GMM Regressions
All variables are first-differenced to control for firm fixed effects. The regressions also control for 4-digit SIC
industry and year fixed effects. All firm-level variables are instrumented by their second lags in levels and the
current and once-lagged intra- and extra-quintile change variables. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets
(book values). Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard
deviation of operating cash flow divided by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference
between the firm’s capital-labor ratio and the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. Intraquintile change is the mean change in the dependent variable within the firm’s industry-year quintile (own-firm
excluded). Extra-quintile change is the mean change outside the firm’s industry-year quintile. Quintiles are based on
the lagged levels of the dependent variables. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets. Diversification is one minus the
Herfindahl of output across the firm’s four-digit SIC industries. Tobin’s q is the market value of equity plus the
book value of debt and preferred stock minus deferred taxes, divided by the book value of assets. For GMM, we use
the Newey-West procedure to address heteroscedasticity and the autocorrelation introduced by first-differencing.
Asymptotic t-values in parentheses. a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge
(Natural hedge)2
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability

Ordinary Least Squares
Leverage
K/L
Risk
0.022
0.009
a
(4.07)
(2.64) a
0.040
0.000
(0.05)
(4.30) a
0.037
0.003
a
(0.25)
(2.58)

General Method of Moments
Leverage
K/L
Risk
0.040
0.398
(1.05)
(7.91) a
0.259
-0.594
(2.21) b
(-5.56) a
0.539
-0.325
a
(6.96)
(-6.61) a

-0.013
-0.153
a
(-2.71) (-42.51) a
0.037
0.023
a
(3.70) a
(4.56)
0.167
0.186
a
(14.97) a
(16.15)
-0.119
0.065
a
(2.28) b
(-4.81)

-0.003
(-1.04)
0.000
(-0.02)
0.167
(16.06) a
-0.069
(-3.08) a

-0.145
(-2.81) a
0.244
(3.98) a
0.097
(5.31) a
-0.010
(-0.23)

-0.042
(-1.72) c
0.021
(0.68)
0.116
(3.61) a
0.030
(0.74)

0.069
(1.68) c
-0.132
(-2.73) a
0.075
(2.83) a
-0.027
(-0.53)

-0.045
(-17.65) a
0.039
(14.30) a
-0.017
(-11.73) a
0.000
(-0.03)
0.000
(1.04)
5.79%
19,416
1241 a
n/a

-0.347
(-3.50) a
0.416
(6.18) a
0.420
(6.84) a
0.067
(0.89)
0.103
(6.23) a
n/a
19,416
225 a
121 a

0.006
(0.13)
-0.094
(-2.70) a
-0.025
(-0.78)
0.074
(2.02) b
-0.014
(-1.76) c
n/a
19,416
90 a
24 b

0.301
(3.57) a
-0.343
(-5.68) a
-0.257
(-5.07) a
0.021
(0.38)
-0.081
(-5.66) a
n/a
19,416
117 a
117 a

-0.152
(-29.57) a
2
0.019
(Profitability)
(3.50) a
Size (log of assets)
0.071
(23.88) a
Diversification
0.021
(2.65) a
Tobin’s q
-0.002
(-2.48) b
Adjusted R-square
8.35%
Degrees of freedom
19,416
1781 a
Wald test, H0: all coefs = 0
Hansen J-statistic (11 dof)
n/a

0.030
(7.53) a
-0.027
(-6.44) a
0.032
(13.91) a
0.010
(1.66) c
-0.002
(-3.41) a
11.72%
19,416
2592 a
n/a

Panel A: OLS
Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Tobin’s q
Panel B: GMM
Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Tobin’s q
0.19 0.04 -0.22
0.07 -0.02 -0.31
0.29
-2.52
-0.98

2.39 0.33 -1.87
-0.39 -0.11 -0.53
4.10 -0.07 -5.34
-8.06
7.35
-6.26 0.51 7.41

0.07 -0.41
2.25
0.09 1.14

0.26 -0.02 0.16
-0.47 -0.13 0.28
0.02 0.01
25th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-1.48
0.14 n/a -0.03
-0.08 0.10 n/a

1.60 -0.21 0.86
-1.41 -0.38 0.62
0.14 0.08
5th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-5.02
-0.43 n/a 1.92
-1.34 0.54 n/a

0.15

-0.03 0.18
-0.24 -0.03
0.11 -0.02

0.22 1.14
-1.02 -0.19
0.32 -0.07
0.24

25th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a -0.04 0.08
-0.01 n/a
-0.02
n/a

5th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a -0.11 0.00
-0.10 n/a
-0.11
n/a

0.11

-0.51 0.08 0.63
-0.05
-0.03
0.36 -0.02 -0.45

-0.19 -0.02 0.06
0.23 0.00 -0.27

-0.08 0.02 0.00
-0.05 -0.02 0.12
-0.01 -0.01
50th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-0.46
0.21 n/a -0.28
0.20 0.00 n/a

-0.06 -0.04
0.03 -0.01
-0.01 -0.01

50th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a -0.02 0.10
0.00 n/a
0.00
n/a

0.07

-1.19 0.08 1.53
2.48
-2.36
1.58 -0.11 -1.90

-0.52 -0.08 0.29
0.38 0.01 -0.22

-0.40 0.05 -0.13
0.38 0.09 -0.03
-0.04 -0.03
75th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
0.92
0.28 n/a -0.52
0.44 -0.09 n/a

-0.09 -0.26
0.30 0.02
-0.12 0.00

75th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a 0.01 0.14
0.01 n/a
0.01
n/a

0.76
0.03
-3.25 -0.02 4.27
10.89
-10.11
7.04 -0.55 -8.37

-1.31 -0.33
0.78 0.14

-1.67 0.17 -0.59
1.81 0.47 -0.56
-0.16 -0.10
95th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
6.10
0.95 n/a -2.84
2.36 -0.77 n/a

-0.11 -1.28
0.97 0.22
-0.34 0.04 -0.04

95th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a 0.13 0.26
0.11 n/a
0.15
n/a

Predicted percentage changes in the dependent variables as each regressor varies from the 5th to 95th sample percentile holding all other regressors at their
sample mean levels (statistically insignificant relations are omitted). Panel A uses OLS coefficient estimates. Panel B uses GMM coefficient estimates. Leverage
is total debt divided by total assets (book values). Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard deviation of
operating cash flow divided by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capital-labor ratio and the industry-year
median, normalized by the industry-year range. Intra-quintile change is the mean change in the dependent variable within the firm’s industry-year quintile (ownfirm excluded). Extra-quintile change is the mean change outside the firm’s industry-year quintile. Quintiles are based on the lagged levels of the dependent
variables. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets. Tobin’s q is the market value of equity plus the book value of debt and preferred stock minus deferred taxes,
divided by the book value of assets.

Table VIII
Economic Significance of the Determinants of Financial Leverage, Capital Intensity, and Risk

Table IX
OLS and GMM Regressions with Entry and Exit
All variables except the dummy variables are first-differenced to control for firm fixed effects. The regressions also control for
four-digit SIC industry and year fixed effects. All firm-level variables are instrumented by their second lags in levels and the
current and once-lagged intra- and extra-quintile change variables. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets (book values).
Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard deviation of operating cash flow
divided by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capital-labor ratio and the
industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. Intra-quintile change is the mean change in the dependent variable
within the firm’s industry-year quintile (own-firm excluded). Extra-quintile change is the mean change outside the firm’s
industry-year quintile. Quintiles are based on the lagged levels of the dependent variables. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets.
Diversification is one minus the Herfindahl of output across the firm’s four-digit SIC industries. Tobin’s q is the market value of
equity plus the book value of debt and preferred stock minus deferred taxes, divided by the book value of assets. For GMM, we
use the Newey-West procedure to address heteroscedasticity and the autocorrelation introduced by first-differencing. Asymptotic
t-values are in parentheses. a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge

Ordinary Least Squares
K/L
Risk
Leverage
0.022
0.009
(4.09) a
(2.60) a
0.041
0.000
(4.34) a
(0.03)
0.037
0.003
(2.53) b
(0.23)

General Method of Moments
Leverage
K/L
Risk
-0.017
0.196
(-0.44)
(3.57) a
-0.004
-0.624
(-0.03)
(-5.73) a
0.217
-0.350
(2.35) b
(-7.16) a

-0.013
(-2.66) a
0.033
(3.94) a
0.168
(16.28) a
-0.117
(-4.75) a

-0.153
(-42.53) a
0.024
(3.85) a
0.185
(14.91) a
0.062
(2.18) b

-0.003
(-1.05)
0.001
(0.33)
0.167
(16.10) a
-0.070
(-3.12) a

-0.111
(-2.13) b
0.170
(2.77) a
0.141
(6.55) a
0.013
(0.24)

-0.048
(-2.02) b
0.037
(1.26)
0.101
(3.19) a
0.039
(0.98)

0.036
(0.93)
-0.081
(-1.81) c
0.100
(3.35) a
-0.025
(-0.47)

-0.152
(-29.56) a
0.017
(3.05) a
0.072
(24.04) a
0.021
(2.64) a
-0.002
(-2.28) b

0.030
(7.54) a
-0.027
(-6.31) a
0.031
(13.71) a
0.010
(1.66) c
-0.002
(-3.39) a

-0.045
(-17.52) a
0.039
(14.38) a
-0.018
(-11.89) a
0.000
(-0.03)
0.000
(1.03)

-0.183
(-1.65) c
0.276
(3.84) a
0.389
(5.67) a
0.081
(1.02)
0.081
(4.65) a

-0.017
(-0.36)
-0.076
(-2.17) b
0.003
(0.10)
0.070
(1.90) c
-0.007
(-0.90)

0.220
(2.52) b
-0.268
(-4.36) a
-0.129
(-2.44) b
0.020
(0.38)
-0.052
(-3.66) a

0.007
(2.84) a
Switcher
-0.001
(-0.24)
Exiter
0.024
(2.28) b
0.009
Seller
(2.78) a
Adjusted R-square
8.43%
Degrees of freedom
19,412
Wald test, H0: all coefs = 0
1781 a
Wald test, H0: dummies = 0
21 a
Hansen J-statistic (11 dof)
n/a

0.001
(0.65)
-0.002
(-1.09)
-0.019
(-2.34) b
-0.002
(-0.63)
11.74%
19,412
2582 a
7
n/a

0.002
(1.83) c
-0.006
(-4.25) a
0.006
(1.19)
-0.002
(-1.36)
5.89%
19,412
1238 a
25 a
n/a

0.008
(1.64)
0.004
(0.65)
0.033
(1.70) c
0.021
(2.65) a
n/a
19,412
185 a
9c
114 a

0.004
(2.00) b
-0.003
(-1.36)
-0.020
(-1.74) c
0.001
(0.28)
n/a
19,412
95 a
11 b
24 b

0.009
(2.38) b
-0.002
(-0.49)
0.008
(0.45)
0.003
(0.54)
n/a
19,412
71 a
6
111 a

(Natural hedge)2
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability
(Profitability)2
Size (log of assets)
Diversification
Tobin’s q
Status Indicators
Entrant

Incumbents Only
Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Tobin’s q
Exiters and Sellers Only
Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability
Size (log of assets)
Tobin’s q
-0.53 0.09 0.70
-0.43 0.02 0.27
0.09
-0.30
th
50 Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-1.96
n/a -2.05
0.36 -0.67 n/a
0.35 -0.02 0.07
0.45 -0.66 -2.04
-0.04 -0.54 -1.85
0.27 -0.69 -2.07
0.39
-2.04

-0.39 0.08 0.12
-3.87 0.12 3.69
-1.35
1.57
th
25 Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-1.52
n/a -1.91
0.37 -0.44 n/a

2.26 -2.83 -11.13 0.71 -0.36 -1.46
-2.20 -0.86 -2.67 -0.24 -0.69 -2.15
-1.32 -0.32 -1.42
-2.67 -1.46 -3.15
-1.00
-1.81

-0.41 -0.46 -1.71
-0.64 -0.93 -2.40
0.11
-1.99

-0.55 -0.02 0.34
-0.06 0.02 -0.08

0.64 -0.07 -2.99
-11.57 0.35 11.35
-7.04
8.95
th
5 Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-0.01
n/a -0.88
0.42 0.55 n/a

0.07 -0.05
0.00 -0.14

-0.10
-0.18

2.51 0.49 -2.32
-0.50 -0.10 -0.37

50th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-0.31
n/a -0.10
-0.08 0.01 n/a

25th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-1.50
n/a 0.17
-0.52 0.09 n/a

5th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-5.66
n/a 2.32
-2.47 0.45 n/a

0.38 -0.63 -2.01
1.19 -0.45 -1.73
0.65
-2.09

-0.03 0.24 1.31
1.11 -0.64 -1.92

-0.60 0.10 1.17
3.09 -0.08 -3.23
1.41
-2.01
th
75 Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-2.54
n/a -2.17
0.35 -0.85 n/a

-0.94 -0.11 0.67
0.05 0.03 -0.03

75th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
1.31
n/a -0.36
0.29 -0.05 n/a

1.42
0.23

2.61 -1.19 -2.90
4.28 0.35 -0.60
1.80
-2.28

-1.82 0.15 3.10
2.82 -0.43 -1.34

-0.37 0.02 2.22
14.78 -0.42 -14.86
7.28
-9.63
th
95 Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
-4.75
n/a -3.41
0.28 -2.36 n/a

-1.86 -0.45
0.33 0.16

95th Percentile
Debt K/L Risk
n/a
7.37
n/a -2.92
3.25 -0.60 n/a

Predicted percentage changes in the dependent variables (using GMM coefficient estimates) as each regressor varies from the 5th to 95th sample percentile
holding all other regressors at their sample mean levels (statistically insignificant relations are omitted). The top panel only includes incumbents. The bottom
panel only includes exiters and sellers. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee.
Risk is the standard deviation of operating cash flow divided by sales. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s capitallabor ratio and the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. Intra-quintile change is the mean change in the dependent variable within the
firm’s industry-year quintile (own firm excluded). Extra-quintile change is the mean change outside the firm’s industry-year quintile. Quintiles are based on the
lagged levels of the dependent variables. Profitability is EBIT divided by assets. Tobin’s q is the market value of equity plus the book value of debt and preferred
stock minus deferred taxes, divided by the book value of assets.

Table X
Economic Significance of the Determinants of Financial Leverage, Capital Intensity, and Risk with Entry and Exit

Table XI
OLS and GMM Regressions for Market Leverage
All variables except the dummy variables are first-differenced to control for firm fixed effects. The regressions also control for
four-digit SIC industry and year fixed effects. All firm-level variables are instrumented by their second lags in levels and the
current and once-lagged intra- and extra-quintile change variables. Leverage is total debt divided by total liabilities plus the
market value of equity. Capital / labor is net plant and equipment (in millions of $) per employee. Risk is the standard deviation
of operating cash flow divided by assets. Natural hedge is one minus the absolute value of the difference between the firm’s
capital-labor ratio and the industry-year median, normalized by the industry-year range. Intra-quintile change is the mean change
in the dependent variable within the firm’s industry-year quintile (own firm excluded). Extra-quintile change is the mean change
outside the firm’s industry-year quintile. Quintiles are based on the lagged levels of the dependent variables. Profitability is EBIT
divided by assets. Diversification is one minus the Herfindahl of output across the firm’s four-digit SIC industries. Tobin’s q is
the market value of equity plus the book value of debt and preferred stock minus deferred taxes, divided by the book value of
assets. For GMM, we use the Newey-West procedure to address heteroscedasticity and the autocorrelation introduced by firstdifferencing. Asymptotic t-values in parentheses. a, b, c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels.

Dependent variables:
Leverage
Capital / Labor
Risk
Industry Variables
Natural hedge

Ordinary Least Squares
Leverage
K/L
Risk
0.025
0.010
(4.59) a
(2.98) a
0.042
-0.002
(4.48) a
(-0.53)
0.040
-0.005
(-0.44)
(2.75) a

General Method of Moments
Leverage
K/L
Risk
0.125
0.257
(3.04) a
(4.35) a
0.378
-0.791
(2.82) a
(-7.07) a
0.384
-0.426
(4.05) a
(-9.30) a

-0.003
(-0.53)
0.017
(2.03) b
0.148
(14.93) a
0.036
(1.63)

-0.158
(-43.75) a
0.027
(4.23) a
0.191
(15.52) a
0.074
(2.62) a

-0.001
(-0.54)
0.000
(-0.09)
0.175
(16.85) a
-0.067
(-2.97) a

-0.101
(-1.81) c
0.125
(1.93) c
0.100
(4.73) a
0.170
(3.40) a

-0.056
(-2.08) b
0.045
(1.48)
0.080
(2.68) a
0.039
(1.04)

-0.021
(-0.50)
-0.003
(-0.08)
0.087
(2.96) a
-0.005
(-0.11)

-0.099
(-19.78) a
-0.002
(-0.33)
0.060
(19.70) a
0.009
(1.15)
-0.021
(-22.85) a

0.031
(7.99) a
-0.032
(-7.89) a
0.031
(13.69) a
0.010
(1.65) c
-0.002
(-2.46) b

-0.045
(-18.25) a
0.038
(14.85) a
-0.016
(-11.10) a
0.002
(0.39)
0.001
(1.37)

-0.282
(-2.88) a
0.339
(4.52) a
0.281
(4.53) a
0.037
(0.45)
0.047
(2.95) a

0.065
(1.26)
-0.148
(-4.10) a
-0.003
(-0.13)
0.047
(1.24)
-0.008
(-1.29)

0.255
(3.01) a
-0.305
(-5.09) a
-0.052
(-1.46)
0.042
(0.73)
-0.029
(-2.53) b

0.012
(4.69) a
Switcher
0.004
(1.56)
Exiter
0.024
(2.38) b
Seller
0.015
(4.69) a
Adjusted R-square
8.18%
Degrees of freedom
19,757
Wald test, H0: all coefs = 0
1748 a
Wald test, H0: dummies = 0
51 a
Hansen J-statistic (11 dof)
n/a

0.002
(0.94)
-0.003
(-1.48)
-0.016
(-2.14) b
0.000
(-0.06)
12.36%
19,757
2784 a
8
n/a

0.002
(1.85) c
-0.006
(-4.14) a
0.004
(0.71)
-0.002
(-1.47)
6.05%
19,757
1299 a
23 a
n/a

0.005
(0.98)
0.005
(0.93)
0.029
(1.39)
0.013
(1.60)
n/a
19,757
148 a
4
62 a

0.005
(2.28) b
-0.003
(-1.04)
-0.016
(-1.51)
0.004
(0.81)
n/a
19,757
149 a
11 b
21 b

0.010
(2.63) a
-0.002
(-0.45)
0.002
(0.14)
0.009
(1.49)
n/a
19,757
90 a
9c
103 a

(Natural hedge)2
Intra-quintile change
Extra-quintile change
Control Variables
Profitability
(Profitability)2
Size (log of assets)
Diversification
Tobin’s q
Status Indicators
Entrant

