                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        STOCK MARKET BOOM AND THE PRODUCTIVITY GAINS OF THE 1990S


                                            Urban Jermann
                                           Vincenzo Quadrini


                                          Working Paper 9034
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9034


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Stock Market Boom and the Productivity Gains of the 1990s
Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 9034
July 2002
JEL No. E23, G14, G32, J23



                                             ABSTRACT

        Together with a sense of entering a New Economy, the US experienced in the second half of the
1990s an economic expansion, a stock market boom, a financing boom for new firms and productivity
gains. In this paper, we propose an interpretation of these events within a general equilibrium model with
financial frictions and decreasing returns to scale in production. We show that the mere prospect of high
future productivity growth can generate sizable gains in current productivity, as well as the other above
mentioned events.




Urban Jermann                                                    Vincenzo Quadrini
Finance Department                                               Department of Economics
The Wharton School                                               Stern School of Business, NYU
University of Pennsylvania                                       44 West Fourth Street, 7-85
3620 Locust Walk                                                 New York, NY 10012
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                           and NBER
and NBER                                                         vquadrin@stern.nyu.edu
jermann@wharton.upenn.edu
Introduction
During the second half of the 1990s, the United States experienced the con-
tinuation of one of the longest economic expansions. The distinguishing
characteristics of this period can be summarized as follows.

  1. High growth rates of output, employment, investment and wages.

  2. High growth rates of labor productivity.

  3. A stock market boom.

  4. A financing boom for new and expanding firms.

  5. A sense of moving towards a “New Economy”.

    In this paper, we propose an interpretation of these events in which the
prospect of a New Economy plays a key role in generating the other events.
More specifically, we show that the mere prospect of high future productivity
growth can generate a stock market boom, a financing boom for new firms,
an economic expansion as well as sizable gains in current productivity of la-
bor. There are two main ingredients to our story: financing constraints due
to limited contract enforceability and firm-level diminishing returns to scale.
Financing constraints generate an endogenous size distribution of firms. Di-
minishing returns make aggregate productivity dependent on the size dis-
tribution of firms. In particular, a more concentrated firm-size distribution
results in higher aggregate labor productivity.
    In our model, an initial improvement in the prospects for future pro-
ductivity growth generates the following set of reactions. First, the market
value of firms is driven up by the increase in the expected discounted value
of profits. Because of the higher market value, new firms find their financ-
ing constraints relaxed and are able to operate with a higher initial capital
investment and employment. At the aggregate level, the increase in labor
demand from the new firms pushes up the wage rate and forces existing un-
constrained firms to adjust their production plans to increase the marginal
productivity of labor. Therefore, while newer and smaller firms expand their
employment, older and larger firms contract over time. This generates a more
concentrated economy-wide size distribution of firms. Given the concavity of
the production function, the more concentrated firm-size distribution leads


                                      1
to higher aggregate productivity of labor. This “reallocation” effect is in ad-
dition to the increase in productivity due to capital deepening. We find that
a reasonably calibrated model can generate a cumulative productivity gain
of about 2% over a 5 year period, with 1% attributable to the reallocation
effect and 1% to capital deepening. This productivity gain is driven solely
by the prospects of higher productivity growth and would arise even if the
increase in technological growth would never occur.
    The theoretical framework consists of a general equilibrium model in
which investment projects are carried out by individual entrepreneurs and
financed through an optimal contract with investors. The structure of the
optimal contract is complicated by limited enforceability: the entrepreneur
controls the resources of the firm and can use these resources for his own
private benefit. The limited enforceability of contracts implies that new in-
vestment projects are initially small, but then increase gradually until they
reach the optimal scale. This class of models has shown to be able to ex-
plain several important features of firm growth dynamics. See Albuquerque
& Hopenhayn (1997), Cooley, Marimon, & Quadrini (2000), Monge (2001)
and Quintin (2000).
    To keep our analysis focused, we abstract from other channels emphasized
in the literature through which expectations may have an immediate impact
on current economic activity such as time-to-build, capital adjustment costs,
or consumption smoothing. Also, it should be clear that we do not believe
that the economic expansion experienced by the U.S. economy during the
second half of the 1990s was entirely driven by expectations of future higher
productivity growth. Rather, we see our explanation as complementary to
the actual improvement in firm level technology which, for simplicity, we
omit from the analysis.
    Section 1 reviews the main events experienced by the U.S. economy in
the 1990s. Section 2 contains an overview of how these facts are linked in
our theoretical model and provides the intuition for the main results of the
paper. Section 3 presents the model and Section 4 contains the quantitative
analysis. Section 5 provides additional empirical evidence in support of the
reallocation mechanism described in the paper and Section 6 concludes.




                                      2
1    Facts about the 1990s
In this section we provide some quantitative evidence about the above-
mentioned five characteristics of the US economy during the second half
of the 1990s.

Macroeconomic expansion: The second half of the 1990s features the
continuation of one of the longest economic expansions in recent US history
with an acceleration in the growth rates of output, employment, investment
and wages. Figure 1 presents the growth rates of these four aggregates for
the period 1990-2000.

Productivity growth: A recent paper by Baily (2002) surveys some of the
studies that estimate the sources of productivity growth during the second
half of the 1990s. We summarize the estimates in Table 1, where we have
averaged across three sets of estimates, namely, updated numbers from Oliner
& Sichel (2000), Economic Report of the President (2001) and Jorgenson, Ho,
& Stiroh (2001). These numbers incorporate the downward revision of GDP
made in the summer of 2001.

    Table 1: Decomposition of Growth in Output Per Hour, 1995-2000.

            Average annual growth 1995-2000                2.55
            Average annual growth 1973-1995                1.40


            Acceleration of growth = 1.15%
             Contribution of labor quality                 -0.01
             Contribution of MFP in computer-sector         0.31
             Contribution of capital deepening              0.43
             Contribution of MFP outside computer-sector    0.42

            Source: Baily (2002)


   Output per hour in the nonfarm private business sector has grown at
an annual rate of 2.55% during the period 1995-00 compared to a 1.40%
growth rate during the period 1973–95. Therefore, there has been an accel-
eration of 1.15%. Abstracting from labor quality which counts for a small
decline (-0.01%), the table decomposes this acceleration in three components.

                                      3
The first component is the growth in multifactor productivity (MFP) in the
computer sector. The estimate for this is 0.31%. Capital deepening, which
results from the investment boom especially in computer equipment, counts
for 0.43%. The remaining 0.42% is the structural acceleration in multifactor
productivity outside the computer-producing sector.1 Our analysis will focus
on the last component which accounted for somewhat over 2% of cumulative
growth during the period 1995-00.2

Stock market boom: Equity prices have registered a spectacular increase
during the second half of the 1990. During that period the S&P500 or the
Dow Jones Industrial indexes have more than doubled. The goal of this
paper is to relate this stock market boom to the growth in labor produc-
tivity experienced by the U.S. economy during this period. Figure 2 plots
the productivity growth and the price-earning ratio in the post-war period.
The post-war period can be divided in three sub periods: the “golden age”
of rapid productivity growth between 1950:2 and 1972:2, the “slow down
period” from 1972:2 to 1995:5, and the “revival period” since 1995:4. The
identification and labeling of these three sub-periods are taken from Gordon
(2001). Clearly, there is a strong positive association between productivity
growth and price-earnings ratios.3 Although the causal relationship can go
in both directions, in this paper we will emphasize the channel going from
the asset prices to the productivity of labor.

Financing boom for new firms: Figure 4 illustrates the financing boom
for new firms with the evolution of the Nasdaq composite index and the
   1
     Gordon (2001) further decomposes this last component into cyclical and structural,
arguing that most of the gain is cyclical. Given that such a decomposition depends on ad-
ditional auxiliary assumptions, we do not distinguish here between these two components
although we will distinguish between them in our theoretical framework.
   2
     Several studies (see for example Brynjolfsson & Hitt (2000), Jorgenson & Stiroh (2000),
Oliner & Sichel (2000)), interpret the multifactor productivity outside the computers sector
as the result of the network and externality advantages brought about by information
and communication technologies. At the same time, the increase in investment and the
subsequent capital deepening was driven by the fall in prices of computers. In this paper
we provide a different interpretation of the driving forces underlying the improvement in
multifactor productivity and capital deepening.
   3
     Because the subdivision in the three sub-periods is to some extent arbitrary, we have
also computed the trends of these two series using a low-pass filter. The pattern of these
trends displays a similar picture.


                                             4
amount of venture capital investment. While the association between the
value of firms quoted in Nasdaq and venture capital investment is not sur-
prising, it is worth to be emphasized because it shows the close connection
between the value that the market attributes to investment projects and the
volume of funds injected in those projects. At the beginning of 2000, the
size of the venture capital market has reached dimensions of macroeconomic
significance. Although these funds were only about 1 percent of GDP, in
terms of net private domestic investment they are about 15 percent. More-
over, the funds injected through venture capital are only part of the funds
raised and invested by these firms. Some of these firms, in fact, raise funds
through IPOs. Even if the percentage of venture capital firms that go public
is small (about 10 percent), the funds raised through IPOs are considerable.
The number of IPOs also boomed during the second half of 1990s.

“New Economy”: While more elusive, the sense of moving towards a New
Economy has been manifest in many ways. Shiller (2000) contains a detailed
account of this tendency linked, among other things, to the emergence of the
internet and the ever wider use of computer technology. Fed chairman Mr.
Greenspan has been making the case for an upward shift in trend productivity
growth driven by new equipment and management techniques since 1995.
See, for example, Ip & Schlesinger (2001). The same article also describes
how this view spread across the Federal Open Market Committee: referring
to a speech of Fed member Mr. Meyer, the article reports:

          “‘we can confidently say ... that, since 1995, actual produc-
      tivity growth has increased.’ At the time he suggested that he
      believed the economy could annually grow by overall as much as
      3% without inciting inflation, up from his longtime prior estimate
      of a 2.5% limit. Soon, thereafter, he indicated that perhaps the
      right number was 3.5% to 4%.”

    The goal of this paper is to link these facts within a unified framework and
to provide an explanation for the labor productivity improvement which does
not rely on network and spill over effects following the diffusion of information
and communication technologies.




                                       5
2       Overview of the main results
In this section we describe informally the model’s main mechanisms that
link the events documented above. A detailed analysis of the model will be
conducted in the next section.
    Suppose that there is a fixed number of workers with a constant supply of
labor and a fixed number of firms. All firms run the same decreasing return-
to-scale technology F (L) with the input of labor L as plotted in Figure 4.
Given the concavity of the production function, there is an optimal input
of labor which is determined by the equilibrium wage rate. In the absence
of financial constraints, all firms will employ the same input of labor L.
However, if the employment of labor requires capital, the presence of financial
constraints may limit the ability of the firm to employ L. Assume there is a
fraction of firms that are financially constrained and operate at a sub-optimal
scale, and the remaining fraction includes firms that are not constrained
and operate at the optimal scale. For simplicity let’s assume that half of
the firms are financially constrained and employ L, and the other half are
unconstrained and employ L. This is shown in panel a) of Figure 4



        6                                                    6

F (L)                                  r                0                       r 
                                                                                     
                                                   F (L )                     
                                                                           
                                                   F (L0 )

F (L)



                                           -                                               -
            L                          L                             L0             L
                                                                                      0

            a) Before the price boom                             b) After the price boom


                Figure 4: Reallocation of workers and productivity effect.

    Because the production function is concave, this allocation of labor is
clearly inefficient. By reallocating workers from unconstrained firms to con-
strained firms as in panel b), aggregate production increases. Because the
supply of labor does not change, the productivity of labor also increases.


                                               6
    The main point of the paper is to show that a stock market boom can
generate a reallocation of workers similar to the one described above. The
idea is that, when the value of a new firm increases, the firm is able to get
more initial financing from investors. This, in turn, increases the average
employment of constrained firms, which in the above graph is captured by
the shift to the right of L. The increase in the demand of labor coming
from constrained firms increases the wage rate which in turn reduces the
optimal (unconstrained) input of labor L. This is captured in the graph by
the shift to the left of L. As a consequence of the increase in the size of
constrained firms and the decrease in the size of unconstrained firms, the
aggregate productivity of labor increases. Therefore, an asset price boom
can generate an economic expansion through a productivity improvement.4
    In the above example we have made two special assumptions. The first
assumption is that labor is perfectly complementary to capital. The relax-
ation of this assumption may increase the impact of an asset price boom on
the productivity of labor. This is because higher wages may induce firms to
use more capital per unit of labor (capital deepening). The second assump-
tion was the constancy of the aggregate supply of labor. Although in the
full specification of the model we maintain the assumption that the number
of workers is fixed, working time depends on the wage rate. The relaxation
of this second assumption will weaken the impact of an asset price boom on
the productivity of labor. To see this, consider the extreme case in which
labor is perfectly elastic. In this case the wage is not affected by the asset
price increase and L does not change. However, the size of constrained firm
L will still move to the right. This would imply that the productivity of con-
strained firms declines while the productivity of unconstrained firms remain
unchanged. This may induce a fall, rather than an increase, in the aggregate
productivity of labor.5
    Based on the above considerations, we can summarize below the main
   4
     If we were to compute the Solow residuals using a constant return to scale function,
z·L, applied to aggregate data, the improvement in labor productivity would be interpreted
as an exogenous increase in z, rather than generated endogenously by the reallocation of
resources. In fact, when labor is the only input of production and the technology is constant
return-to-scale, z is the productivity of labor. As we will see later, this interpretation also
applies in the case in which there is a second input of production, that is, capital.
   5
     The productivity of labor does not necessarily decrease. In fact, even though the pro-
ductivity of constrained firms decreases, their employment share increases. Consequently,
the impact on aggregate productivity depends on whether the decrease in the individual
productivity of constrained firms dominates their increase in the share of employment.


                                              7
factors that affect the productivity improvement:

    • Returns to scale: If the degree of concavity in the production function
      is high, the reallocation of labor will have large effects on productivity.
      In the extreme case in which F (L) is linear, the reallocation of labor
      has no effect on productivity beyond capital deepening.

    • Size heterogeneity: If the size of constrained firms is small relative to
      unconstrained firms, the productivity differential is large. This implies
      that the reallocation of labor can generate a large productivity gain.
      The number of constrained firms is obviously also important.

    • Elasticity of labor: If the elasticity of labor is small, the expansion
      of constrained firms generates a large increase in the wage rate which
      in turn induces a large fall in the employment of unconstrained firms.
      Therefore, the productivity improvement will be higher.

   In Section 5 we provide some empirical evidence in support of this real-
location mechanism. Before discussing this empirical evidence, however, we
turn now to the description of the whole general equilibrium model.


3     The model
Agents and preferences: The economy is populated by a continuum of
agents of total mass 1. In each period, a fraction 1 − α of them is replaced
by newborn agents. Therefore, α is the survival probability. A fraction e of
the newborn agents have an investment project and, if they get financing,
they become entrepreneurs. The remaining fraction, 1 − e, become workers.
Agents maximize:
                            ∞ 
                                 α t
                           X                         
                        E0               ct − ϕt (ht )                   (1)
                           t=0 1 + r

where r is the intertemporal discount rate, ct is consumption, ht are working
hours, ϕt (ht ) is the disutility from working. We assume that the disutility
from working is time dependent as explained below.
    Utility flows are discounted by α/(1 + r) as agents survive to the next
period only with probability α. Given the assumption of risk neutrality, r
will be the risk-free interest rate earned on assets deposited in a financial


                                        8
intermediary.6 The function ϕt is strictly convex and satisfies ϕt (0) = 0.
Denoting by wt the wage rate, the supply of labor is determined by the
condition ϕ0t (ht ) = wt α/(1 + r). The wage rate is discounted because wages
are paid in the next period as specified below. For entrepreneurs ht = 0 and
their utility depends only on consumption.

Investment project: An investment project requires an initial fixed in-
vestment κt , which is sunk, and generates revenues according to:

                                   yt = zt · F (kt , lt )θ                             (2)

where yt is the revenue generated at time t given the inputs of capital kt
and labor lt . The variable zt is the same for all firms and we will refer to
this variable as the “aggregate technology level”. The function F is strictly
increasing with respect to each of the two arguments and homogeneous of
degree 1. The parameter θ is smaller than 1, and therefore, the revenue
function displays decreasing returns to scale. Capital depreciates at rate δ.
     With probability 1 − φ the project becomes unproductive. Therefore,
there are two circumstances in which the firm is liquidated: When the en-
trepreneur dies and when the project becomes unproductive. The survival
probability is αφ. To simplify the analysis we assume that the carrier choice
of an agent with entrepreneurial skills is irreversible. Hence, if the firm gets
liquidated, the entrepreneur remains inactive. We allow the liquidation prob-
ability φ to change stochastically to capture the age dependence of the firm
survival. The precise nature of the stochastic process for φ will be specified
in the calibration section.
     The total resources available after production, net of wages, are (1−δ)kt +
zt F (kt , lt )θ − wt lt . Using the optimality condition for the input of labor, we
can express lt as a function of zt , kt and wt , that is, l(zt , kt , wt ). We can then
express the firm’s resources as R(zt , kt , wt ) = (1−δ)kt +zt F (kt , l(zt , kt , wt ))θ −
wt l(zt , kt , wt ).

Financial contract and repudiation: To finance a new project the en-
trepreneur enters into a contractual relationship with one or more investors.
   6
     On each unit of assets deposited in a financial intermediary, agents receive (1 + r)/α
if they survive to the next period and zero otherwise. The financial intermediary acts as
a life-insurance company and the expected return on these deposits is r.



                                             9
The financial contract is not fully enforceable.7 At the end of the period, the
entrepreneur has the ability to divert the firm resources (capital and labor)
to generate a private return according to the function:

                D(zt , kt , wt ) = λ · zt · F (kt , lt (zt , kt , wt ))θ = λ · yt+1        (3)

In this case the firm becomes unproductive and capital fully depreciates. The
fact that the firm becomes unproductive in case of diversion makes the issue
of renegotiation irrelevant (the production capacity is lost). Notice that λ
is allowed to be larger than 1. In fact, even if λ is moderately greater than
1, diversion is still inefficient. This is because to generate a one-time return
from diversion, the ability of the firm to generate profits is permanently lost.
Moreover, in case of diversion capital fully depreciates.
    This specification captures the notion that the default value is closely
related to the size and productivity of the project under control of the en-
trepreneur. Other specifications would be possible, for instance we could have
used λ · k. While the model would have had similar properties, our specifica-
tion is more convenient because all firms will choose the same capital-labor
ratio independently of the production scale. This property simplifies the de-
composition of the productivity gains between capital deepening and labor
reallocation as we will see in the quantitative section.

Aggregate technology level and balanced growth path: The aggre-
gate technology level zt grows over time at rate gz . We assume that the
growth rate can take two values, gzL and gzH , with gzL < gzH . The economy
can switch from one growth regime to the other with some probability pt .
This probability is itself stochastic and the next period value is drawn from
the probability distribution Γ(p0 |p, gz0 ). This distribution depends on the cur-
rent p and the next period growth regime gz0 . The growth rate gz and the
switching probability p—which we denote by x ≡ (gz , p)—are the aggregate
shocks in the model. The stochastic distribution of x (joint distribution of
gz and p) is derived from the distribution function Γ(p0 |p, g 0 ).
    The growth in the aggregate level of technology zt allows the economy
to experience unbounded growth. To insure stationarity around some trend,
we need to make particular assumptions about the disutility from working,
    7
      The paper is related to the literature on optimal contracting with limited enforceability
as in Albuquerque & Hopenhayn (1997), Alvarez & Jermann (2000), Cooley et al. (2000),
Kehoe & Levine (1993), Marcet & Marimon (1992), Monge (2001), Quintin (2000).


                                                10
ϕt (h), and the initial set up investment of a new firm, κt . Define 1 + gt =
             1
(1 + gz,t ) 1−θ where the parameter  is the capital share parameter in the
function F (k, l) = k  l1− . Moreover, define At = tj=1 (1 + gj ). We assume
                                                      Q

that the disutility from working takes the form ϕt (h)= πAt hν . This particular
specification can be justified by interpreting the disutility from working as the
loss in home production where the production technology evolves similarly
to the market technology. Regarding the set up investment of a new firm we
assume that it takes the form κt = At κ. Given these specifications of the
disutility from working and the set up investment, the economy will fluctuate
around the stochastic trend At . Therefore, all the endogenous variables with
unbounded growth will be detrended by the factor At .

Stock market value: Before characterizing the properties of the contract,
let’s define here the market value of a firm. If the firm is not liquidated, it
will pay the dividend R(zt−1 , kt−1 , wt−1 ) − kt , where kt−1 was the capital
invested in the previous period and kt is the capital invested this period. If
the firm is liquidated, there is not capital investment and the dividend is
R(zt−1 , kt−1 , wt−1 ).
    The (non-detrended) market value of the firm, denoted by Pt , is the
discounted value of the firm’s dividends, that is,
                                              
                        ∞  j−1
                 1
                      X    
                            Y      h                            i
           Pt =     Et        βs  R(zj , kj , wj ) − αφt kj+1                  (4)
                1+r    j=t s=t

where βs = αφs /(1 + r). Notice that the capital investment is multiplied by
the survival probability αφs because in case of liquidation next period capital
is zero. After some rearrangement and dividing the whole expression by At ,
this can be expressed as:
                                                  
                      ∞         j−1
                                                                1
                      X         Y                                         
       Pt = kt + Et                  βs (1 + gs+1 ) −kj +
                                                                  R(kj , wj )   (5)
                      j=t       s=t                            1+r

where now all the variables are detrended.
   Notice that, although the detrended payments do not display unbounded
growth, the detrended value of the firm depends on the expected future
growth rates of the economy: if the economy is expected to grow faster,
future payments will also grow at a higher rate. This, in turn, increases the
value of the firm today, as shown in Equation 5.

                                              11
Timing summary: Before starting the analysis of the model, we sum-
marize here its timing. All the shocks are realized at the beginning of the
period. Therefore, agents’ death, firms’ death, next period survival probabil-
ity, level of technology z (for the new investment), and switching probability
become known at the beginning of the period. Firms enter the period with
resources zt−1 F (kt−1 , lt−1 )θ + (1 − δ) kt−1 . These resources are used to pay
for the wages of the workers hired in the previous period and to finance the
new capital investment (if still productive). What is left is paid as dividends.
At this stage the firm also decides the new input of labor. It is at this point
that the entrepreneur decides whether to repudiate the contract and divert
the resources of the firm (capital and labor). Therefore, the choice to default
is made before observing the next period value of z. This timing convention
is convenient for the characterization of the optimal contract. Finally, it is
important to re-emphasize the timing of the level of technology z. Produc-
tion depends on the current z which is known at the moment of choosing the
inputs of capital and labor. Therefore, there is not uncertainty about the
return from current investment. Only the returns from future investments
are uncertain.

3.1    The economy with enforceable contracts
We first characterize allocations when contracts are fully enforceable and the
entrepreneur is unable to divert the firm’s resources. In this case, all firms
will employ the same input of capital k̄ which is given by:
                                         1
                                                                 
                    k̄ = arg max −k +         R(k, w)                (6)
                            k           1+r
In this simple economy the detrended wage is constant because there is a
constant number of firms (entrepreneurs) and the disutility from working
grows at the same rate of the whole economy.
   Using equation (5), the detrended market value of the firm is:
                                                    
                        ∞         j−1
                                                                  1
                        X         Y                                      
         Pt = k̄ + Et                  βs (1 + gs+1 ) −k̄ +
                                                                    R(k̄, w)   (7)
                        j=t       s=t                            1+r
    When a new firm is created, the value Pt is shared between the investor
and the entrepreneur. In the case of competitive financial markets, the in-
vestor will get the cost of creating the new firm, κ + k̄, and the entrepreneur
will get Pt − κ − k̄.

                                               12
    The probability of a regime switch pt affects the value of a firm (because it
affects the probability distribution of future g 0 s), but it is completely neutral
with respect to the real variables of the economy. Therefore, a change in
likelihood of a regime switch does not have any real effect unless this switch
takes place. In contrast, we will see in the next section that when contracts
are not fully enforceable, pt affects not only the value of the firm but also
production decisions and the aggregate productivity of labor.

3.2    The economy with limited enforceability
A contract specifies the payments to the entrepreneur, ct , the payment to the
investor, τt , and the capital investment, kt , for each history realization of the
states. We assume that the payments to the entrepreneur cannot be negative.
Also denote by qt the value of the contract for the entrepreneur and by St
the total surplus. All these variables are detrended by At = tj=1 (1 + gj ).
                                                                     Q

Denote by s the aggregate states of the economy plus the individual survival
probability φ. The contractual problem can be written recursively as follows:
                                            1
                                                                                   
 S(s, q) =       max           −k +            R(k, w(s)) + βE(1 + g 0 )S(s0 , q(s0 )) (8)
              k,c(s ),q(s0 )
                  0                        1+r

              subject to
                                   h                 i
              q = βE(1 + g 0 ) c(s0 ) + q(s0 )                                        (9)
              q ≥ D(k, w(s))                                                         (10)
              c(s0 ) ≥ 0, q(s0 ) ≥ 0                                                 (11)

The function S(s, q) is the end-of-period surplus of the contract, net of the
cost of capital. If we invest k—which is a cost—the discounted gross revenue
paid in the next period is (1/(1 + r))R(k, w(s)). Therefore, the present value
of the firm return is −k+(1/(1+r))R(k, w(s)). The surplus function depends
on the aggregate states plus the firm-specific survival probability φ—which
we have denoted by s—and the endogenous individual state q. Notice that
the discount factor β = αφ/(1+r) is known in the current period but changes
stochastically over time because it depends on φ.
    Condition (9) is the promise-keeping constraint, (10) is the enforceability
constraint (incentive-compatibility) and (11) imposes the non-negativity of


                                                13
the payments to the entrepreneur. The term (1+g 0 ) comes from the detrend-
ing procedure and the prime denotes next period variable. In formulating
the above problem we take as given the optimal policy when the firm is liq-
uidated. This policy consists of setting consumption and continuation utility
equal to zero. This is the optimal policy given that the entrepreneur will
permanently loose the ability to run a firm in future periods.
    Coherently with the formulation of the surplus function, the aggregate
states of the economy are given by the current growth in productivity g,
the switching probability p, and the distribution (measure) of firms over φ
and q. The recursive problem can be solved once we know the distribution
function (law of motion) for the aggregate states and the individual survival
probability, which we denote by s0 ∼ H(s).
    Denote by µ the Lagrange multiplier associated with the promise-keeping
constraint (9) and denote by γ the Lagrange multiplier associated with the
enforceability constraint (10). Conditional on the survival of the firm, the
first order conditions are:
                          1
                            
                             Rk − 1 − γDk = 0                                 (12)
                         1+r

                     µ(s0 ) + γ − µ = 0              for all s0               (13)

                     µ − γ ≥ 0,              (= if c(s0 ) > 0)                (14)
                                 h              i
                     βE(1 + g 0 ) c(s0 ) + q(s0 ) − q = 0                     (15)

                     q − D(k, w(s)) ≥ 0              (= if γ > 0)             (16)


    Condition (14), combined with condition (13), implies that the payment
to the entrepreneur c(s0 ) is zero if the next period Lagrange multiplier µ(s0 )
is greater than 0. This has a simple intuition. Because µ decreases when the
enforceability constraint is binding (see condition (13)), when µ(s0 ) reaches
the value of 0, the enforceability constraint will not be binding in future
periods, that is, γ = 0 for all possible realizations of s0 . In this case the firm
will always employ the optimal input of capital k̄(s) as can be verified in
(12). Therefore, when µ(s0 ) = 0, the firm is unconstrained.

                                        14
    Before reaching the unconstrained status, however, the enforceability con-
straint (10) can be binding in future periods and γ is greater than zero in
some contingencies. This implies that the firm will employ a sub-optimal
input of capital. Moreover, in those periods in which the enforceability con-
straint is binding, condition (16) is satisfied with equality (and zero payments
to the entrepreneur, unless the unconstrained status is reached that period).
Therefore, this condition will determine the growth pattern of the firm. The
following proposition states these properties more formally.

Proposition 3.1 There exists q(s) such that,

 (a) The function S(s, q) is increasing and concave in q ≤ q(s).

 (b) Capital input is the minimum between k = D−1 (q, w(s)) and k̄(s).

 (c) If q ≤ βE(1 + g 0 )q(s0 ), the entrepreneur’s payment c(s0 ) is zero.

 (d) If q > βE(1 + g 0 )q(s0 ), there are multiple solutions to c(s0 ).

Proof 3.1 The recursive problem (8) is a contraction. Therefore, there ex-
ists a unique function S(s, q) that satisfies the Bellman equation. Moreover,
the recursion preserves concavity which guarantees the concavity of the sur-
plus function. The other properties derive directly from the first order condi-
tions (12)-(16).                                                        Q.E.D.

    Therefore, the dynamics of the firm has a simply structure. The promised
value and the input of capital grow on average until the entrepreneur’s value
reaches q(s). At this point the input of capital is always kept at the optimal
level k̄(s) and the total value of the firm, after capital investment, is P (s) =
k̄(s) + S(s, q(s)).

3.2.1   Initial conditions
After characterizing the surplus function, we can now derive the initial condi-
tions of the contract. Assuming competition in financial markets, the initial
contract solves:

                                q 0 (s) = max q                              (17)
                                s.t. S(s, q) − q ≥ κ

                                        15
    This problem maximizes the value of the contract for the entrepreneur, q,
subject to the participation constraint for the investor, S(s, q) − q ≥ κ. The
solution to this problem is unique. In fact, the function S(s, q) is increasing
and concave, and for q ≥ q(s) its slope is zero. Therefore, above some q, the
function S(s, q) − q is strictly decreasing in q. This implies that the solution
is unique and satisfies the zero-profit condition S(s, q) − q = κ.
    The determination of the initial value of q is shown in Figure 5. This figure
plots the value of the contract for the investor, S(s, q) − q, as a function of
q. The initial value of q—and therefore, the initial input of capital—is given
by the point in which the curve crosses the set up investment κ.


         S(s, q) − q
                       6




                  κ           r

                                                            -
                                                        q
                           q 0 (s)




             Figure 5: Initial conditions of the optimal contract.


3.2.2   General equilibrium
We provide here the definition of a recursive general equilibrium. The suf-
ficient set of aggregate states are given by the current growth rate g, the
switching probability p, and the distribution (measure) of firms over φ and
q, denoted by M . We have denoted the aggregate states plus the individual
survival probability by s = (g, p, M, φ).

Definition 3.1 (Recursive equilibrium) A recursive competitive equilib-
rium is defined as a set of functions for (i) consumption c(s) and working
hours h(s) from workers; (ii) contract surplus S(s, q), investment k(s, q),

                                       16
consumption c(s, q)(s0 ) and wealth evolution q(s, q)(s0 ) for entrepreneurs; (iii)
initial condition for a new firm q 0 (s); (iv) wage w(s); (v) aggregate demand
of labor from firms and aggregate supply from workers; (vi) aggregate in-
vestment from firms and aggregate savings from workers and entrepreneurs;
(vii) distribution function (law of motion) s0 ∼ H(s). Such that: (i) the
household’s decisions are optimal; (ii) entrepreneur’s investment, consump-
tion and wealth evolution satisfy the optimality conditions of the financial
contract (conditions (12)-(16)), and the surplus satisfies the Bellman’s equa-
tion (8); (iii) the wage is the equilibrium clearing price in the labor market;
(iv) the capital market clears (investment equals savings); (v) the law of mo-
tion H(s) is consistent with the individual decisions and the stochastic process
for x = (g, p) and φ.



3.2.3   The impact of an asset price increase
We now consider the consequences of an increase in the value of new firms
brought about by an increase in the probability that the economy will be in
the high growth regime. We will state this experiment more precisely in our
quantitative analysis. For the purpose of this section, any exogenous increase
in the value of new firms would have similar consequences.
    Figure 6 plots the value of the contract for the investor (before investing).
As in the previous Figure 5, the initial value of q is at the point in which
the investor’s value crosses the set up investment κ. The second and higher
curve follows from the increase in the value or surplus of the firm. The new
investor’s value intersects κ at a higher level of q. Because higher values of q
are associated with higher values of k (remember that for constrained firms
q = D(k, w)), the price change increases the initial investment of new firms.
This implies that the total stock of capital and employment increase.
    The analysis underlying Figure 6 is based on the assumption that the
wage rate remains constant. Although the supply of capital is elastic (given
the risk neutrality assumption), the supply of labor is not perfectly elastic.
This implies that the increase in the demand of labor induces an increase in
the wage rate which reduces, but only partially, the initial increase in the
stock of capital and in the demand of labor. The change in the firm-size
distribution following such an asset price increase and its consequences for
aggregate labor productivity will be the focus of the quantitative analysis in
the next section.

                                        17
       Contract value 6
        for investor




                  κ        r     r

                                                             -
                                                         q
                                                       S(s2 , q) − q
                                                       S(s1 , q) − q




Figure 6: Impact of an asset price increase on the initial conditions of the
contract.

4     Quantitative analysis
In this section we calibrate the model and study how expectations of persis-
tent higher future growth rates—the New Economy—impact on the macro
performance of the economy.

Calibration of shock process and simulated experiment: Our ob-
jective is to study a sequence of events where after a long period of slow
growth, the economy experiences an increase in the probability of higher fu-
ture growth rates of technology. Assuming that the high growth regime will
not be realized for several periods (although the probability of high growth
persists), we will focus on a pure expectational shock which we interpret as
the prospects of a New Economy.
    The growth rate gz was assumed to take two values, gzL and gzH . We
now assume that the switching probability p also takes two values. The first
value is zero and the second is denoted by p. Given that p takes only two
values, there are four possible shock realizations: x1 = (gzL , 0), x2 = (gzL , p),
x3 = (gzH , 0), x4 = (gzH , p). The stochastic properties of these shocks are
governed by a four-dimension transition probability matrix. To construct this
matrix we make the following assumptions about the distribution Γ(p0 | p, gz0 ).
First, conditional on remaining on the same growth regime, the transition

                                        18
probability matrix for p ∈ {0, p} is:
                                                       "                #
                           0                               1−ρ  ρ
                     Γ(p       | p, gz0   = gz ) =
                                                            ρ  1−ρ
If the economy switches to a different growth regime, the transition proba-
bility matrix is:                            "     #
                          0      0             1 0
                       Γ(p | p, gz 6= gz ) =
                                               1 0
Therefore, we impose that if the economy switches to a new growth regime,
the probability of switching back to the old regime is zero in the first period.
This assumption makes a regime switch more persistent.
   Using the above specifications, the transition probability matrix for the
four states x = (gz , p) (joint distribution of gz and p) is equal to:
                                                                                      
                      (1 − ρ)                     ρ           0               0
             0
                     ρ(1 − p)              (1 − ρ)(1 − p)    p               0
       prob(x |x) = 
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                         0                        0        (1 − ρ)            ρ        
                         p                        0        ρ(1 − p)     (1 − ρ)(1 − p)

    This matrix depends only on two parameters: ρ and p. In our simulation
exercise we assume that ρ ≈ 0 and we consider several values of p. Given
this parameterization, the switching probability p ∈ {0, p} is very persistent
as long as the economy remains in the same growth regime. We interpret the
first state x1 = (gzL , 0) as the state prevailing during the period 1972:2-1995:4
and the second state x2 = (gzL , p) as the state prevailing during the period
1995:4-2000:4.
    Consistent with this interpretation, we take the growth rate in trend
productivity during the period 1972:2-1995:5 to calibrate gzL . As reported in
Table 1, the trend growth in labor productivity during this period was 1.42%
per year. Therefore, we set g L = (gzL )1/(1−θ) = 0.0142. The value of gzH ,
instead, is interpreted as the potential growth rate in the “New Economy”.
According to the citation in Ip & Schlesinger (2001), the New Economy was
believed to grow at rates exceeding the previous rates by as much as 1.5
percent. Accordingly, we set g H = (gzH )1/(1−θ) = 0.0292.
    Our computational exercise consists of simulating the artificial economy
for the following sequence of realized shocks:
                                     L
                                 
                                  (gz , 0),
                                                      for t = −∞ : 0
                      xt =
                                     (gzL , p),
                                 
                                 
                                                       for t = 1 : N

                                                  19
    In words, we assume that the economy has been in the state x1 = (gzL , 0)
for a long period of time. This period has been sufficiently long for the
economy to converge to the long-term equilibrium associated with this state.
Starting from this initial equilibrium, the switching probability increases to
p and the new state becomes x2 = (g L , p). We will then consider a sequence
of realizations of this state and we compute the transition to the new long
term equilibrium associated with x2 . Therefore, after the arrival of p, the
economy remains in the low growth regime for several periods even though in
each period there is a positive probability of transiting to the New Economy.
Although these are very extreme assumptions, they capture the main idea of
the paper, that is, the fact that in the 1990s the likelihood of the New Econ-
omy increased. This shift in expectations was driven by the rapid diffusion
of information and communication technologies. The assumption underlying
the numerical exercise is that the economy did not switch to the new growth
regime. Only the expectations about the new regime have changed. This
assumption allows us to isolate the mechanism described in the paper which
solely relies on expectations and not direct technological improvements.

Calibration of other parameters: The period in the model is one year.
The intertemporal discount rate (equal to the interest rate) is set to r = 0.02
and the survival probability to α = 0.99; we will report on the sensitivity of
the results with respect to r.
    The detrended disutility from working takes the form ϕ(l) = π ·lν and the
supply of labor is governed by the first order condition νπlν−1 = wα/(1 + r).
The elasticity of labor with respect to the wage rate is 1/(ν − 1). Blundell
& MaCurdy (1999) provide an extensive survey of studies that estimate this
elasticity. For men, the estimates range between 0 and 0.2, while for married
women they range between 0 and 1. Based on these numbers, we use a labor
elasticity of 0.5 which implies a value of ν = 3. We will consider other values
in the sensitivity analysis. After fixing ν, the parameter π is chosen so that
one third of available time is spent working.
    The fraction of agents with entrepreneurial skills e determines the ratio
of workers to firms, which affects the level of the equilibrium wage rate.
However, for the quantities we are interested in, this parameter is irrelevant8
    The production function is specified as (k  l1− )θ . Atkeson, Khan, & Oha-
   8
    Whatever the value of e, we can set π so that the working hours satisfy the calibration
target of one third and the labor market is in equilibrium.


                                            20
nian (1996) provide some discussion that justifies a value of θ = 0.85. This
is also the value used by Atkeson & Kehoe (2001). The parameter , then, is
set so that the labor income share is close to 0.6. For unconstrained firms the
labor income share is equal to θ(1−). Because most of the production comes
from unconstrained firms, we use this condition to calibrate . Using the first
order condition for the optimal input of capital (which is satisfied for uncon-
strained firms), the depreciation rate can be expressed as δ = θ/(K/Y ) − r.
With a capital-output ratio of 2.5 and the above parameterization of θ,  and
r, the depreciation rate is δ = 0.08.9
    We assume that the survival probability φ takes two values, φ and φ,
with φ < φ. When firms are born, their initial survival rate is φ. Over
time, however, these firms may become mature with some probability χ and
their survival probability becomes φ forever. This allows us to capture the
dependence of the firm survival on age. We set φ = 0.91 and φ = 0.99.
Together with the one percent probability that the entrepreneur dies, these
numbers imply that new firms face a 10 percent probability of exit while the
exit probability of mature firms is 2 percent. These numbers are broadly
consistent with the U.S. data for the manufacturing and business service
sector as reported by OECD (2001). According to this source, only 50% of
entrant firms are still alive after 7 years which is consistent with the 10%
yearly probability of exit assumed for new firms. After parameterizing φ and
φ, the probability that a firm becomes mature is set such that the average
exit rate is 6 percent. This is in the range of values resulting from several
empirical studies about firms’ turnover as in Evans (1987) and OECD (2001).
    Two other parameters need to be calibrated: the default parameter λ and
the set up investment κ. These two parameters are important in determining
the initial size of new firms: with larger values of these parameters, the initial
size of new firms is smaller. Our calibration target is to have an initial size
of firms which is 25% the average size of incumbent firms. This is somewhat
larger than the value of 15% reported by OECD (2001) for the U.S. business
sector. However, in the data there are other factors that reduce the initial
size of new firms like learning. The parameter λ is especially important to
determine the feasible range of the size distribution of firms. In particular,
for small values of λ, the initial size of new firms can not be very small. We
   9
    Notice that the economy-wide capital-output ratio will not be exactly 2.5 because in
the economy there are also constrained firms. However, because the production share of
constrained firms is small, these numbers will not be very different from the targets.



                                          21
set λ = 3 because this allows us to have an initial size of new firms which is
equal to 25% the size of incumbent firms. After setting λ = 3, we determine
the value of κ such that k0 is 25% the capital of incumbent firms.10 The full
set of parameter values is reported in Table 2.

                             Table 2: Parameter values.

            Growth regimes                               g ∈ {0.0142, 0.0292}
            Transition probability parameter             ρ≈0
            Intertemporal discount rate                  r = 0.02
            Disutility from working ϕ(h) ≡ π · hν        ν=3
                                                         π = 0.002
            Survival probability of agents               α = 0.99
            Survival probability of projects             φ ∈ {0.91, 0.99}
            Probability the firm matures                 χ = 0.021
            Production technology (k  l1− )θ           θ = 0.85
                                                          = 0.294
            Depreciation rate                            δ = 0.08
            Set up investment                            κ = 0.44
            Default parameter                            λ=3




Results: Figures 7 and 8 plot the detrended responses of the economy
after the arrival of a sequence of signals p and the economy remains in the
                                      1
low growth regime g L = (1 + gzL ) 1−θ − 1 = 0.0142. Several values of p̄ are
considered.
    The plots in Figure 7 display the set of events through which the expecta-
tions about the New Economy leads to an improvement in the productivity of
labor. First, the higher value of p increases the value of firms and generates a
stock market boom (plot a). The asset price increase is substantial. We will
comment below how the model can generate this large stock market boom.
After the stock market boom, new firms get higher initial financing and hire
more labor (plot b). With the exception of the first period, this implies that
  10
     Larger values of λ (and smaller values of κ) would reduce the speed of convergence to
the unconstrained status but would not change the main results of the paper. However,
we have some constraints on how large λ could be. If λ is too large, the value of defaulting
will be larger than the value of the firm and the investor would prefer to default.



                                            22
the demand of labor increases and pushes up the wage rate (plot c).11 A
higher wage rate induces unconstrained firms to reduce employment (plot
d). Also, the higher wage rate leads to substitute labor and increases the
intensity of capital (plot e). As a result of these events, the productivity of
labor increases as shown in panel f.
    The productivity improvement derives in part from the reallocation of
labor to younger firms (reallocation effect) and in part from the increase in
capital intensity (capital deepening effect). Given that all firms run the same
production technology z(k  l1− )θ and choose the same capital-labor ratio, the
aggregate productivity of labor can be written as:
                                                θ X
                                       K
                                          
                           LabProd = z                   si Lθ−1
                                                             i                       (18)
                                       L             i

where Li is the labor employed by all firms of type i and si is their share of
aggregate labor.12 Taking logs and first difference we get:
                                                                                 !
                                      K
                                                   
                                                                       si Lθ−1
                                                                   X
       ∆log(LabProd) = ∆logz + θ∆log                    + ∆log            i         (19)
                                      L                            i

The first element on the right-hand-size is constant because the growth rate
of z does not change in our simulation exercise. The second element is the
contribution of capital deepening while the third is the contribution of labor
reallocation.
    The last two contributions in equation (19) are shown in plots g and
h. In the model, within a 5 year period, corresponding to 1995-00, labor
productivity increases by about 2%, with about half of it generated by the
  11
      In the first period the demand of labor decreases because old firms that are still
financially constrained reduce their investment. This investment reaction of constrained
old firms derives from the features of the optimal contract. In this contract investment
is state contingent. When the economy is in an expansionary path and the wage rate
will eventually increase, the optimal size of firms decreases. On the other hand, when
the economy is in a recession path and the wage rate decreases, the optimal size of firms
tends to increase. This implies that the growth incentive for the firm is lower when the
economy is expanding. Anticipating this, the optimal contract recommends higher levels
of investments when the economy is in a recession path and lower levels of investment
when the economy is in an expansionary path. The negative investment effect coming
from existing constrained firms will be overturned later on by the entrance of new firms.
   12
      The fact that the capital-labor ratio depends only on the wage rate is a consequence
of the particular functional form chosen for the default value.


                                           23
reallocation effect and the other half by capital deepening. This corresponds
roughly to about half of the actual productivity increase for that period
discussed in section 1.
    Notice that if we use a constant return-to-scale production function to
evaluate the contribution of the different factors to the productivity change,
the last term of equation (19) would be zero because θ = 1. Consequently, the
reallocation effect would be mistakenly attributed to an exogenous increase
in the growth rate of z or multifactor productivity.
    Figure 8 shows the impact of the higher p on other macroeconomic vari-
ables. Again, with the exception of the first period, capital, employment and
production all get a positive and persistent impulse from the higher switch-
ing probability. It is also interesting to observe that a small value of p can
have significant effects on the economy. This is because the “signal” is highly
persistent in our calibration. Even if there is only 10 percent probability of
switching to the New Economy, this probability is present in every period
and once the economy has switched, it will remain in the high growth regime
with very high probability. The last panel of Figure 8 plots the fraction of
firms that are not financially constrained. As can be seen, this fraction in-
creases with the signal. This is another way to see how the stock market
boom relaxes the tightness of financial constraints.

4.1    More on the reallocation effect
To get a better understanding of our quantitative results, we present here
a simple example covering some of the factors that determine the size of
the reallocation effect. Assume there are only two types of firms: small
constrained firms and large unconstrained firms. A small firm employs l1
units of labor and a large firm employs l2 units of labor. Given the fraction
of small firms, n, the average (per-firm) employment is equal to l = n · l1 +
(1 − n) · l2 . The reallocation term derived above, that is, the last term in
equation (19), can be rewritten as:
                                                !θ                  !θ 
                                              l
                        = ∆loglθ−1 + ∆log n 1
                                                                  l2
               si Lθ−1
            X
   ∆log           i                                    + (1 − n)            (20)
         i=1,2                                 l                   l

   The first term on the right-hand-side is the “level effect”. With larger
average scale, productivity is reduced, given decreasing returns to scale. The
second term on the right-hand-side is the “relative reallocation effect”: the

                                      24
smaller the difference in size between small and large firms, the greater is
the productivity of labor. As we have shown in the previous section, a stock
market boom generates an increase in the average size of firms l (level effect)
which has a negative impact on productivity. It also reallocates labor from
large firms to small firms—that is, it increases l1 /l and decreases l2 /l—which
has a positive impact on productivity.
    In our calibration, we have set θ = 0.85. With this value of θ, if the
average labor supply increases by 6.6%, the average productivity of labor
falls by 1%. In the baseline model the supply of labor increases by about
3%. Therefore, the level effect reduces productivity by about 0.5%. However,
this is more than compensated by the reallocation of labor from large to
small firms. Table 3 shows the increase in productivity due to the relative
reallocation effect (last term in equation 20), from eliminating all financial
frictions. We consider several initial values of n and l1 /l2 and the elimination
of all the financial frictions implies l1 /l = l2 /l = 1. This is the maximal effect
that can be obtained through the relative reallocation mechanism.

Table 3: Relative reallocation effect from eliminating all the financial con-
straints. The value of θ is 0.85.
                                n = 0.3   n = 0.4   n = 0.5   n = 0.6

                   l1
                   l2   = 0.1    3.04      4.15      5.29      6.41

                   l1
                   l2   = 0.2    1.98      2.62      3.21      3.70

                   l1
                   l2   = 0.3    1.31      1.68      2.00      2.21



    As can be seen from the table, for the particular range of initial conditions,
the potential gains in productivity due to the relative reallocation mechanism
are much larger than the losses in productivity induced by the level effect.

4.2    Sensitivity analysis
In this section, we document the sensitivity of our quantitative results to
changes in the interest rates, r, the labor supply elasticity, 1/ (ν − 1), and
the degree of decreasing returns to scale, θ.


                                            25
    As we have seen in the previous section, the model can generate large
stock market booms after small changes in the switching probability p. The
calibration of the interest rate r and the survival probability φ are key for
generating these large asset effects. To see this, consider the steady state
value of a firm once it reaches the unconstrained status:
                                         d
                                   
                                        αφ
                                                          .              (21)
                              1−       1+r
                                                 (1 + g)

Here d denotes the detrended values of dividends which is constant in the
steady state. The term αφ/(1 + r) is the discount factor. This factor is
multiplied by 1 + g because dividends are detrended. As can be seen in
equation (21),
               the value of the firm gets more responsive to changes in g as
             αφ
the term 1+r (1 + g) approaches 1. Because this term depends negatively
on the interest rate, smaller is r and larger is the price sensitivity to g.
    The requirement for a sizable stock market increase partly motivates our
choice of specification for the survival probability φ as taking two values
φ and φ̄. Having a low survival probability for young firms allows us to
generate the empirically observed high turnover rates even if mature firms
have a low exit rate. The high survival rate of mature firms is important to
generate large stock price movements because a large fraction of the market
capitalization comes from these firms.
    Figure 9 plots the stock market value and other variables for different
values of the interest rates. If we reduce the interest rate to 1.5% from our
benchmark value of 2%, then we can generate a stock market boom that is
close to 100 percent. When the interest rate is 3%, instead, the stock market
boom is much smaller. Notice that even if the impact on the stock market
is very sensitive to the interest rate, the impact of the market boom on
productivity does not change much. This is because the stock market boom
obtained in the baseline model already eliminates almost all the financial
restrictions faced by new firms. The economy then, is close to a frictionless
economy and further increases in the stock market have a modest impact on
the real sector of the economy.
    Figure 10 and 11 show sensitivity to changes in the labor supply elasticity
and the curvature of the production function. For the labor supply elasticity,
Figure 10 plots the impulse responses of the stock market and productivity
for different values of the parameter ν. In these impulse responses the value
of the switching probability is p̄ = 0.2. When labor is not very elastic, a

                                         26
positive signal has a larger effect on productivity but a smaller effect on
aggregate employment and production. Figure 11 presents the sensitivity
analysis with respect to the returns to scale parameter θ. In changing θ
we also change λ and κ so that the initial size of new firms is the same
as in the previous calibration before the increase in p. When θ is small,
and thus the production function more concave, the expectation of higher
future growth generates larger productivity gains and larger impacts on the
aggregate economy. These results confirm our discussion in Section 2.


5    Additional empirical evidence
In this final section we provide some more direct empirical evidence in support
of the reallocation mechanism underlying the productivity gains emphasized
in the previous sections. The main feature of this mechanism is that labor
has been reallocated to firms that are financially constrained. To verify this
mechanism we would need cross-sectional panels of firms which unfortunately
are not available for the years under consideration. However, we have some
data on the size distribution of employers (firms). As long as there is some
correlation between the size of employers and the tightness of financial con-
straints, we can use the size of firms as a proxy for the tightness of financial
constraints.
    The County Business Patterns published by the Census Bureau contains
annual data on the number of workers employed by firms of a certain size.
Most of the country’s economic activity is covered, with the exception of self-
employed individuals, employees of private households, railroad employees,
agricultural production employees, and most government employees. Firms
are grouped into 3 size classes: firms with less than 20 employees, firms with
less than 100 employees, and firms with less than 500 employees. Figure 12
reports the percentage of firms and the employment share in each of these
three size classes over the period 1988-99. As can be seen, the number of
firms and the employment share of smaller firms (the left section of the
distribution) have declined during the 1990s. Furthermore, this tendency
seems to accelerate in the second half of the 1990s.
    Figure 12 points out that the left tail of the distribution of firms and
employment in smaller firms has shrunk, which is consistent with our real-
location mechanism. Concerning the right tail of the distribution with the
large firms, we do not have data for each year during the 1990s and or the


                                      27
whole economy. However, we have some concentration indices for the manu-
facturing sector for the years 1992 and 1997. These indices are constructed
using data from the 1992 and the 1997 Economic Census (which is conducted
with a 5 years frequency). Table 4 reports these indices for five classes of
manufacturing firms: the 50 largest; the 51st to 100th largest; the 101st to
150th largest; the 151st to 200th largest; the firms smaller than the 200th
largest. The ranking is based on value added.

Table 4: Share of Industry Statistics for Companies Ranked by Value Added.
                              Total      Production workers   Value   New capital
                            employees   Total Hours Wages     added   expenditures

                                             1992 Economic Census
50 largest                    13.0      12.8     12.9  19.3   23.7        21.8
51st to 100th largest          4.5       4.3     4.4    5.4   8.4         10.8
101st to 150th largest         3.9       4.3      4.4   4.9    5.5         6.8
151st to 200th largest         2.8       3.0      3.0   3.5    4.0         5.7
201st largest and smaller     75.8      75.5     75.3  66.8   58.3        55.0

                                             1997 Economic Census
50 largest                    11.7      10.6     11.1  16.8   24.0        21.3
51st to 100th largest          4.4       4.2     4.4    5.2   7.7         7.3
101st to 150th largest         3.6       3.7      3.7   4.4    5.2         5.3
151st to 200th largest         2.8       2.9      3.0   3.3    3.8         4.1
201st largest and smaller     77.5      78.6     77.7  70.4   59.3        62.0

Source: Concentration Ratios in Manufacturing: 1992 and 1997 Economic Census

    Table 3 shows that the employment share of the 1997 largest firms has
decreased relative to 1992. This tendency can also be observed in terms of
shares of new capital expenditures. Therefore, according to this table the
right tail of the distribution seems to have shrunk in relative terms. This
pattern is consistent with our reallocation mechanism. There is also another
pattern shown by the table which is worth emphasizing. Although the share
of employment of the 50 largest firms has decreased, the share of value added
has not decreased. At the same time, when we look at the class of smaller
firms, the increase in the share of value added is smaller than the increase in
share of employment. This seems to suggest that the labor productivity of
the largest firms has increased relative to the productivity of smaller firms,
which is consistent with our reallocation mechanism. To summarize, while

                                          28
the evidence provided in this section is not a rigorous proof of our reallocation
mechanism, it is fully consistent with our story.


6     Conclusion
This paper develops a general equilibrium model with financial market fric-
tions in which stock market booms can generate an economic expansion with
gains in productivity. The reaction of the economy to a stock market boom
is consistent with the 1990s expansion of the US economy characterized by
higher investment, higher productivity, higher employment and higher pro-
duction. This interpretation of the U.S. expansion may coexist with the
more traditional view which assigns a direct role to technological improve-
ments related to information and communication technologies as in Cooley
& Yorukoglu (2001). However, the recent survey of Baily (2002) points out
that, although information and communication technologies were important
for the productivity revival of the 1990s, other factors must have also played
an important role. This paper provides a complementary explanation for
these productivity gains which is consistent with the view of more recent
studies emphasizing the “business reorganization” induced by greater com-
petition. (See McKinsey Global Institute (2001) and Lewis, Palmade, Re-
gout, & Webb (2002)). Our view is that the driving force of this greater
competition was the asset price boom experienced by the U.S. economy in
the second half of the 1990s. The asset price boom allowed the financing of
more investment for constrained firms and generated a reallocation of labor
from less productive (unconstrained) firms to more productive ones.




                                       29
Appendix: computation of equilibrium
Equations (12)-(16) with the initial condition q + κ = S(s, q) provide the
basic conditions that need to be satisfied by the optimal contract. If we
knew the terms E(1 + g 0 )q(s0 ) and E(1 + g 0 )S(s0 , q 0 ), these conditions would
be sufficient to solve the model. The numerical procedure, then, is based on
the parameterization of these two functions on a grid of values for µ. The
chosen parameterization depends on the particular problem we try to solve.
    In the computation of the transitional equilibrium, we assume that ρ =
0. Therefore, when there is the arrival of the new signal p, the economy
continues to receive this signal with probability 1 as long as the economy
does not switch to the high growth regime. Moreover, if the economy switches
to the high growth regime, the switch will be permanent. The equilibrium
computed under these assumptions is an approximation of the case in which
ρ is not very different from zero as assumed in the calibration section. A more
detailed description of the numerical procedure is available upon request from
the authors.




                                        30
References
Albuquerque, R. & Hopenhayn, H. (1997). Optimal dynamic lending con-
     tracts with imperfect enforceability. Unpublished manuscript, Univer-
     sity of Rochester.

Alvarez, F. & Jermann, U. (2000). Efficiency, equilibrium, and asset pricing
     with risk of default. Econometrica, 68 (4), 775–97.

Atkeson, A. & Kehoe, P. (2001). The transition to a new economy after the
     second industrial revolution. Minneapolis Fed Working Paper # 606.

Atkeson, A., Khan, A., & Ohanian, L. (1996). Are data on industry evolu-
     tion and gross job turnover relevant for macroeconomics?. Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 44 (1), 216–50.

Baily, M. N. (2002). The new economy: post mortem or second wind?.
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (2), 3–22.

Blundell, R. & MaCurdy, T. (1999). Labor supply: a review of alternative
     approaches. In Aschenfelter, O. & Card, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Labor
     Economics, Vol. 3A, chap. 27. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam.

Brynjolfsson, E. & Hitt, L. M. (2000). Beyond computation: information
     technology, organizational transformation and busienss performance.
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (4), 23–48.

Cooley, T. F., Marimon, R., & Quadrini, V. (2000). Aggregate consequences
     of limited contracts enforceability. Unpublished manuscript, New York
     University.

Cooley, T. F. & Yorukoglu, M. (2001). The new economy: some macroe-
     conomic implications of an information age. Unpublished Manuscript,
     New York University and University of Chicago.

council of Economic Advisers (2001). Economic Report of the President.
     United States Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.

Evans, D. S. (1987). Tests of alternative theories of firm growth. Journal of
     Political Economy, 95 (4), 657–74.



                                     31
Gordon, R. J. (2001). Technology and economic performance in the american
     economy. Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Ip, G. & Schlesinger, J. M. (2001). Great expectations. The Wall Street
     Journal, 12/18.
Jorgenson, D. W., Ho, M. S., & Stiroh, K. J. (2001). Projecting produc-
     tivity growth: lessons from the U.S. growth resurgence. Unpublished
     Manuscript.
Jorgenson, D. W. & Stiroh, K. J. (2000). Raising the speed limit: U.S. eco-
     nomic growth in the information age. Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, 31 (1), 125–211.
Kehoe, T. & Levine, D. (1993). Debt constrained asset markets. Review of
    Economic Studies, 60 (4), 865–88.
Lewis, W. W., Palmade, V., Regout, B., & Webb, A. P. (2002). What’s right
     with the U.S. economy. The McKinsey Quarterly, 2002 (1), 31–40.
Marcet, A. & Marimon, R. (1992). Communication, commitment and growth.
     Journal of Economic Theory, 58 (1), 219–249.
McKinsey Global Institute (2001). U.S. productivity growth 1995-2000.
    Washington D.C., October.
Monge, A. (2001). Financial markets, creation and liquidation of firms and
    aggregate dynamics. Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern Univer-
    sity.
OECD (2001). Productivity and firm dynamics: evidence from microdata.
   Economic Outlook, 69 (1), 209–223.
Oliner, S. D. & Sichel, D. E. (2000). The resurgence of growth in the late
     1990s: is information technology the story?. Journal of Economic Per-
     spectives, 14 (4), 3–22.
Quintin, E. (2000). Limited enforcement and the organization of production.
     Unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Shiller, R. J. (2000). Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press,
      Princeton, New Jersey.


                                    32
                                                     Figure 1 - Growth of macroeconomic variables
                          15

                                            GDP
                                            Total employment
                          10                Private fixed investment
                                            Total compensation



                            5
Growth rate




                            0




                           -5




                          -10
                                   1990       1991      1992     1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
                          Source: Economic Report of the President (2002)



                                              Figure 2 - Productivity growth and price-earning ratio

                          4.0                                                                                            35
                                          Average productivity growth
                                          Price-earnings ratio
                          3.5                                                                                            30



                          3.0                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                              Price-earnings ratio
    Productivity growth




                          2.5                                                                                            20



                          2.0                                                                                            15



                          1.5                                                                                            10



                          1.0                                                                                            5

                                               Golden age                             Slow down               Revival
                                                 period                                 period                period
                          0.5                                                                                            0
                                1955 1958 1961 1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000

                      Source: Economic Report of the President (2002)
                                          Figure 3 - Stock market and Venture Capital
                 1.4                                                                                           12
                               Venture capital investment
                               Nasdaq composit index
                 1.2
                                                                                                               10


                  1




                                                                                                                    Stock market index
                                                                                                               8
Percent of GDP




                 0.8

                                                                                                               6

                 0.6

                                                                                                               4
                 0.4


                                                                                                               2
                 0.2



                  0                                                                                            0
                        1990     1991   1992    1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001

                       Source: CRSP database and PricewaterhouseCoopers
Figure 7: Impulse responses after the increase in the switching probability p.
Figure 8: Impulse responses after the increase in the switching probability p.




          Figure 9: Sensitivity analysis for different interest rates.
         Figure 10: Sensitivity analysis for the elasticity of labor.




Figure 11: Sensitivity analysis for the curvature of the production function.
                                        a) Firms with less than 20 employees
             21.0%                                                                                        89.8%


             20.5%                                                                                        89.7%


             20.0%                                                                                        89.6%


             19.5%                                                                                        89.5%


             19.0%                                                                                        89.4%


             18.5%           Employment share                                                             89.3%
                             Percent of firms
             18.0%                                                                                        89.2%
                     1988   1989   1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999


                                       b) Firms with less than 100 employees
             41.0%                                                                                        98.4%


             40.0%
                                                                                                          98.4%
             39.0%


             38.0%                                                                                        98.3%


             37.0%
                                                                                                          98.3%
             36.0%           Employment share
                             Percent of firms
             35.0%                                                                                        98.2%
                     1988   1989   1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999


                                       c) Firms with less than 500 employees
             55.0%                                                                                        99.76%



             54.0%
                                                                                                          99.74%


             53.0%

                                                                                                          99.72%

             52.0%


                                                                                                          99.70%
             51.0%
                             Employment share
                             Percent of firms
             50.0%                                                                                        99.68%
                     1988 1989 1990        1991   1992 1993 1994 1995 1996           1997   1998 1999




Figure 12: Dynamics in the distribution of employment among different size classes of firms.
