                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHEN CAN PARTIAL PUBLIC INSURANCE PRODUCE PARETO IMPROVEMENTS?


                                            Amy Finkelstein


                                          Working Paper 9035
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9035


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Peter Diamond, Bengt Holmström, Ben Olken, and Jim Poterba for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Can Partial Public Insurance Produce Pareto Improvements?
Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9035
July 2002
JEL No. H42, D82



                                             ABSTRACT

        Wilson (1977) provided the striking result that the government can always Pareto dominate a
pooling equilibrium in a private insurance market with adverse selection by providing the pooling policy
as a compulsory public policy and allowing individuals to buy supplementary private insurance. I show
that this Pareto improving role for the government does not derive from its unique capacity to compel
participation in a public insurance program. Rather, it stems from the fact that, with the introduction of
the public policy, individuals may now hold multiple insurance policies: one public and one private. If,
instead, we relax the assumption of the Wilson model that individuals may only hold one private
insurance policy, the private market equilibrium is always second best Pareto efficient and there is no
possibility of Pareto improvement through government intervention. Whether in fact individuals are
restricted to purchasing only one private insurance policy – and hence whether there is scope for Pareto
improvement through government policy in this model – varies in a predictable manner across different
insurance markets.




Amy Finkelstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
afinkels@nber.org
1. Introduction

    A ubiquitous form of government intervention in insurance markets is compulsory public provision of

partial insurance coverage, with the option for individuals to buy supplemental insurance on the private

market. Social Security systems in countries around the world are one such example; many provide partial

annuitization for the elderly, who can supplement this with additional private annuities. Public disability

insurance programs in the U.S. and in Canada, national health insurance programs in Canada and in the

U.K., and the U.S. Medicare system are further examples of partial public insurance programs that permit

private supplementation.

    One economic rationale for such government intervention in insurance markets is the inefficiency of

private insurance markets when there is adverse selection. Wilson (1977) first noted that when the private

market equilibrium with adverse selection is a pooling equilibrium, government intervention that provides

a compulsory partial insurance policy at the population-average actuarially fair price and allows

individuals to purchase supplemental coverage on the private market can always be Pareto improving.

This analysis has been widely cited in support of the welfare-enhancing potential of various partial public

insurance programs such as mandatory Social Security programs with supplementary private annuity

markets (see for example Eckstein et al. 1985 or Eichenbaum and Peled 1987) and compulsory partial

health insurance coverage with supplementary private health insurance markets (see for example

Diamond 1992, Feldman et al. 1998, or Neudeck and Podczeck 1996).

    This paper explores the mechanism behind the government’s ability to create a Pareto improvement

over the private market equilibrium in the Wilson model of adverse selection in insurance markets. I

demonstrate that the Pareto improvement does not stem from the government’s unique capacity to compel

participation in a public insurance program. Rather, the gain from introducing public insurance in the

Wilson model comes from the fact that the model restricts individuals to holding only one private

insurance policy. The introduction of the public program loosens this constraint by introducing the

potential for individuals to hold multiple insurance policies (one public and one private). If, instead, we

relax the single private policy assumption and allow individuals to hold multiple private insurance

policies, the private market equilibrium will always be second best Pareto efficient and the introduction of

                                                                                                               1
a partial public insurance policy can only redistribute along the Pareto frontier from the low risk to the

high risk.

    Section two reviews the intuition behind the Wilson result. Section three establishes the two results of

the paper. First, I show that the power of compulsion is not needed for the government to be able to

Pareto improve on the Wilson equilibrium. Second, I establish that when multiple private policies are

allowed in the Wilson model, the private market equilibrium is always second-best Pareto efficient.

Section four considers the empirical validity of the critical Wilson assumption that consumers may

purchase only a single private insurance policy. I show that the validity of this assumption varies in a

predictable manner across different insurance markets. An implication is that, in the Wilson model, there

is potential for Pareto improvements from public provision of health insurance, such as that provided

through the Medicare program, but not from publicly-provided annuities such as those provided through

defined benefit Social Security programs. Section five concludes.

2. Partial Public Insurance Provision and Pareto Improvements in the Wilson model

    The standard analysis of adverse selection in insurance markets involves competitive insurance

markets and two types of individuals, high risk (H) and low risk (L). These individuals differ only in their

(privately known) accident probabilities, which are denoted by π H and π L respectively, with

0 < π L < π H < 1. It is well-known that in this setting, the private market outcome will not be Pareto

efficient. A useful concept therefore in markets with adverse selection is the set of second-best Pareto

efficient allocations. These allocations maximize a weighted sum of the utilities of the two types, subject

to an aggregate resource constraint and incentive compatibility constraints for both types (Crocker and

Snow 1985). A variety of equilibrium concepts have been proposed for competitive insurance markets

with adverse selection. Crocker and Snow (1985) show that some, such as those of Rothschild and Stiglitz

(1976), Grossman (1979), Riley (1979), and Wilson (1977), do not necessarily produce even second-best

Pareto efficient outcomes, while others, such as that Miyazaki-Spence (Miyazaki (1977), Spence (1978)),

are always second-best Pareto efficient.

    When the private market equilibrium is not second-best Pareto efficient, it is interesting to consider



                                                                                                               2
whether and how the government can Pareto improve on the private market equilibrium. Wilson (1977)

established that when the private market equilibrium is a pooling equilibrium, the government can always

achieve a Pareto improvement.1

    Wilson introduced a new “foresight” equilibrium concept defined as follows:


Definition: A Wilson equilibrium is a set of policies in which:
         i)    consumers choose a single insurance policy to maximize expected utility
         ii)   each policy earns non-negative profits individually
         iii)  there is no other set of policies outside of the equilibrium set which, if offered, would
               earn positive profits in the aggregate and non-negative profits individually, after the
               unprofitable policies in the original set have been withdrawn.2

He showed that the resultant equilibrium will exist, will be unique (except in a knife-edge case), and will

be either a separating or a pooling equilibrium. These two types of equilibria are illustrated in Figure 1.

The vertical and horizontal axes represent income in the states with and without an accident respectively.

The point E represents the individual’s endowment with no insurance. Points on the 45 degree line

represent points of full insurance. Movements to the northeast represent increasing utility. The line HE

(LE) represents the set of policies that earn zero expected profits when high (low) risk individuals buy

them. Line EF (the market odds line) represents the set of policies priced at the population-average

actuarially fair price. In a pooling equilibrium, the amount of insurance is determined by the tangency of

the low risk type’s indifference curve (UL ) with the market odds line EF; it is denoted by γ in the figure; it

provides less than full insurance. In a separating equilibrium, which is identical to that of Rothschild and

Stiglitz (1976), the high risk type pays his own-type actuarially fair marginal price and gets full insurance

(at a H ) while the low risk type pays his own-type actuarially fair marginal price and gets exactly that

amount of insurance that leaves the high risk type indifferent between purchasing his equilibrium policy

and deviating toward purchasing the low risk policy (at a L ); this is less than full insurance. The

equilibrium is a separating one if the low risk type prefers a L to γ and a pooling one if, as drawn, the low


1
  When the equilibrium is separating, there may or may not be room for Pareto improvement. This was first noted by
Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) and discussed in more detail by Crocker and Snow (1985). I concentrate on the
pooling case here because it is where the result is more dramatic – the government can always enact a Pareto
improvement – and where the Wilson model offers something different from other equilibrium concepts.
2
  The italicized portion in the above definition indicates the modification of the equilibrium concept used by
Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976).

                                                                                                                     3
risk type prefers γ to a L .3

    Wilson shows that if the government provides and requires everyone to purchase the private market

pooling equilibrium policy γ and allows supplemental policies to be purchased, the result is a Pareto

improvement over the initial pooling equilibrium γ, This is shown in Figure 2. The government policy

translates the endowment point from E to γ. We can now look for a private market equilibrium for

supplemental policies from this new endowment point. γ. Line γH′ (γL′) represents the set of policies that

earn zero expected profits when high (low) risk individuals buy them starting from the new endowment γ;

line γF represents the set of policies that earn zero expected profits when both types purchase them. It is

straightforward to see that the private market equilibrium cannot be pooling. By definition of the original

pooling equilibrium γ, low risk types do not wish to purchase any additional insurance at the market-odds

actuarially fair price. This ensures the existence of a separating equilibrium with the usual characteristics,

which is shown in the figure by {βH , βL }. The high risk type receives the amount of supplemental

insurance necessary to be fully insured and pays his actuarially fair price for the supplemental insurance;

the low risk type receives the maximal amount of supplemental insurance at his actuarially fair price that

can maintain incentive compatibility for the high risk type. Each of these supplemental policies earns zero

profits as required in equilibrium. Moreover, since at the original pooling equilibrium individuals receive

less than full insurance – and individuals therefore on the margin want to pay their actuarially fair price

for more insurance – both types are strictly better off at the final allocation {βH , βL } than they were at the

original pooling equilibrium γ. This can be seen in the figure by comparing utility of each type at the new

equilibrium –given by UL * and UH * -- to utility at the original equilibrium (UL and UH ).4

3. Why Can’t the Private Market Achieve the Equilibrium Induced by the Public Program?


3
  The equilibrium allocation of the Wilson “foresight” equilibrium is identical to that obtained by the Grossman
(1979) “dissembling” equilibrium.
4
  Eckstein et al (1985) extend the Wilson analysis to describe the entire set of compulsory government insurance
policies at the market-odds price that would produce Pareto improvements over a private market pooling
equilibrium. They show that any compulsory government-provided insurance at the market-odds line with
supplemental private policies will be Pareto improving as long as the government provision is less than or equal to
the amount of insurance in the pooling equilibrium and greater than or equal to the amount that, when the high risk
individuals then purchase supplemental insurance at their actuarially fair price to achieve full insurance, their utility
is equal to the amount in the original pooling equilibrium.

                                                                                                                            4
    As discussed above, this Wilson (1977) result has been widely cited as a rationale for a variety of

partial public insurance programs. But a natural question is why, when there is a private market pooling

equilibrium, the private market does itself not offer the Pareto improving supplemental policie s induced

by the public program. The answer is that the private market does not offer the supplemental policies

because the model restricts individuals to holding at most one private insurance policy.

    I establish two results. First, the power of compulsion is not necessary for the government to achieve

a Pareto improvement over the private market equilibrium. Second, if we modify the Wilson model to

allow individuals to purchase multiple private insurance policies, the private market equilibrium is always

second-best Pareto efficient and there is no scope for Pareto improvements through public policy.

3.1 Pareto improvements with optional partial public insurance

Proposition I: Suppose the government offers an optional public policy that replicates the private market

pooling equilibrium at γ. It also allows individuals to buy private insurance, and continues to offer the

public policy as long as it breaks even. Then the resulting equilibrium is identical to that when the

publicly-provided policy is mandatory.

    Proof: To establish that the final allocation {βH , βL } is still an equilibrium when the government

provides the optional policy γ, consider the two possible types of private market responses. First, the

private market may offer policies available only as a supplement to the government policy. In this case,

we know that the supplementary policies from the new endowment point γ that result in the final

allocation {βH , βL } constitute an equilibrium. Second, the private market may offer an alternative policy

to the combination of government policy γ and the private supplemental policies that result in the final

allocation {βH , βL }. However, there is no profitable alternative policy that the private market can offer

that remains profitable after all unprofitable policies are withdrawn. To see this, we must consider three

possible cases. First, there is no profitable policy from the initial endowment point E that attracts both

types since the low risk types prefer βL to their most preferred point on the market-odds line (γ). Second,

there is no profitable policy from the initial endowment point E that attracts only high risk types since at




                                                                                                               5
βH high risk types receive full insurance and also receive a lump sum subsidy (equal to the distance along

the 45 degree line between EH and EH′).

    Third, consider policies that attract only low risk types: any policy in the shaded region of Figure 2 –

below the fair odds line (EL) for the low risk type, above the low risk indifference curve U*L through βL ,

and below the high risk indifference curve U*H through βL – would attract only the low risk types and earn

non-negative profits. However, if the low risk types purchase a policy in this region rather than the

combination of the government pooling policy γ and the private supplemental policy that gets them to βL ,

the pooling policy γ now attracts only high risk types; γ thus becomes an unprofitable policy and would be

withdrawn by the government. With the pooling policy withdrawn, high risk types prefer any policy in

the shaded region to their supplemental policy that provides the insurance from γ to βH ; as a result, a

policy in the shaded region will attract both types and hence not be profitable.

    To see that high risk types prefer any policy in the shaded region to their supplemental policy alone,

note first that low risk types prefer any outcome in the shaded region to a L (shown in Figure 1), which

denotes their allocation without government intervention should they choose the separating equilibrium. 5

Now consider the outcome x , which represents the policy in the shaded region with the least amount of

insurance; it lies at the intersection of line EL and the indifference curve U*L . Since low risk types strictly

prefer x to a L and the marginal price of the two policies is the same, x must contain more insurance than

a L. The single crossing property insurance that high risk types must therefore also strictly prefer x to a L ,

and since they are indifferent – by construction – between a H and a L , they must strictly prefer x to a H .

High risk types must therefore strictly prefer x to the supplemental policy by itself since this policy has

the same marginal price as a H but pays out less insurance. Moreover, since outcome x represents the

outcome in the shaded area with the least amount of insurance, and since low risk types at least weakly

prefer all outcomes in the shaded area to outcome x, the single crossing property ensures that high risk


5
  This follows by transitivity. By construction, low risk types (weakly) prefer any outcome in the shaded region to
βL. We have already established that they prefer βL to γ , and that they prefer γ to a L , since the original equilibrium
without government intervention is a pooling one. Thus by transitivity they prefer any outcome in the shaded region
to a L .

                                                                                                                       6
types strictly prefer any outcome in the shaded area to outcome x, and thus any outcome in the shared

area to the supplemental policy by itself. Therefore there exists no profitable deviation to attract low risk

types that will not also attract high risk types once the unprofitable pooling policy is withdrawn. ¦

    The preceding argument establishes that even optional government provision of the market

equilibrium pooling policy γ produces a Pareto improvement over the market equilibrium γ. The intuition

for why compulsion is not needed stems from the fact that the pooling policy γ is priced at the population-

average actuarially fair price and therefore neither risk type equates marginal rates of substitution with

marginal rates of transformation. Moreover, the pooling policy provides less than full insurance.

Therefore, both types prefer to buy additional insurance at their own-type actuarially fair price. By

offering the optional pooling policy γ and allowing individuals to buy supplementary private insurance

policies, the government can make both types better off than they are with just the pooling policy γ since

the supplementary private market equilibrium will be a separating one which allows both types to buy

some additional insurance at their actuarially fair price.

    Thus the ability of the government – unlike a private firm – to compel purchase of an insurance

policy is not critical to the government’s ability to achieve a Pareto improvement over a private market

pooling equilibrium. Indeed, the preceding argument has established that were a private firm to offer the

policy γ -- and, like the government, only withdraw it if it became unprofitable – then, if individuals are

allowed to purchase multiple private policies – the resulting equilibrium would be the same as that

obtained through the compulsory public insurance policy γ. However, in the Wilson model, the private

market cannot offer such supplemental policies to the private policy γ because it is assumed (see Wilson

1977, p.170) that individuals may only purchase a single private insurance policy. Therefore what

government provision accomplishes in the Wilson model is the possibility of multiple insurance policies

(one government, and one private) and thus the Pareto improvement over the pooling equilibrium.

    The critical difference between the government and the private market in this model is that private

firms will behave strategically in determining the optimal level of the pooling policy whereas the level of

the government policy was established by assumption. Therefore, the private market equilibrium when


                                                                                                                7
individuals are allowed to buy multiple policies will not necessarily involve the final allocation {βH , βL }

because the equilibrium amount of cross-subsidization of high risk types by low risk types may be

different than the amount provided by the policy γ. I now consider in more detail the nature of the private

market equilibrium when individuals are allowed to buy multiple policies.

3.2 The Wilson equilibrium with multiple private policies

Proposition II: A Wilson equilibrium modified to allow individuals to purchase multiple private policies

will always be second best Pareto efficient.

    Proof: Crocker and Snow (1985) prove that the Miyazaki-Spence equilibrium is always second-best

Pareto efficient. We prove that the Wilson equilibrium with multiple private policies produces the

identical allocation to the Miyazaki-Spence equilibrium.

    The Miyazaki-Spence equilibrium modifies the original single -policy Wilson equilibrium defined

above by relaxing assumption (ii) to allow firms to offer policies that do not individually break even, as

long as the set of policies offered by the firm breaks even in the aggregate. Let λ denote the proportion

of the population that is type H. An insurance contract can be described by the premium ( Pi ) that type i

pays in either state of the world and the amount of the indemnity payment ( qi ) that type i receives in the

event of the accident. We denote by v i the expected utility of type i. Spence (1978) showed that the

Miyazaki-Spence equilibrium is the solution to the following Program I:

                  max v L (PL , q L )
                  s.t.
                  (1) λPH + (1 − λ ) PL = λπ H q H + (1 − λ )π L q L
                  ( 2)v H (PH , qH ) ≥ v H ( PL , q L )
                  (3) v H (PH , q H ) ≥ max v H (π H q, q )
                                         q


    The Miyazaki-Spence equilibrium maximizes the expected utility of low risk types subject to the

constraints that in aggregate the firm breaks even across all its policies (constraint 1), that the high risk

type (weakly) prefer his chosen policy to that chosen by the low risk type (constraint 2), and that the high




                                                                                                                8
risk type is at least as well off as the best he can do purchasing insurance at his actuarially fair marginal

price of π H (constraint 3).

    The original Wilson equilibrium replaces the aggregate break-even constraint (1) above with a per-

policy break-even constraint for the separating or pooling contract as follows:

                  (1a) Pi = π i qi for i ∈ {H , L} (separatin g equilibriu m)
                  or
                  (1b) P = (λπ H + (1 − λ )π L ) * q (pooling equilibriu m)

    Now consider the modification to allow individuals to purchase multiple private policies.6 Since each

policy must individually break even, the set of contracts purchased must consist of combinations of

separating and pooling policies. Without loss of generality, we can simplify the analysis of multiple

policies by considering at most one separating and one pooling policy, since there are no gains to be had

by a firm from subdividing the separating or pooling component of the contract. We can therefore write

the Wilson equilibrium with multiple policies as the solution to the following Program II:

                  max v L (PL , q L )
                  s.t.
                  (1′) Pi = µ (π i qi ) + (1 − µ )(λπ H + (1 − λ )π L ) * q for i ∈ {H , L} and µ ∈ [0,1]
                  ( 2′)v H ( PH , q H ) ≥ v H ( PL , q L )
                  (3′) v H ( PH , q H ) ≥ max v H (π H q, q )
                                          q



    The resource constraint (1′) requires that any allocation be produced by a convex combination of a

separating and a pooling policy. Since the objective function and constraints ( 2′) and (3′) in Program II

are identical to their counterparts in Program I, it remains to show that the resource constraints (1) and

(1′) are equivalent. Comparing them, we can see that constraint (1′) imposes the additional constraint –

beyond that imposed by the aggregate resource constraint (1) – that any cross-subsidization is from the

low risk type to the high risk type. However, this constraint is not binding as it is already imposed by




6
  It is important to note that insurance companies’ ability to charge an increasing marginal price, which is a
necessary condition for maintaining a separating equilibrium, does not require that individuals purchase only one
private policy. An increasing marginal price requires only that insurance companies are able to monitor total
insurance purchased by any customer (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976).

                                                                                                                    9
constraint (3). Thus the allocation in a Wilson equilibrium with multiple policies is identical to that in a

Miyazaki-Spence equilibrium and is therefore second-best Pareto efficient. ¦

    The intuition for why allowing multiple policies guarantees that the Wilson equilibrium is second best

Pareto efficient is clear. The separating equilibrium of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) or Wilson (1977)

may not be second best Pareto efficient because it does not allow for cross-subsidization of high risk

types by low risk types. Such cross-subsidization weakens the incentive compatibility constraint on the

high risk type and thus allows the low risk type to purchase additional insurance. This clearly makes the

high risk type better off and may make the low risk type better off if his marginal utility from additional

insurance exceeds his marginal disutility of the transfer to the high risk type. The Miyazaki-Spence

equilibrium is always second best Pareto efficient because it permits such cross-subsidization. By

allowing for a pooling policy, the single-policy Wilson equilibrium can also achieve cross-subsidization.

However, a pooling equilibrium can never by itself be second best Pareto efficient because neither risk

type equates marginal rates of substitution with marginal rates of transformation, and both types have less

than full insurance.

    Once multiple policies are allowed in the Wilson model, the model can achieve both the optimal

amount of cross-subsidization through the pooling policy as well as the marginal efficiency requirements

through the supplementary separating policies. The Wilson equilibrium with multiple policies will

therefore always involve a separating contract; it may also involve a pooling contract in addition to the

separating contract if some amount of cross-subsidization of the high risk type by the low risk type is

optimal for the low risk type. Unlike the government, which can choose an arbitrary amount of cross-

subsidization, the Wilson equilibrium with multiple policies results in the unique amount of cross-

subsidization that maximizes the utility of the low risk type.

    Since the Wilson equilibrium is second best Pareto efficient when the purchase of multiple private

policies is allowed, and since the government is typically assumed to have no more information than

private firms, publicly provided insurance – indeed any government intervention – becomes purely a

redistributive rather than efficiency-enhancing endeavor. Cle arly the government cannot redistribute

further to the low risk types along the second-best Pareto frontier since the private market equilibrium

                                                                                                               10
achieves the low risk type’s maximum utility along this frontier. But by providing a compulsory policy at

the market-odds price that provides more insurance than the pooling policy in the multiple -policy private

market equilibrium, and allowing the private market to supplement this public policy, the government can

move along the second-best Pareto frontier to redistribute further from the low risk types to the high risk

types; indeed, it can achieve any second-best Pareto efficient allocation in which the high risk type is fully

insured and the low risk type has less than or equal to full insurance.

4. In which insurance markets – and why – is the single policy assumption reasonable?

      The ability of a partial public insurance program to create a Pareto improvement over a pooling

equilibrium therefore depends critically on whether individuals can purchase multiple private insurance

policies. In practice, whether the assumption of single insurance policies – and thus the welfare-enhancing

role of government – is a reasonable one varies across different types of insurance markets.

      Individuals are not covered by multiple private health insurance policies. For example, in the 1996

National Health Interview Survey – which collects information on up to four different health insurance

plans – only about 5 percent of adults with private health insurance report that they are covered by more

than one private health insurance plan. 7 In contrast, individuals tend to hold multiple life insurance

policies and multiple private annuity policies. For example, Cawley and Philipson (1999) report over one-

quarter of elderly individuals with term life insurance policies hold multiple such policies. LIMRA (2000)

reports that, in 1997, over half of individuals who purchased immediate, fixed payment, individual

annuities in that year reported owning other private individual annuities.

      Four features of the private insurance market are likely to influence whether individuals tend to hold

multiple private insurance policies. First, policies that make relatively frequent payments – such as health

insurance or annuities – are likely to benefit from economies of scale in administering the insurance and

therefore are more likely to have individuals only hold one such policy. Life insurance policies, which

will make at most one payment, do not have the same savings on administrative costs from the provision

of only one policy. Second, policies that provide a service in addition to a financial payment are likely to

benefit from non-financial economies of scale; this mitigates against the appeal of holding multiple

7
    Based on author’s calculation.

                                                                                                               11
policies. For example, HMO policies which join the provision of health services with the financial

reimbursement are likely to provide services such as centralization of individual’s medical records and

establishment of doctor-patient relations that would make holding multiple HMO policies unattractive to

the consumer. Third, the insured may be more eager to hold multiple policies when they are written as

long-term contracts – such as life insurance and annuities – rather than as annual contracts such as health

insurance; by holding multiple policies from multiple sources, the insured can diversify the risk in a long-

term contract of any given company becoming insolvent and hence unable to pay a claim many years

hence.

    Fourth –and perhaps most importantly – a restriction to single policies may be more likely when

moral hazard effects of insurance are large. In such circumstances, insurance companies may include co-

payments and deductibles to try to strike the optimal trade-off between reducing risk exposure and

creating perverse incentives; they would not want this to be undone by the purchase of additional

insurance to cover these cost-sharing provisions. Moral hazard effects are likely to be largest for health,

and smallest for annuities. Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) review the empirical literature on the elasticity

of demand for medical care with respect to its price and conclude that moral hazard is a quantitatively

important effect of health insurance. While there is no empirical evidence of moral hazard effects of

annuities, it seems likely that moral hazard is less of an issue in this insurance market than in others.

Philipson and Becker (1998) present a theoretical argument for how the receipt of an annuity may lead

some individuals to devote additional resources to life-extension. In practice, however, in developed

countries like the United Kingdom, Finkelstein and Poterba (2000) suggest that the fraction of their

income that annuitants receive from annuities is too small to make moral hazard effects likely to be

quantitatively important in private annuity markets.

    It is therefore not surprising that health insurance policies – which feature all four factors likely to

limit buyers to one policy – are almost exclusively owned singly whereas life insurance and annuity

policies – which feature at most one factor each – are commonly held in multiples. The theoretical results

suggest that this difference between health insurance and annuity markets has critical implications for the

potential welfare-enhancing role of government-provided partial insurance coverage. In particular, the

                                                                                                               12
results suggest that partial public health insurance programs such as the U.S. Medicare system and the

Canadian and British national health insurance systems may potentially produce Pareto improvements

along the lines suggested by the Wilson (1977) model. In contrast, defined benefit Social Security

systems, which provide partial annuitization around the world, cannot produce Pareto improvements

through alleviation of adverse selection pressures in the Wilson (1977) model. Whether in practice partial

public health insurance programs do achieve this theoretical possibility is an open question and one that I

examine empirically elsewhere (Finkelstein 2002). For a restriction to single policies is necessary but not

sufficient for their to be potential for Pareto improvement through partial public insurance; we have seen,

for example, that there is no scope for Pareto improvements through government intervention in the

Miyazaki-Spence single policy equilibrium.

5. Conclusion

    This paper has explored the mechanism behind the much-cited Wilson (1977) finding that publicly-

provided partial insurance at the population-average fair odds price combined with private supplementary

policies can always Pareto dominate a private market pooling equilibrium in an insurance market with

adverse selection. The government’s capacity for affecting this Pareto improvement stems not from its

unique capacity to compel participation in an insurance program, but merely from its introduction of the

potential for individuals to hold multiple insurance policies. Once individuals are allowed to hold multiple

private insurance policies, the private market equilibrium will always be second-best Pareto efficient and

government intervention therefore cannot be efficiency-enhancing. A comparison across insurance

markets indicates that, in predictable ways, the single -policy assumption – and hence the potential for

Pareto improvement through government intervention in this model – applies in some insurance markets

but not in others.

    An important avenue for further research is to explore the precise reason why individuals purchase

only a single insurance policy, for this may effect the welfare consequences of introducing partial public

insurance programs. For example, if large moral hazard effects are the primary reason for the restriction

to single private health insurance policies, the social welfare gains from introducing a partial public health

insurance program may be mitigated. As noted by Pauly (1974), the introduction of a partial public

                                                                                                               13
insurance program in a model with moral hazard instead of adverse selection can be welfare reducing

because of the moral hazard subsidy of the private residual insurance by the public program.

Incorporating such moral hazard effects into a welfare analysis of the introduction of a partial public

program in the Wilson adverse selection model becomes critical if moral hazard is a primary reason for

the restriction to single policies in this model




                                                                                                          14
References

Cawley, John and Tomas Philipson. 1999. An Empirical Examination of Information
Barriers to Trade in Insurance. American Economic Review 89(4), pp.827-846.

Crocker, Keith and Arthur Snow. 1985. The Efficiency of Competitive Equilibria In Insurance Markets with
Asymmetric Information. Journal of Public Economics, 26, pp.207-219.

Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2000. The Anatomy of Health Insurance. In Handbook of Health
Insurance, Culyer AJ and Newhouse JP (eds.)

Diamond, Peter. 1992. Organizing the Health Insurance Market. Econometrica, (60): 1233-1254.

Eckstein, Zvi, Martin Echeinbaum and Dan Peled. 1985. Uncertain Lifetimes and the Welfare Enhancing
Properties of Annuity Markets and Social Security. Journal of Public Economics, 26, pp.303-326.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Dan Peled. 1987. Capital Accumulation and Annuities in an Adverse Selection
Economy. The Journal of Political Economy, (95): 334-354.

Feldman, Roger, Carlos Escribano and Laura Pellise. 1998. The role of government in health insurance
markets with adverse selection. Health Economics (7): 659-670.

Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2000. Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder Evidence
from the U.K. Annuity Market. NBER Working Paper No. 8045.

Finkelstein, Amy. 2002. The Interaction of Partial Public Insurance Programs and Residual Private Insurance
Markets: Evidence from the U.S. Medicare Program. NBER Working Paper 9031.

Grossman, Hirschel. 1979. Adverse selection, dissembling, and competitive equilibrium. Bell Journal of
Economics, pp. 336-343.

LIMRA. 2000. Immediate Annuity Buyer Study. LIMRA International, Windsor CT.

Miyazaki, Hajime. 1977. The rate race and internal labor markets. Bell Journal of Economics, pp.394-418.

Neudeck, Werner and Konrad Podczeck. 1996. Adverse selection and regulation in health insurance markets.
Journal of Health Economics, (15): 387-408.

Pauly, Mark. 1974. Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral Hazard and
Adverse Selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics (88): 44-62.

Philipson, Tomas and Gary Becker. 1998. Old-Age Longevity and Mortality-Contingent Claims. Journal of
Political Economy. (106): 551-573.

Riley, John. 1979. Informational equilibrium, Econometrica 47, 331-359.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect
Information. Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November), pp.629-649.

Spence, Michael. 1978. Product differentiation and performance in insurance markets. Journal of Public
Economics, (10): 427-447.

Wilson, Charles. 1977. A model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information. Journal of Economic
Theory 16, pp.167-207.
                                                                                                           15
