NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ETHNICITY, LANGUAGE, AND WORKPLACE SEGREGATION:
EVIDENCE FROM A NEW MATCHED EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE DATA SET

Judith Hellerstein
David Neumark

Working Paper 9037
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9037

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002
Hellerstein is Associate Professor of Economics at the University of Maryland, and Neumark is Professor
of Economics at Michigan State University. Both are Research Associates of the NBER. We thank Kimberly
Bayard, Joel Elvery, and Jennifer Foster for outstanding research assistance, and Etienne Wasmer and
members of the University of Maryland Demography of Inequality Initiative for helpful comments. This
research was supported by NSF grant SBR95-10876 and the Russell Sage Foundation, through the NBER.
The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Census Bureau research associates at the
Washington, DC, RDC. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census. This paper has been screened to insure that
no confidential data are revealed. This paper was prepared for the ADRES/CEPR/Université du Maine
Conference “Discrimination and Unequal Outcomes,” Le Mans, France, January 17-20, 2002. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Judith Hellerstein and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Ethnicity, Language, and Workplace Segregation:
Evidence from a New Matched Employer-Employee Data Set
Judith Hellerstein and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 9037
July 2002

ABSTRACT
We describe the construction and assessment of a new matched employer-employee data set (the
Decennial Employer-Employee Dataset, or DEED) that we have undertaken as a part of a broad research
agenda to study segregation in the U.S. labor market. In this paper we examine the role of segregation by
Hispanic ethnicity and language proficiency, contributing new, previously unavailable descriptive
information on segregation along these lines, and evidence on the wage premia or penalties associated
with this segregation. The DEED is much larger and more representative across regional and industry
dimensions than previous matched data sets for the United States, and improvements along both of these
dimensions are essential to isolating the importance of segregation by language and ethnicity in the
workplace.
Our empirical results reveal considerable segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and by English
language proficiency. We find that Hispanic workers, but not white workers, suffer wage penalties from
employment in a workplace with a large share of Hispanic workers, and even more so a large share of
Hispanic workers with poor English language proficiency. In addition, we find that segregation of
Hispanic workers among other Hispanics with similar English language proficiency does not reduce the
penalties associated with poor own language skills.

Judith K. Hellerstein
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hellerst@econ.umd.edu

David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
dneumark@econ.msu.edu

I. Introduction
There is vast evidence of segregation by race, sex, and ethnicity in the U.S. labor market, and much
of this segregation is at the hard-to-observe level of the establishment. For example, in previous work
using a matched employer-employee data set that we constructed to examine the role of segregation in the
labor market, we found that randomly selected black workers worked in establishments that had 22-29%
more blacks than in establishm ents of random ly selected white w orkers, and random ly selected H ispanic
workers worked in establishments that had about 32% more Hispanics than in those of randomly selected
white workers (Bayard, et al., 1999).
Even w hen controlling for ind ividu al characteristics of workers, part of the lower wages paid to
blacks, women, and Hispanics rem ains attributable to segregation by industry, occupation, establish ment,
and job-cell (occupations within establishments). This adverse effect of segregation on wages has often
been interpreted as eviden ce of labor market discrimination, where fem ale and minority workers are
“crowded” into a subset of job s, resulting in lower wages for the workers in these jobs, who are
disproportionately female and minority (Bergmann, 1974).
While segregation per se, and the wage penalties associated with it, may stem from discrimination,
alternative explanations are possible. Theoretically, paralleling Lang’s (1986) model of language
discrimination, productivity may rise when em ployers group like workers together if similarities across
workers in an establishment lower transaction costs between workers. In such a case, there are incentives
to segregate workers by type. And those workers “outside” of the majority may suffer wage penalties
associated with the higher transaction costs that they impose, given that complete segregation is unlikely
and some interaction is required.
As the labor force in the United States becomes increasingly heterogeneous across dimensions of
race, ethnicity, and spoken language (including but not limited to English proficiency), the issue of how
people interact in the labor market is going to become increasingly important. This is especially true at the
establishment level, where workers need to interact with each other, with supervisors, and – in some types
of establishments – with customers. Th ere already is evidence that one’s ability to communicate with

-1-

others is an important determ inant of labor market success. In Bayard, et al. (1999), w e found that workers
who do not speak English well earn significantly less (between 16% and 30% ) than workers who do speak
English well, even controlling for race, ethnicity, and other typical human capital controls; Trejo (1997)
reports a similar result.
In this paper, we describe the construction and assessment of a new matched employer-employee
data set that we have undertaken as a part of a broad research agenda to examine labor market segregation
in the United States.1 We then illustrate the usefulness of these data by examining the role of ethnicity and
language in the labor market. The empirical analysis contributes new, previously unavailable descriptive
information on labor market segregation in the United States, and its role in generating wage premia or
penalties. In addition, although testing theories is not the main focus of this paper, we do provide evidence
on models and hypotheses regarding the role of ethnicity and language in the labor market. Of course,
using a data set that matches workers to establishments is key to determining the importance of segregation
by ethnicity and language in the workplace, because so much of the segregation is at the establishment
level (B ayard, et al., 1999), an d because the most pertinent interactions betw een workers occur within
establishm ents. While w e have constructed and analyzed matched em ployer-employee data sets in the past,
our new matched data set is much larger and more representative across regional and industry dimensions
than p revious m atched data sets for the Un ited States; the improvements along both of these dimensions are
essential to isolating the imp ortance of segregation by language and ethnicity in the workplace.
In order to narrow the definition of ethnicity, and because Hispanics are an important and rapidly
growing segment of the labor force, in the empirical work that we present we focus on comparisons
between white men and H ispanics. 2 We also narrow our definition of language and focus solely on English
language proficiency, although there are clearly other possible definitions. We then examine the extent of
establishment-level segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and by English language proficiency in our data, and
estimate a variety of wage penalties or premiums associated with ethnic and language segregation.

1

Part of our research agenda also focuses on the link between workplace segregation and residential segregation, since
our worker data contains hom e add ress informatio n that can be used to measure residential segreg ation.
2

W e focus on no n-black Hisp anics o nly.

-2-

Our empirical results reveal considerable segregation by Hispanic ethnicity in the U.S. labor
market. W hite m en w ho speak English very well and work with at least one Hispanic co-worker work in
establishments that are on average 12% H ispanic, whereas Hispanics work in establishments that are on
average 47% Hispanic. There is also a trem endous am ount of segregation by English language proficiency.
Of the H ispanic co-workers of white men who speak English very well, less than 2% of them speak English
poorly or not at all; in contrast, of the Hispanic co-workers of Hispanics who do not speak English, 44% of
them speak English poorly or not at all.
Turning to the effects of segregation on wages, we find that H ispanic w orkers, but not w hite
workers, suffer wage pen alties from employment in a workplace with a large share of Hispanic workers,
and even more so a large share of Hispanic workers with poor English language proficiency. In addition,
we find that segregation of Hispanic workers among other Hispanics with similar English language
proficiency does not reduce the penalties associated with poor own language skills.
II. The Construction and Evaluation of the D EED M atched Em ployer-Em ployee Data Set
A. Introduction
Fifteen years ago, data sets matching employees with their employers were virtually non existent.
The importance of these data sets was well understood, however, as highlighted by two authors in the
original Handbook of Labor Economics (Ashenfelter and Layard, 1986). Robert Willis wrote that the study
of wage determination “will hinge crucially on the development of data which links information on the
individual characteristics of workers and their households with data on the firms who employ them” (1986,
p. 589). And Sherwin Rosen wrote, that “on the empirical side ... the greatest potential for further progress
rests in developing more suitable sources of data on the nature of selection and matching between workers
and firms” (1986 , p. 688).
Fortunately, since then matched employer-employee data sets have been created, first outside and
then more recently in the United States. Indeed, by the time the more recent volumes of the Handbook of
Labor Economics were published in 1999 (Ashenfelter and Card, 1999), there was enough research using
these data sets to merit a full chapter (see Abowd and Kramarz, 1999).

-3-

This section of the paper documents the construction and evaluation of a new U.S. matched
employer-employee data set, based on the Decennial C ensus of Population for 1990. The key innovation in
this data set – which we call the DEE D (Decennial Employer-Employee Dataset) – is that we match
workers to establishm ents by using the actual written worker responses to the question asking respond ents
to list the business address of their employer in the week prior to the Census. These responses are matched
to a Census Bureau file containing business address information for all establishments in the United States.
The resulting DEED data set is very large, containing information on 3.2 million workers matched
to nearly one million establishments, which account for 27% of workers in the Decennial Census and 19%
of active establishments in the Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL), an administrative database
containing information for all business establishments operating in the United States in 1990.3 As it stands,
it is the largest national matched employer-employee database covering the United States that contains
detailed demographic information on workers, 4 making it a rich source of information for studying a variety
of questions of interest to labor econom ists, demographers, and others.
B. Previous Matched Data Using the 1990 Decennial Census
In past research, we have used and/or created two more limited matched data sets based on the
1990 Census of Population. The first data set we have used covers manufacturing only, and is called the
Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database (W EC D). The second, which w e created, covers all
industries, and is called the New W orker-Establishment Characteristics Database (NWE CD). The matched
WEC D and NW EC D d ata sets are constructed from two data sources: the 1990 Sam ple E dited Detail File
(SEDF), which contains all individual responses to the 1990 Decennial Census one-in-six Long Form; and
the 1990 SS EL. The W ECD and NW ECD were created by using the detailed industry and location

3

These numbers are based on the data set after basic sample inclusion criteria have been imposed, as described below.

4

Another national matched employer-employee data set currently under construction at the U.S. Census Bureau is the
Longitudina l Employer Ho useho ld Databa se (LE HD ). The LE HD is very rich in that it contains ob servations on all
workers in co vered establishments (not limited to the one-in-six samp le of Census L ong-F orm respo ndents) and is
longitudinal in nature. As of now, however, the LEHD does not contain detailed demographic information on
workers, and only co vers a handful of states (a lthough som e of the largest ones). In addition, it matches workers to
firms rather than establishments, so that workers can only be matched to establishments when the establishment is not
part of a multi-unit firm.

-4-

information for employers available in both the 1990 SEDF and the 1990 SSEL to link workers to their
employers. The W ECD and NW ECD have proven very valuable. After describing the construction of
these data sets, we briefly discuss some of the previous work we have conducted using them.5 How ever,
we also discuss som e important lim itations of the W EC D and NW EC D, and how they are ameliorated in
the DEED.
Households receiving the 1990 Decennial Census Long Form were asked to report the name and
address of the employer in the previous week for each employed member of the household. In addition,
respondents were asked for the name and a brief (one or two word) description of the type of business or
industry of the most recent employer for all members of the household. Based on the responses to these
questions, the Census Bu reau assigned geographic and industry codes to each record in the data and it is
these codes that are available in the 1990 SEDF.
The SS EL is an annually-updated list of all business establishments with one or more employees
operating in the United States. The Census B ureau uses the SS EL as a sam pling fram e for its E conomic
Censuses and Surveys, and continuously updates the information it contains. The SSEL contains the name
and address of each establishment, geographic codes based on its location, its four-digit SIC code, and an
identifier that allows the establishment to be linked to other establishments that are part of the same
enterprise, and other Census Bureau establishment- or firm-level data sets that contain more detailed
employer characteristics.6
Matching workers to employers to create the WEC D an d the N WEC D proceeded in four steps.
First, w e standard ized the geographic and industry codes in the SE DF and the SSEL. Next, w e selected all
establishments that were unique in an industry-location cell. Third, all workers who indicated they worked

5

See Troske (19 98) for a more thorough discussion of the construction and representativeness of the WEC D, and
Bayard, et al. (2000) for an analogous description of the NWECD.
6

In bo th the SE DF and the SSEL the level of detail of the geo graphic codes d epends o n the loc ation o f the employer.
In metropolitan areas, the Census Bureau assigns codes that identify an employer’s state, county, place, tract, and
block. A block is the smallest geographic unit defined b y the Ce nsus in the SEDF and the SSEL. A typica l block is
that segment of a street that lies between two other streets, but could also be a street segment that lies between a street
and a “natural” boundary such as a river or railroad tracks. A tract is a collection of blocks. In non-metropolitan
areas, the Census Bureau defines tracts as “Block Numbering Areas” (BNAs), but for our purposes tracts and BNAs
are equivalent. A Census designated place is a geographic area or township with a population of 2,500 or more.

-5-

in the same industry-location cell as a unique establishment were matched to the establishment. Finally, we
eliminated all matches based on imputed data. The W ECD is also matched to data from the Census of
Manufactures, which provides the ingredients necessary to estimate production functions, but restricts the
data set to manufacturing plants.
Using the W ECD, Hellerstein, et al. (1999) exam ine the relationships between productivity, wages,
and worker characteristics in the manufacturing sector to test for discrimination and other deviations from
equality betw een wages and marginal products. The unique contribution of the m atched data in this
research is to complement commonplace estimates of wage gaps by, e.g., race and sex, with production
function estimates of productivity gaps by race and sex. This permits, for example, a test for sex
discrimination in wages based on whether the wage gap exceeds the productivity gap (which it does). 7
The W ECD is also used in Hellerstein, et al. (2002) to examine the relationship between
profitability and worker characteristics, to test the simple prediction of the neoclassical model of
discrimination (Becker, 1971) that firms that hire more women or blacks are more profitable. This latter
paper also uses longitudinal data on establishments (but not workers) to examine the relationship between
grow th and workforce characteristics, to test whether non -discrim inating employers appear to outcompete
their rivals in product markets, consistent with the view that market competition roots out discrim ination.
The results from this paper indicate that firms that hire more women are indeed more profitable, consistent
with discrimination. But among establishm ents with the largest m arket shares, which presumably operate
in less-competitive product markets, discriminating firms are not “punished” by the market, suggesting that
market competition alone is insufficient to counter discrim ination.
Finally, Bayard, et al. (1999 and forthcoming) use the NWEC D – covering all industries – to
estimate the shares of racial, ethnic, and sex differences in wages that can be attributed to segregation
across occupations, industries, establishments, and establishment-occupation cells. This evidence speaks
directly to the relative im portance of equal pay and equal opportunity (including affirm ative action) in

7

We have also pursued this question in data on manufacturing establishments in Israel, although with data that do not
perm it disaggregatio n amo ng wo rkers in an estab lishment (Hellerstein and N eumark, 1998 and 1 999 ).

-6-

breaking down pay gaps by race, sex, and ethnicity in U.S. labor markets.
Wh ile the WECD and NW ECD have yielded new m ethods of studying labor market discrimination
and other issues, and unique results, there are a few shortcomings of these data sets that are of serious
concern. Because the match is based on the geographic and industry codes, in order to ensure that we link
workers to the correct employers w e only match workers to establishm ents that are unique in an industrylocation cell. This substantially reduces the number of establishments available for m atching. Of the 5.5
million establishments in the 1990 SSEL with positive employment, only 388,787 are unique in an
industry-location cell. Once we m atch to workers, and impose a few other sample restrictions to improve
the accuracy of the data, we end up with a data set including about 900,000 workers in 138,000
establishments, which covers 7% of all workers in the SEDF, and 3% of all establishments in the SSEL. 8
Second, although this is still a very large data set, matching on location and industry codes affects the
representativeness of the resulting matched data. Establishments in the WEC D and NW ECD are larger and
are more likely to be located outside of a metropolitan statistical area (MSA) than the typical establishment
in the SS EL. In addition, relative to workers in the SED F, workers in the matched data are more likely to
be white and married, are slightly older, and have different patterns of education. Finally, because
manufacturing establishments are more likely to be unique to an industry-location cell (consider a factory
compared with a retail clothing outlet in a mall), they are considerably over-represented in the N WEC D.
For focusing on Hispanics and language proficiency, under-representation of small establishments in urban
areas is particularly problem atic, rendering the W EC D an d NWEC D even less ideal.
C. Overview of the DEED
To address these deficiencies, we have developed an alternative method to m atch workers to
employers that does not require establishments and workers to be located in unique indu stry-location cells.
Instead, this method relies on matching the actual employer name and address information provided by
respondents to the Decenn ial Census to name and address information available for employers in the SSEL.
This methodology produces a matched data set that is much larger and more representative than the WECD

8

Again, these num bers are prior to samp le restrictions imposed in the analysis.

-7-

or the NWECD.9
When the N WEC D w as created, the sp ecific name and address files for Long-Form respondents
were unknown and unavailable to researchers. Subsequently, we were able to help track down the name
and address files and to participate in their conversion from an internal Census Bureau input/output
language to a readable format. Because this name and address file had been used solely for internal
processing purposes, it did not have an official name, but was informally known as the “W rite-In” file. We
have retained this moniker for reference purposes.
The Write-In file contains the information written on the questionnaires by Lon g-Form
respond ents, but not actually captu red in the SED F. For example, on the Long F orm workers are asked to
supply the name and address of their employer. In the SEDF, this information is retained as a set of
geographic codes (state, county, place, tract, block), and the employer name and street address is omitted
entirely. The Write-In file, however, contains the geographic codes as well as the employer’s actual
business name and address. B ecause name and address information is also available for virtually all
employers in the SSEL, nearly all of the establishments in the SSEL that are classified as “active” by the
Census Bureau are available for match ing.
We can therefore use employer names and addresses for each worker in the Write-In file to match
the Write-In file to the SSEL. Additionally, because both the Write-In file and the SED F contain identical
sets of u nique individ ual identifiers, we can use these identifiers to link the Write-In file to the SED F. This
procedure potentially yields a much larger matched data set, and one whose representativeness is not
compromised by the need to focus on establishments unique to industry-location cells.
Table 1 summ arizes the type of information available in each file, and graphically displays the way
the files are matched together and the resulting information contained in the DEE D. As noted above, for
virtually all establishments in the United States, the SSEL contains basic establishment-level information
including geography, industry, total em ploym ent, payroll, and an indicator for whether the establishm ent is

9

Because the W EC D contains only manufac turing establishments, while the DEE D and the NW EC D cover all
industries, in the remaining discussion w e focus only on c omp aring the latter two data sets.

-8-

a single-unit enterprise or part of a multi-unit firm. The SE DF contains the full set of responses provided
by all Long-Form respondents. Among the individual-level information contained in the Long Form are
standard basic dem ographic characteristics (e.g., gender, age, race/ethnicity, education), earnings, hours
worked, industry, occupation, language proficiency, and immigrant status and cohort. In addition, the
SED F contains detailed geographic information about an individual’s residence and workplace. Because
the DEE D links the SSEL and the SEDF together, we can assemble characteristics of the workforce of an
establishm ent. T he opportunity to compare and contrast the earnings and characteristics of workers b oth
within and across employers is one of the most useful and unique features of matched employer-employee
data sets in general, and the D EED in particular.
Before we can begin to link the three files together, we must select valid observations from each
file and organize them to facilitate matching. For workers, this is easy. We first match the Write-In files
and the SED F together based on the set of unique individual identifiers the two files have in comm on. As a
practical matter, this is done on a state-by-state basis because the large SEDF and W rite-In files are each
comprised of 51 sub-files – one for each state and the District of Columbia.
We then select the records for all individuals who indicated that they worked, and who included
any information about the identity of their employers. That is, even if the workers provide only an
employer name and city, we still attempt to match the worker. Although we would increase the percentage
of workers matched if we imp osed stricter criteria on the individuals to be matched (e.g., requiring workers
to include all address elements to be eligible for matching), we nonetheless attempt to match all possible
workers, but impose strict criteria (described below) to make sure that workers who provide sparse
information about the locations of their workplaces are matched correctly. Once we link the SEDF and
Write-In files together and retain “matchable” observations, we output a new series of 51 state-specific files
based on the location of each worker’s employer. These 51 files contain the records that we attempt to
match to the SSEL.
The selection of valid establishment observations from the SSEL is not as straightforward as the
selection of worker records. The SSEL is the sampling frame for all establishment survey programs of the

-9-

Census Bureau, and covers all businesses ex cept those in private households and some government entities.
Businesses are considered legal or administrative entities assigned an Em ployer Identification Number
(EIN) by the Internal Revenue Service; a single business may have many establishments. Not all industries
in the SSEL fall under the purview of Census Bureau surveys – those that do not are called “out-of-scope.”
Ou t-of-scop e industries inclu de m any agricultural industries, urban transit, the U.S. Postal Service, private
households, schools and universities, labor unions, religious and membership organizations, and
government/public administration. The Census Bureau does not validate the quality of SSEL data for
businesses in out-of-scope industries; for example, for some local governm ents the SSEL may contain only
a single, consolidated observation that is intended to cover several establishments, while for others the
coverage is more complete. We therefore eliminate all out-of-scope establishments, accounting for a 5.6%
reduction in the total number of SSEL records. We also exclude establishments that are located outside of
the United States, that are associated with an administrative entity, have zero or missing payroll, or have
internal processing flags that indicate the record to be invalid.10 The SS EL is maintained in two separate
files: one for single-unit enterprises; and one for establishm ents that are part of multi-unit firms. W e
perform the relevant restrictions on each file, and when necessary rename relevant variables to maintain
consistency across the two files. Finally, we comb ine the two files.
D. Matching Workers and Establishm ents
Once we have selected valid worker and establishment observations, we can begin to match worker
records to their establishment counterparts. To match workers and establishments based on the Write-In
file, we use MatchWare – a specialized record linkage program. M atchWare is comprised of two parts: a
nam e and address standard ization mechanism (AutoS tan); and a matching system (AutoM atch). This
software has been used previously to link various C ensus Bureau data sets (Foster, et al., 1998).
Our method to link records using MatchW are involves two basic steps. The first step is to use

10

An additional issue w as that there are occa sionally multiple records for a given establishment. Often, these duplicate
records occur because an establishment changed ownership during the year, so there is one SSEL record associated
with each own er. Because we want to m atch a w orker to only one establishm ent record, when w e observe duplicate
establishment records we select the record that is considered “active.”

-10-

AutoStan to standardize em ployer names and addresses across the Write-In file and the SSEL.
Standardization of addresses in the establishment and worker files helps to eliminate differences in how
data are reported. For example, a worker may indicate that she works on “125 North M ain Street,” w hile
her employer reports “125 No. M ain Str.” The standardization software considers a wide variety of
different w ays that common address and business terms can be written, and converts each to a single
standard form .
On ce the softw are standardizes the business names and addresses, each item is parsed into
components. To see how this works, consider the case just mentioned above. The software will first
standardize both the worker- and employer-provided addresses to something like ‘125 N M ain St.’ Then
AutoStan will dissect the standardized addresses and create new variables from the pieces. For example,
the standardization software produces separate variables for the House N umber (125), directional indicator
(N) , street name (Main), and street type (St). 11 The value of parsing the addresses into m ultiple pieces is
that we can match on various comb inations of these com ponents.
We supplemented the AutoStan software by creating an acronym for each company name, and
added this variable to the list of matching components. We noticed that workers often included only the
initials of the company for which they work (e.g., ‘A BC Corp’), while the business is more likely to
include the official corporate nam e (e.g., ‘Albert, Bob, and Charlie Corporation’).
The second step of the matching process is to select and implement the matching specifications.
The AutoMatch software uses a probabilistic matching algorithm that accounts for missing information,
misspellings, and even inaccurate information. This software also permits users to control which matching
variables to use, how heavily to weight each matching variable, and how similar two addresses must appear
in order to be considered a match. AutoMatch is designed to compare match criteria in a succession of
‘passes’ through the data. Each pass is comprised of ‘Block’ and ‘Match’ statements. The Block
statements list the variables that must match exactly in that pass in order for a record pair to be linked. In

11

This example is provided for illustrative purposes only and does not demonstrate the full range of variables generated
by the matching software. To learn more about the full range of possibilities, see the MatchWare documentation
(MatchW are Technologies, Inc., 1997).

-11-

each pass, a worker record from the Write-In file is a candidate for linkage only if the Block variables agree
completely with the set of designated Block variables on analogous establishm ent record s in the SSEL.
The M atch statements contain a set of additional variables from each record to be compared. These
variables need not agree completely for records to be linked, but are assigned weights based on their value
and reliability.
For example, we might assign ‘employer name’ and ‘city name’ as Block variables, and assign
‘street nam e’ and ‘house number’ as M atch variab les. In this case, A utoM atch com pares a w orker record
only to those establishment records with the same employer name and city name. All employer records
meeting these criteria are then weighted by whether and how closely they agree with the worker record on
the street name and house number Match specifications. The algorithm applies greater weights to items
that appear infrequently. So, for example, if there are several establishments on Main St. in a given town,
but only one or two on M ississippi St., then the weight for ‘street name’ for someone who works on
Mississippi St. will be greater than the ‘street name’ weight for a comparable Main St. worker. The
employer record with the highest weight will be linked to the worker record conditional on the weight
being above some chosen minimum . Worker records that cannot be matched to employer records based on
the Block and Match criteria are considered residuals and we attempt to match these records on subsequent
passes using different criteria.
It is clear that different B lock and M atch specifications m ay produce different sets of matches.
Matching criteria should be broad enough to cover as many potential matches as possible, but narrow
enough to ensure that only high probability matches are linked. Because the AutoM atch algorithm is not
exact there is always a range of quality of matches, and we are therefore cautious in how we accept linked
record pairs. Our general strategy was to impose the most stringent criteria in the earliest passes, and to
loosen the criteria in subsequent passes. We did substantial experimentation with different matching
algorithms, and visually inspected thousands of matches as a guide to help determ ine cutoff w eigh ts. In
total, we ran 16 passes. As displayed in Appendix Table A1, we obtained most of our matches in the
earliest passes.

-12-

E. Fine-Tuning the Matching
In order to assess the quality of the first version of our national matched data set, we embarked on a
project to manually inspect and evaluate the quality of a large num ber of random ly selected matches. W e
first selected random samples of 1,000 worker observations from each of the five most populous states
(CA, NY, TX , PA, IL) plus three other states (FL, MD, CO ), which were chosen either because they
provided ethnic and geographic diversity or because researchers had familiarity with the labor markets and
geograph y of those states. We also chose from these eight states a random sample of 300 establishments
and their 8,088 corresponding matched worker observations. In total, then, we manually checked 16,088
employer-employee matches, of which 15,009 were matches to in-scope establishments. 12
For each observation selected, we retained identifying information from both the SED F (Decennial
Census) and the SSEL, such as employer name and address, and industry and zip code, along with the
round and pass numbers in which the match had been made by Autom atch. Two researchers independently
ranked the quality of each of the matches by comparing information from the SEDF and the SSEL and
assigning a numerical score to the match on a scale of one to five as follows: 1=definitely a correct match;
2=probably a correct match; 3=not sure; 4=probably not a correct match; and 5=definitely not a correct
match. To give a sense of what the matched addresses look like and how they were scored by handcheckers, in Appendix Table A2 we present hypothetical examples of matched addresses from the SEDF
and SSE L and their hand-checked scores. These closely resemble randomly selected hand-checked
matches from the actual data; due to confidentiality restrictions, we cannot provide actual examples. The
examples in Appendix Table A2 should make it clear that scores of 1 and 2 were given by the handcheckers for only high-quality matches, so that the matching criteria we set in A utom atch worked to
minimize type-two errors.

12

As we were constructing the DEED, a working group at the Census Bureau was revising the list of out-of-scope
industries. We obtained the updated list of the Census Bureau’s out-of-scope industries after matching, and deleted
matches that were in industries new to this updated list. Interestingly, we discovered that two industries (colleges and
universities, and religious organizations) that we had initially included as in-scope and that are actually out-of-scope
had match rates that we considered to be “bad” as defined below. We only report results for the hand-checked
observatio ns that were in-sco pe.

-13-

There are a number of ways to evaluate the quality of our matching process given the results of the
hand-checking. First, in Table 2, we show a 2-way frequency table of the hand-checked scores for this
version of the data set. This table illustrates that our matching procedure generally worked well. Over
66% of the hand-checked observations received scores of 1 from both hand-checkers, and over 88% of the
observations received scores no lower than 2 from both researchers. 13 Only 0.62% of matches received
scores of five from both hand-checkers.
In order to refine our match, we examined the hand-checked observations more carefully. We
coded each observation as an acceptable or not acceptable match, where an acceptable match was
conservatively defined to be one that received a score of 1 or 2 from both researchers. We then examined
the distribution of acceptable matches over various dimensions of the data and in multiple ways. Table 3
contains the results of linear probability regressions for the probability that a hand-checked observation was
deemed to be an unacceptable match against a series of demographic variables as well as a few other
variables that may help determine whether the match is good or bad. The demographic variables include a
worker’s age, sex, race/ethnicity, edu cation, full-time status, and English speaking ability. The geographic
variables include state indicators, dumm y variables for whether or not the location of the worker’s
employer is in an MSA, whether or not the block or tract code is allocated (these codes are allocated by the
Census Bureau when there is not enough information to assign them with a great degree of certainty), and
interactions between the block and tract allocation variables and the MSA indicator. We also include
industry dummy variables, and in some specifications occupation dummy variables.14
The results of the regressions in Table 3 indicate that only a few variables or sets of variables are
quantitatively and statistically significantly related to the probability of a bad match. Perhaps most
noticeable are the differences by industry. For example, in colum n (5), the probability of a bad match is
0.06 lower in manufacturing than in services (the omitted industry, where the average probability of a bad

13

The hand-chec king was do ne by five different researchers who were random ly assigned to matche s.

14

W e also experimented with including establishment size dummy variables in the regressions. Match quality does
vary system atically by establishm ent size, with large establishm ents hav ing fewer poor matches.

-14-

match is 0.12).15 Aside from differences by industry in the probability of a bad match, blacks are 0.05-0.07
more likely to be poorly matched than whites, and those with advanced degrees are also more likely than
others to be poorly matched.
The characterization of match quality as varying systematically by industry was also the consensus
of the researchers who had done the hand-checking, where industry differences w ere noted even m ore
dramatically at a level of industry finer than the two-digit controls included in the regressions in Table 3.
Figure 1 shows a histogram of the distribution of error rates across industries (where industry is defined by
the 3-digit classification in the SEDF ) in the sam ple of hand-checked observations. Recall that workers are
determined to be matched in error if at least one of two scorers assigns a score of 3, 4, or 5 to the workerestablishment match. We tallied up the percentage of workers in each industry who appeared to be
matched in error and weighted the industries by their overall employment share. The upper histogram in
Figure 1 shows that more than 55% of all industries (employment-weighted) have an error rate of 0.10 or
less.16 It is clear from the distribution shown on the histogram that there are very few industries where the
error rates are greater than 0.25. It is also worth noting that our definition of “error” is quite conservative,
and that a match is deemed to be in error if even one of the individuals rating the match was “not sure”
about its quality. In order to better observe the distribution of error rates across industries in the left-hand
tail, the lower histogram in Figure 1 examines the distribution of error rates for those industries with an
error rate of less than 0.20.
Given the information that match quality was so strongly associated with industry, we embarked
upon a plan to refine our matching proced ure by developing criteria to reduce errors by indu stry. We
identified those industries that (1) had an estimated error (bad match) rate of 0.10 or more, and (2)
represented at least 1% of emp loyment in the entire matched national data set. The 0.10 rate was chosen
because there does seem to be a reasonable drop in the frequency of bad matches at around that point in the

15

The samp le size is a bit lower than in the frequency table (Table 2) because these regressions exclude 5 peop le in the
military and use the worst two of the four hand-checked scores for observations that were selected both in the worker
sample and in the establishment sample.
16

These histograms could be based on either worker-reported or establishment-reported industry. The qualitative
conclusions were very similar; here we sho w the former.

-15-

distribution. Because both the worker and the establishment are assigned industry codes, and because we
manually checked two separate files (one worker- and one establishment-based) of randomly selected
matches, there are four possible tabulations for each industry. W e considered an industry to be prob lematic
if it met the two criteria in any of the four tabulations. After additional insp ection of the prob lematic
industries, we then imposed correction procedures (discussed below) that included deletion of observations
from the m atched data set if certain criteria w ere met.
Table 4 lists the industries that in any one of the four tabulations had an estimated error rate of at
least 0.10 and also comprised at least 1% of employment in the first version of the matched data set. The
table shows the case with the highest proportion of “unacceptable” matches of the four possible tabulations
for each industry. Table 4 also indicates how many of the tabulations identified the industry as
problematic. There were 14 industries that met both criteria for identification as problematic.
For each of these industries, we re-examined the data to determ ine what systematic reasons, if any,
led the quality of the matches to be low, and to find a remedy to the problems. For seven of the 14
industries, we decided to restrict good matches to be those for which the industry code in the SEDF
matched the industry code in the SSEL. This eliminated bad matches such as the following hypothetical
example:
SED F Business Address:
General Hospital
1 Medical Drive
Anytown, USA
Industry: 831 (hospitals)

SSEL Bu siness Address:
Private Cafeteria of General Hospital
1 Medical Drive
Anytown, USA
Industry: 641 (eating and drinking places)

matched to

In this example, hospital employees in the SE DF and the business name of the hospital’s cafeteria
in the SSEL refer to the hospital by a common name, while – in another entry on the SSEL with an industry
code of 831 – the actual hospital uses the hospital’s legal name and perhaps also the address of the parent
hospital chain headquarters, rather than the physical location of the hospital in Anytown. Therefore, the
closest match to the hospital workers in the SE DF (and note that many of the parts of the business address
do match) is the privately-owned cafeteria located on the grounds of the hospital. This is clearly a bad
match, and selecting only those observations where the SED F and SSEL industries match exactly

-16-

eliminates this problem. It should be noted that we did not impose on the entire data set the restriction that
SSEL and SEDF industries match exactly because industry can be miscoded on both the worker and
establishm ent files (see Bayard, 2001).
For five other industries we restricted good matches to be those for which the five-digit zip codes
from the SEDF and SSEL matched exactly. This was important in certain industries like grocery stores and
banks, where establishm ents with the same nam e had multiple establishm ents in similar locations (like in
large cities) but in different zip codes. Finally, for the remaining two industries (physicians’ offices and
clinics, and legal services) we modified the AutoMatch program to parse out words in the establishment
names differently from the standard way, since employees in these industries often report different
establishm ent names than em ployers in a w ay that the standard algorithm in AutoM atch does not handle
well (e.g., an employee will write the establishment name in the SEDF as ‘Jones & Smith’ while the
employer’s nam e in the SSEL is ‘Law O ffices of John Jon es and Jane Smith’).
We applied each industry’s restrictions and passed all of the data again through the AutoMatch
procedure. From this second version of the national data set, we selected random samples from the 17
problematic industries of 100 workers and 30 establishments (all the workers matched to each
establishment) in the same eight states examined earlier. As before, two researchers independently scored
each observation for match quality based on the scale given earlier. The results of this second round of
checks indicated that we had substantially redu ced the error rate in eight of the 14 industries, but six
industries still had error rates over 0.10 and comprised at least 1% of overall employment in the matched
data. These industries are: Grocery stores (601); Eating and drinking places (641); Banking (700);
Insurance (711); Real estate, including real estate-insurance offices (712); and Offices and clinics of
physicians (812). Because we used a much smaller sample in the second round, the error rates are less
reliable. After examination of the second version of the national data set, there were no obvious correction
procedures to reduce error rates in the six industries, and so we decided to retain this version of the data set
as final. Data users should exercise caution when using matches in the six industries listed above; these
industries account for 14% of the workers in the final version of the DEED an d 17% of the establishments.

-17-

F. E valuating the Representativeness of the Matched D ata
To evaluate the representativeness of the m atched D EE D d ata set, it is useful to com pare basic
descriptive statistics from the DEED with their counterparts from the SEDF. In addition, to measure the
degree to w hich the D EE D is an im provement over the earlier comparable data set, the NWEC D, it is
useful to examine basic statistics for this data set as w ell.
Table 5 displays comparisons of the means and standard deviations of an extended set of
demographic characteristics from the SEDF, the DEED , and the NW ECD . The first three columns show
the m eans and stand ard deviations for workers in all data sets who are not excluded by the basic
restrictions. 17 Column (4) displays the level differences between m eans for the DEE D and the SED F, while
column (5) displays the level differences between means for the NWEC D and the SEDF.
Ou t of all 12,143,183 workers in the SE DF who met the basic criteria, 3,291,213 (approximately
27% ) are also in the DEED , a substantial improvement over the NWEC D, which contains 904 ,589 workers
who met similar criteria, or only 7% of all possible matches. The m eans of the demographic variables in
both matched data sets are quite close to the means in the S ED F. For exam ple, female workers comprise
46% of the SEDF, and 47% of both matched data sets. The distribution of workers across races and
ethnicities is also relatively similar across the data sets. In the SEDF , white, H ispanic, and black workers
account for 82, 7, and 8% of the total, respectively. The comparable figures for the DEED are 86, 5, and
5%; and in the NWECD, 87, 4, and 7%.18 Similarly, there is a close parallel among the distributions of
workers across education categories in all data sets.
The distributions of workers across industries paint a different picture. Because of the matching
algorithm used, the NWEC D w as heavily over-representative of workers in manufacturing, and u nder-

17

W e exclude individuals from the SE DF who d id not work in the year prior to the survey year (1989), worked in
public administration, or were self-employed. We also dropped workers employed in an industry that was considered
“out-of-scope” in the SSEL (see the earlier discussion). These restrictions were more stringent than those used in the
construction of the base sam ple of the NW EC D, which is why the sam ple size for the N W EC D in T able 5 is slightly
smaller than reported in our previous w ork with the NW EC D (e.g., Bayard, et al., 199 9).
18

W e argued ea rlier that the DE ED was esp ecially useful in capturing H ispanic workers, who wo rk disp roportionately
in small urban establishments. The share Hispanic in the DEED is higher by 33% (5.2% vs. 3.9% , which round to the
5% and 4 % figures rep orted in the text). M oreo ver, in the DE ED , 9.6% of Hispanics work in cen tral city
establishments with fewer than 15 wo rkers; 7.1% of whites work in establishments fitting these criteria.

-18-

representative of retail workers. Th e DEE D is not lim ited in the same way. A pproximately 25% of all
workers in the SED F are employed in the manufacturing sector, and although this number is somewhat
greater in the DEED (33%), it is substantially higher in the NWEC D (49%). Retail workers comprise 20%
of all workers in the SED F, and 17% in the DE ED , but only 9% of all NWECD workers.
The second half of the table, columns (6) through (10), displays summary statistics for full-time
workers in the SED F, D EE D, and NW EC D. The results are very similar to those for all workers, with
means across demographic characteristics fairly similar across all three data sets, while the distribution of
workers across industries in the DEED is much more similar to the underlying SEDF than is the
distribution in the NW EC D.
In addition to comparing worker-based means in all three data sets, it is useful to examine the
similarities across establishments in the SSEL, the DE ED, and the NW ECD . Table 6 shows descriptive
statistics for establishments in each data set as well as the level differences between the SSEL means and
those from the matched data sets. There are 5,237,592 establishments in the SSEL; of these, 972,436
(19% ) also appear in the D EED, while only 137,735 (slightly more than 2.5% ) are in the N WEC D.
Because only workers who are sent Decennial C ensus Long Forms are eligible for matching to their
employers, it is far more likely that at least one worker in large establishments will be sent a Long Form,
and consequently more likely that such establishm ents are included in either the DEED or the NWEC D.
One can see evidence of the bias towards larger employers in both data sets by comparing the means across
data sets for total employment. An average establishment in the SSEL has 18 employees, while the average
establishment in the DEED has 53 workers, and establishments in the NW ECD have, on average, 62
employees.
The distributions of establishments across industries in the DEED and NWEC D relative to the
SSEL are similar to those in the worker sample in the sense that the DEED is much closer to the SSEL. For
example, although there are roughly the same share of Service establishm ents in all three data sets (28% in
the SSEL, 26% in the DE ED, and 26% in the NWECD ), there is a far greater representation of
manufacturing establishments in the NW EC D (29% ) than in the SS EL (6% ) or the DEED (13% ).

-19-

Examining the distributions of establishments across geographic areas also reveals that the DEED
is more representative of the SSEL than is the NWECD . In both the SSE L and the DE ED, just over 81% of
establishm ents are in an M SA , while this is tru e for only 61% of N WEC D establishm ents. Additionally,
the distribution of establishm ents across Census regions is very similar in the SS EL and the D EE D, while
the NWEC D distribution is not as similar to the SS EL.
Finally, an important way to compare the representativeness of the matched data is to go beyond
differences in means in the two data sets, and to examine regression relationships in the data sets to see
whether the conditional relationships betw een variables are as sim ilar as the unconditional sum mary
statistics. Tab le 7 presents results from a regression of the log of hourly wages on a set of demographic
characteristics. We run two sets of regressions for each of the three data sets. Coefficient estimates and
standard errors for all workers are shown in the first three columns, and for full-time workers in the last
three columns. Across all dim ensions, the D EE D coefficients are uniformly of the same sign, consistently
close, and in some cases nearly identical to the SEDF coefficients. A lthough the N WEC D estimates are
also quite similar, there are a few cases where these coefficients diverge fairly notably from the SEDF
(such as education, working in an M SA , female, an d som e indu stries and occup ations).
Thus, the DEE D offers substantial im provements in providing a matched em ployer-employee data
set for the United States that is larger and more representative of the actual population of workers and
establishm ents.
III. Examining the Extent of Segrega tion by Hispanic Ethnicity and English Lang uage Proficiency
There are multiple reasons why segregation may exist in the labor market. One reason may be
discrimination of the sort that causes labor market inefficiencies, such as in Bergmann’s (1974 ) model
where em ployers “crowd” som e types of workers into establishments or occupations, lowering these
workers’ m arginal products and therefore their wages. Conversely, segregation may exist for efficiencyenhancing reasons that are based on lowering the transaction costs of communication in the labor market.
For example, one way to think about the importance of communication in an establishment is in the
framework of Lang’s (1986) model of language discrimination. In this model, there are transaction costs

-20-

within a firm when some members of the firm have to learn the language of other mem bers; this can also
refer to differences in proficiency in a com mon language, of course. Because of this, the model predicts
that in the short run workers of different languages will be segregated in the workplace and, given that
some interaction is required, workers who do not speak the language of the economically-dominant
majority will earn lower wages. In the long run, th e results of Lang’s model are more am biguous. If
workers learn each others’ languages, segregation will be reduced and the wage gap across groups will
decrease. Alternatively, members of the minority group may become owners of firms, which w ill
perp etuate segregation by language by red ucing the wage gap across language groups. “Language” in
Lang’s m odel can be literal, or it can refer to cultural differences across groups that lead to transaction costs
in communication.
Because of its size and depth as a matched employer-em ployee data set, the DEE D is uniquely
capab le of measuring the extent of segregation at the establishment level by ethnicity and language.
However, because the SED F contains such rich information about individuals, there are multiple ways of
categorizing ethnicity and language. For example, English language proficiency and Household Language
Spoken are both measures of literal language, whereas differing Coun try of Origin may reflect cultural
language differences across individuals who speak the same literal language. In this paper, we use E nglish
language proficiency as the definition of language, taking Lang’s model most literally in that we use the
true language of the majority (English) as the benchmark. Clearly, however, in examining differences
between whites and Hispanics, we are indirectly also examining the possibility that there are “language”
differences across these eth nic groups even among those who speak English well.
In Table 8, we report summary statistics from the sample of white and Hispanic men in the DEED
who work in establishments wh ere we m atch at least one Hispanic worker. 19 We m ake this restriction for

19

W e restrict the samp le to white men so that we do not have to consider wag e differences b etween sexes or rac es. W e
also restrict the sam ple to workers who repo rt working full time (a t least 35 hours) in the previous year. W e do this
for two reasons. First, these workers are more attached to the labor force in general and we thus worry less about
capturing previous labor market experience differentials between part-time and full-time workers. Second, because of
the nature of the DE ED construction, we ma tch workers to their employer in the previous week, but the wage data
come from the previous year. Full-time workers are more likely than part-timers to have earned last year’s wages at
the pre vious w eek’s establishm ent.

-21-

two reasons. First, a vast majority of white men in the DEED are matched to establishments where we do
not observe them working with any Hisp anic co-workers; incorporating these men into the data set would
result in our estimates being driven by a sample of workers who we did not observe to interact with any
Hispanics in the workplace. Second, in a part of our analysis we examine wage gaps between Hispanics
and whites by incorporating establishment fixed effects, where identification of the wage gap is driven by
the existence in the establishment of at least one Hispanic worker (and one white worker, but this is less of
an issue in the data). We also restrict our sample of white men to those who speak E nglish very well, so
that we do not have to consider language differences across white men; for ease of exposition throughout
the paper we refer to this sample of white men who speak E nglish very well simply as “w hite men.” In
short, we consider white men who speak English well and work with at least one Hispanic to be the
benchmark, majority group, to which Hispanics are compared. As a result of this sample selection, our
sample contains information on just over 327,000 white men who speak English well, and just over 69,000
Hispanic workers, among whom 61% self-report speaking English very well, 21% report speaking English
well, 15% report speaking English poorly, an d 4% report not speaking English at all. 20
Not surprisingly, Table 8 shows that white m en in the sample are older, better-educated, more
likely to be married, and less likely to live in an M SA than Hispanic men. A mong H ispanic m en, the only
real difference across the groups defined by English language proficiency is that there is a strong positive
association between English proficiency and education. Indeed, the sample sizes of Hispanic men who do
not speak English and have m ore than a high school education are too small by Census B ureau stan dard s to
even be able to report these means separately in the table.21
The extent of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and English language proficiency is reported in the

20

There are two w ays for no n-English speakers to fill out the C ensus. First, the Census form is ava ilable in S panish.
Second, a Census employee can be sent to help a respondent fill out the form. However, it appears that data are
available only on whether the form that was used was in Spanish. Be cause ma ny of the Hispan ic men who se English
language proficiency is reported to be either poor or ‘not at all’ are immigrants, we generally include controls for
immigration coho rt when looking at H ispanics.
21

For confidentiality reasons, means and coefficients can only be reported for groups larger than 75.

-22-

next five rows of Table 8.22 It should be noted that these results are unique – one needs to know the
demographic composition of workers within an establishment in order to construct these segregation
numb ers, and this kind of information is only available in the United States in matched employer-employee
data, where information on characteristics such as English proficiency comes from the individual data on
employees. The average number of workers per establishm ent in the observations that make up Table 8 is
only 7.1 (the sample of 396,293 divided by 55,793 establishm ents). But because all matched workers are
used to construct the co-worker share variables for the worker observations in Table 8, and becau se
workers from establishments with more matches appear more frequently in the data set, the numbers of coworkers on which the share variables are based are typically much higher – for example, for the
observations in T able 8, the median num ber of co-workers exceed s 45 (and the mean is 129).
Table 8 shows that there is good deal of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and by English
proficiency. A Hispanic man is much more likely than a white man to work with other Hispanics; for
Hispanics, the average share of co-workers who are Hispanic is 43.8%, whereas for white men, the average
share of co-workers who are Hispanic is 10.0%.23
Segregation by English language proficiency is also p ronoun ced, and there are a number of ways to

22

The share variables are constructed excluding the contribution of the individual. For the share Hispanic, for whites
we simply compu te the proportion of Hispanic workers am ong the matched workers at an establishment. The samp le
used to calculate this variable includes all workers in the DEED (e.g., part-time as well as full-time, women as well as
men, etc.). For Hispanics, this proportion is multiplied by total employment, rounding to the nearest integer to get the
imputed number of Hispanics at the establishment. We then subtract one off of the imputed share and off of total
emp loyment (to exclude the individual H ispanic from the calculation), and the n com pute the ratio. (T hus, this
exclusion has a much larger impact on small than large establishments.)
Calculating the share o f Hispanics in a particular language p roficiency category is a bit more complicated.
For whites, we simply compute the ratio of Hispanics in that language category among all Hispanics matched to the
establishment. For Hispanics, we use this ratio to impute the number of Hispanics in that language category. W e then
subtract one from that number only if the individual is in that language category, and subtract one from the total
imputed numbe r of Hispanics, after which we fo rm the ratio. T he only difficulty is when the individual is the only
Hisp anic matched to the plant and all workers are m atched (which occurs in 1 49 cases in the analysis sample). In this
case, this ratio wo uld be zero divide d by zero, after subtra cting one from the num erator and deno minato r. W e
therefo re forego the subtraction in this case, assigning a value o f one. O ne interp retation of this is that while our d ata
indicate we have all workers matched, this may be an error, and we are assuming that a non-matched Hispanic worker
would be in the same language category as the individual, which seems the best guess given the extent of language
segregation. However, we also experimented with defining this share as zero and simply dropping these cases; not
surprisingly given the small number of observations involved, these alternatives had no detectable impact on the
estimates.
23

Recall that we have restricted the sample to white men who work in an establishment where we have matched at
least one Hispanic worker. This reported figure of 10.0% is therefore conditional on a white man working with at
least one Hispanic.

-23-

see this. First, among Hispanics, as English language proficiency drops the average share of Hispanics
rises, so that for a Hispanic who speaks English very well, 36.7% of his co-workers are Hispanic, whereas
for one who does not speak English at all, 70.1% of his co-workers are Hispanic. Second, while on average
almost 82% of a white male’s H ispanic co-workers speak English very well, on average only 61% of a
Hispanic’s co-workers speak English very well. There is segregation by English language proficiency
among H ispanics as well. For a Hispanic who speaks English very well, on average 84.8% of his coworkers speak English well, whereas at the other end of the spectrum, for a Hispanic who does not speak
English, on average only 17.3% of his co-workers speak English very well. C onversely, for a Hispanic
who speaks English very well, on average 1.3% of his Hispanic co-workers do not speak English,24 while
for a Hispanic who does not speak English, 48.1% of his Hispanic co-workers do not speak English at all.
Finally, the table reports descriptive statistics for other characteristics of co-workers, which figu re
in some of the ensuing analyses. These figures reveal that Hispanics tend to work alongside less-educated
co-workers (not surprisingly, given segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and the lower education of
Hispanics), and that this is more true for those w ith poorer language skills.
Information on segregation is also summarized in Figure 2, which reports the distributions of
shares of workers Hispanic by ethnicity and language proficiency. The first two histograms indicate the
degree of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity, revealing the far greater prevalence of high shares Hispanic
among H ispanic workers. The final four histograms indicate the far greater prevalence of high shares
Hispanic am ong those Hispanics whose English is less proficient.
There is thus clear evid ence of rath er strong establishment-level segregation by Hisp anic ethnicity
and by English language proficiency. This segregation is consistent with transaction costs generated by
combining workers who are heterogeneous with respect to language or ethnicity. It can also be generated
by the standard crowding hypothesis, and by residential segregation along the same dim ensions. To gain
more information regarding the impact of these types of segregation on workers, the next section explores

24

Indeed, for the vast majority of Hispanics who speak English very well (93%), none of their Hispanic co-workers do
not speak English.

-24-

the possibly complex relationships between wages and a worker’s own ethnicity and language skills, as
well as these characteristics of his co-workers.
IV. The Im pact on W ages of Segregation by H ispanic Ethnicity and English Proficiency
A. W ages an d Segregation by H ispanic E thnicity
We first focus on the impact on w ages of segregation just by Hispanic ethnicity. Table 9 reports
results from various versions of human capital wage regressions using the sample of men from the DEED
in establishments with at least one matched Hispanic worker (the same sample as in Table 8). Column (1)
contains the baseline results from a simple human capital regression estimated for wh ites and Hispanics,
where we include a dum my variable for Hispanic, age and its square, a d ummy variable for whether a
worker is m arried, education group dummy variables, a dummy variable for whether an individu al works in
an MSA, and dummy variables for state and 1-digit industry. In addition, because many Hispanics in the
labor force were not born in this country, it is possible that any wage penalties we estimate for Hispanics
are in fact due to the immigrant status of the worker; we therefore also include dummy variables for the
cohort in which a Hispanic immigrant came to the United States.25 The estimated coefficients on the
human capital characteristics are consistent with those from other U.S. data sets; there is a quadratic age
profile, a positive marriage premium of 14% , positive returns to education, and a positive wage associated
with living in an MS A. It should be noted that most of these coefficients are identified off of white males
since they constitute 83% of the sample. In column (1), the coefficient on the Hispan ic dummy is !0.14
and statistically significant, indicating that there is a wage penalty of 14 log points associated with being
Hispanic.26
In colum n (1') we replicate the sp ecification in column (1), but add establishm ent fixed effects.
The most important reason for doing this is that the inclusion of fixed effects isolates the effect on wages of

25

The 1990 SE DF has 10 different categories for immigrant status, ranging from first immigrating to the United States
before 19 50 to immigrating between 1987 and 1990 . The se categories do not all cover the same numb er of yea rs.
One caveat to note is Lubotsky’s (2000) finding – based on a comparison with social security administrative data –
that self-reported year of first immigration may be incorrect, and may instead reflect most recent year of immigration
(since m any imm igrants emigrate bac k to their home cou ntries for some perio d of time).
26

The wage pen alty for H ispanic ethnicity is about 50% larger excluding the immigration co ntrols.

-25-

being Hispanic from any other factors that are associated with differences in the establishments in which
white men and Hispanic men w ork, sin ce the coefficient on H ispanic in the fixed-effects specification is
identified off of within-establishment variation between whites and Hispanics. In addition, in the
specification that follow s, in column (2), we add the share of co-workers wh o are H ispanic and who are in
various demographic categories to the column (1) specification. A s the establishm ent fixed effects
subsume these share variables, the fixed-effects specification in column (1') can be interpreted as a nonparametric version of the specification in column (2), where, in particular, we do not restrict the functional
form of the effect of segregation to be linear in the percent Hispanic in the establishment. Finally, the use
of fixed effects to capture the share Hispanic (and everything else about the establishment) avoids the
measurem ent error inherent in our share variables, 27 while also, of course, precluding the estimation of the
effects of various workforce shares. In colum n (1'), the estim ated coefficient on the Hispanic dummy falls
somewhat, to !0.09, while still remaining sizable and statistically significant.
Having estab lished these baseline estimates, the remaining columns of the table present the m ore
substantive results of our analysis of the impact of segregation by Hisp anic ethnicity. Column (2) adds to
the basic specification the share of the establishment’s workforce that is Hispanic, as well as other
demographic characteristics of the establishm ent’s workforce (share in each education category, share
married, and the average age of the workforce). The inclusion of the sh ares in other dem ographic groups is
meant to capture human capital characteristics of co-workers that may affect productivity, and thus wages,
and that may be correlated with the share Hispanic variable.28 The inclusion of the share Hispanic variable
parallels the standard specification in the literature on crowding and segregation (e.g., Groshen, 1991), and

27

As should be clear from Section II, we only have a sample of workers matched to each plant. Thus, variables
measuring the share of workers in any category in an establishment are sample estimates, and hence the regression
estimates are subject to measurement error bias. Because the error variance differs across establishments depending
on the true proportion in each category, correcting for the measurement error based solely on sampling variation
(which would otherwise be simple) is not trivial; see Cockburn and Griliches (1987) and Mairesse and Greenan (1999)
for a related application. We plan to address this issue in future research.
28

Because these variables are meant to capture unobservable human capital characteristics of workers, we do not
include standard segregation measures suc h as share female and share b lack. W e did co nfirm that including these
variab les does not markedly affec t any of the results on Hisp anic or langua ge segregatio n.

-26-

is meant to capture the extent to which crowd ing of some groups of workers affects wages. 29 The estimated
impact of the share H ispanic is !0.104 and is statistically significant. O ne w ay to un derstand the economic
significance of the !0.104 estimated coefficient on the share Hispanic variable is to note that if a worker
moves from an establishment with the average share Hispanic for white workers (0.10) to an establishment
with the average share H ispanic for Hispanic workers (0.44), he will incur a wage loss of approximately 3.5
percen t.
One qualification that we emp hasize at the outset is that our estimates of the effects of the share
Hispanic (and, below, the sh ares with various language skills) are based on across-establishm ent variation.
We do not have changes over time from which we might more reliably identify a causal effect – if we had
changing workforce composition but were w illing to assumed fixed establishment-level unobservables –
nor a more com pelling quasi-experiment with a source of exogenous variation in these shares.30 While we
extend the literature in a nu mber of ways that we regard as significant, this limitation of the existing work
on segregation remains. We discuss this further below.
In column (2) the estimate of the Hispanic dumm y coefficient is !0.108. This is somewhat lower
than the estimate in column (1) where the share Hispanic variable is omitted, but is very close to the
estimate in column (1'). These results confirm that the Hispanic-white wage gap is at least partially driven
by establishment-level segregation, but that most of the individual-level Hispanic wage penalty is a withinestablishment phenomenon. The fact that the coefficient on the Hispanic dumm y in column (2) is so close
to that in column (1') indicates that the inclusion of the share Hispanic variable in column (2) does a good
job of capturing the way in which w ages betw een Hispanics and whites are affected by the establishm ents
in which they work. The coefficients on the individual human capital characteristics in columns (1') and
(2) are also very similar. In results not presented, we confirmed that these similarities are driven by the

29

Mo st segregation studies do not contain data at the establishment level, but instead consider segregation at the
industry o r occupation leve l. Groshen (1 991 ) is one exception.
30

Nonetheless, to avoid cumbersome language we refer to “effects” and “impacts” of our share variables, trusting the
reader to keep this qualification in mind. Lengermann (2001) uses longitudinal data (from the LEHD ) on workers and
establishments to try to estimate a human capital co-worker (or peer) effect, conditioning on individual and firm fixed
effects.

-27-

inclusion of the human cap ital share variables in the regression in column (2), again indicating that these
share variables do a good job of capturing the way in which co-worker or establishment unobservables are
correlated with a workers’ own characteristics and wages. Nonetheless, since our focus is on Hispanicwhite wage differences, what we most care about is the fact that the effect of the inclusion of the
establishm ent fixed effects on the Hispanic-wh ite wage gap mimics so closely the inclusion of the share
Hispanic variable.
In columns (2') and (2") we estimate this specification separately for whites and H ispanics,
respectively, dropping the restriction that the effect of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity is the same for
whites and Hispanics. The estimated coefficient on the share H ispanic for whites in column (2') is !0.037,
much smaller than that for the pooled sam ple in column (2); not surprisingly, then, for Hispanic workers
the estimated coefficient on the share H ispanic variable is much larger (!0.168) than for the pooled sample.
The fact that the impact for Hispanic workers of working with Hispanics is negative while for
white workers th e impact is so close to zero is consistent with a simple model of H ispanic segregation. In
this type of model, since only Hispanics are segregated, only Hispan ics incur a wage penalty; whites are
mobile and wages for whites equalize across the economy so that there is no wage penalty for whites when
they work with Hispanics. Moreover, the fact that the effect of the sh are H ispanic is negative for H ispanic
workers is inconsistent with the hypothesis that segregation by ethnicity is a means of reducing transaction
costs between dissimilar workers (in this case white and H ispanic), since if the m echanism for ethnic
segregation were one based on minimizing transaction costs across ethnic groups, the interaction between
the Hispanic dummy and the share Hispanic would be positive, consistent with the idea that the wage
penalty for being Hispan ic is mitigated if one works with Hispan ics.31
Of course, the theoretical model does not necessarily imply this parameterization of the effect of
co-workers’ ethnicity. For example, it is conceivable that only at higher levels of concentrations of
Hispanic workers does the effective “language” of communication shift, reducing or eliminating the

31

Indeed, if this were all that was going on, one m ight exp ect the sum of the coefficient on the share H ispanic variable
and its interaction with the H ispanic dum my to b e positive, suggesting that, among H ispanics, those who w ork with
other Hisp anics earn a higher wage.

-28-

penalty to being Hispanic. However, when we explored more flexible specifications of the effect of the
share Hispanic, the evidence did not point to a diminution of the negative effect of the share Hispanic for
Hispanic workers as the share Hispanic rose. Indeed, the estimates indicated that for whites the marginal
negative effect of the share Hispanic weakens at higher shares Hispanic, while for Hispanics this marginal
negative effect strengthens. 32 Thus, the results indeed are more consistent with models of discriminationbased segregation, where – aside from lower wages within establishments – Hispanics work in
disproportionately lower-paid establishments.
It is conceivable that the share Hispanic effects estimated in Table 9, columns (2) and (2'), reflect
solely unobservables about the types of establishments in which Hispanics are concentrated. To some
extent, of course, the segregation argument is about the concentration of Hispanics in low-wage
establishments, suggesting that including detailed establishment controls runs the risk of “over-controlling”
for exactly the characteristics of the establishments along which segregation occurs. However, in the
standard story it is the segregation, per se, that reduces wages, rather than establishment characteristics.
Moreover, models of segregation that stem from transaction costs between workers are really models of
within-establishment interactions am ong workers, so a specification that gets as close as possible to
isolating within-establishment interactions provides the best test of these types of models. We cannot
include the share Hispanic variable and establishment fixed effects simultaneously in our regression
specifications, but in the remainder of Table 9 we do two things to assess the robustness of the results to
establishment-level differences.
First, w e check how much detailed establishm ent controls known to be strongly associated with
wages reduce the negative relationship between wages and the share Hispanic (for Hispanics). In columns
(3)-(3") of Table 9 we add detailed controls for industry (3-digit controls) and size (seven categories based
on employment) to the specifications reported in columns (2)-(2") (which themselves already contain some
important establishment controls such as co-worker human capital characteristics and 1-digit industry

32

These estimates are based on replacing the simple linear share Hispanic variable with dummy variables for each
quartile of the share H ispanic distribution b ased on H ispanic workers.

-29-

controls). The inclusion of these establishment controls further reduces the estimated effect of the share
Hispanic in the pooled regression, to a rather small !0.034. This, however, masks rather sharp differences
between whites and Hispanics.
For whites, the estimated impact of the share Hispanic actually becomes positive. Overall, because
the estimate of this coefficient in column (2'), excluding these extra establishment controls, is small and
negative, and because the controls in column (3') may actually sweep out some of the relevant segregation,
we interpret the evidence for whites as suggesting that the effects of the share H ispanic for white workers
are best view ed as near zero – or at least there is no clear evidence of a positive or negative effect.
In contrast, for Hispanic w orkers, although the estimate of share Hispanic falls somewhat (to
!0.099) as we move from column (2") to (3"), evidence of a sizable negative effect of a high concentration
of Hispanic w orkers remains. For the same calculation as above, the estimate implies that if an H ispanic
worker moves from an establishment with the average share Hispanic for white workers to an establishment
with the average share Hispanic for Hispanic workers, he would incur a wage loss of approximately 3.4%,
which is large relative to the typical unexplained H ispanic-white wage differential of app roximately 10% .
Thus, for Hispanic workers in particular, even within very similar types of establishments there is a
substantial wage pen alty associated with working with a large share of Hispanics.
Second, although we cannot include establishment fixed effects and still meaningfully estimate the
effect of share Hispanic on wages, we can estimate a version of the fixed effects equation reported in
column (1') where we interact the share Hispanic with the Hispanic indicator for an individual. This does
not allow us to estimate separately the effects of share Hispanic on white workers and Hispanic workers,
which are key parameters in models of segregation, but it allows us to estimate the differential effect of
share Hispanic on Hispanics relative to white workers, holding fixed across Hispanics and whites all other
(observed and unobserved) establishment-level characteristics, and assuming that they impact Hispanics
and whites equally. W e report the results of this regression in column (4). The reported coefficient of this
interaction implies that, conditional on establishment characteristics, Hispanics incur a 21.6% larger wage
penalty for working with other Hispanics than do white workers. This result is slightly larger than the

-30-

difference in penalties of 17.9% one can calculate by comparing columns (3') and (3"), and further
demonstrates that it is not unobserved establishment characteristics that generate an Hispanic co-worker
wage penalty that is substantially larger for Hispanics than for white workers.
B. Wages and Segregation by Langua ge Proficiency
Up to this point, we have not incorporated English lan guage proficiency into the em pirical analysis.
We begin to do so in Table 10, which follows the key specifications from Table 9, but with the addition of
English language proficiency dummy variables. Column (1) of Table 10 reports results for Hispanics from
the same specification as column (2") of Table 9, augmented by the dummy variables for English language
proficiency; the omitted proficiency category is speaking English very well. 33 The estimates show clearly
that, for Hispanics, there are large wage premiums associated with English language proficiency – the wage
penalty for speaking English well relative to very well is 5.7%, the wage penalty for speaking English
poorly is 16.5%, and the wage penalty for not speaking English at all is 24.9%. 34 The coefficient on the
share Hispan ic variable in column (1) is !0.146; this is 2.2 percentage points smaller than its counterpart
from T able 9 without the English p roficiency variab les.
In columns (2) and (2') we report estimates of the specification (now for whites and Hispanics)
after adding to the regressions not only the variable representing the share of Hispanic co-workers in an
establishment, but also the shares of Hispanic co-workers wh o do not speak English, who speak E nglish
poorly, and who speak English well. The omitted category is the share of Hispanic co-workers who speak
English very well. It should be noted that these English language shares add to one as they represent the
shares of H ispanics in each category among Hispanics in the establishment. The coefficients on these
variables can thus be interpreted as the impact of working with varying kinds of Hispanic workers defined
by their English language proficiencies, conditional on working with a given share Hispanic.
The estimated coefficients on the share Hispanic variable are similar to those in column (2') and

33

There is no corresponding new specification for whites because only those who speak English very well are in the
samp le.
34

These are larger still if the immigration cohort variables are excluded. They are a shade smaller when establishment
fixed effects are include d.

-31-

(2") of Table 9 (!0.041 for whites and !0.141 for Hispanics), indicating a substantial wage penalty for
working alon gside Hispanics only for Hispanics. More importantly, once we cond ition on the Hispanic
composition of the establishment and the worker’s own language proficiency, there is also evidence of
wage penalties for Hispanics who work with Hispanics with worse English language proficiency, with the
penalty rising monotonically as the language skills of co-workers fall. For example, the estimated effect of
the share of Hispan ic co-workers who do not speak English is !0.094, implying that an Hispanic worker
moving from an establishm ent w ith the average share in this category for those who speak English well
(0.013) to the average share for those who do not speak English (0.481) would suffer a wage decline of
4.4%. The estimated effect of a higher share who speak English poorly is just above half of this, and the
estimated effect of a higher share who speak English well (again, relative to very well) is about one-third as
large. At the same time, the substantial wage penalties associated with a worker’s own poor English
proficiency and the overall share Hispanic persist, although falling a bit, indicating that these wage
penalties are for the most part not attributable to language segregation. Interestingly, for whites there are
no such penalties to working with Hispanics who have poor English proficiency; in fact, there is a positive
premium for whites who work with Hispanics who do not speak English. This result could stem from coworker discrimination that is strongest for minorities who do not speak English, or it may arise if whites
tend to be in supervisory positions when working alongside m any Hispanics with poor English skills.
In the remaining columns ((3) and (3')) we add the detailed establishment controls. Once again, the
share Hispanic coefficient turns positive for whites, but remains negative for Hispanics, and the difference
in the coefficients between whites and Hispanics is larger (0.143) between columns (3) and (3') than
betw een (2) an d (2') (0.100). The co-worker langu age share variab les for w hites (Hispanics) are slightly
more positive (less negative) with the inclusion of the detailed establishment controls, but once again the
differences in the coefficients between whites and Hispanics remains large between the columns. Thus,
again, the eviden ce points to Hispanics having w ages lowered via a higher share H ispanic, and even m ore
so via a higher share with poor language skills.

-32-

C. Interactions between Own an d Co-w orker Langua ge Proficiency
The specifications in Table 10, while variants of common specifications in the literature on
segregation , do not adequately capture possible effects of ow n and co-workers’ language that may arise if
language segregation serves to lower transaction costs by allowing one to communicate with those who
speak the same language. Such an hypothesis can be captured in our data by allowing for interactions
between one’s own English language proficiency and the English language proficiencies of one’s coworkers. A specification like this may reveal a wage advantage (at least to some extent offsetting the
negative impacts of one’s own ethn icity and language deficiencies) associated with having co-workers
whose language ability is similar to one’s own or who speak the same language. Rather than incorporating
and interpreting a large series of interaction terms in the specifications in Table 10, we instead turn to
examining the impact of ethnic and language segregation sep arately by English language proficiency. This
is equivalent to incorporating into the regressions full sets of interactions between one’s own ethnicity and
language with not just the characteristics of one’s co-workers, but also with all the human capital
characteristics (and other controls) included in the wage equations.
As a preliminary specification, in Table 11, we examine the effect on wages of establishment-level
segregation by Hispanic ethnicity for Hispanics, now separating Hispanics by English language
proficiency. In column (1) we report results for the sample of Hispanics who speak E nglish very well,
including (as in Table 10) controls for ow n English language proficiency in addition to the share H ispanic
variable. Panel A includes the baseline controls and co-worker human capital characteristics, whereas
Panel B also adds the detailed establishment controls. In columns (2)-(4) we report the results for the three
other language categories.
Before discussing the results for the effects of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity, we note that as
one moves down the En glish proficiency scale the returns to hum an capital characteristics fall almost
monotonically, and often quite dramatically. While the returns to these characteristics for Hispanics who
speak English very well are quite similar to those for white men, the returns are much smaller for Hispanics
who speak English poorly or not at all. This basic pattern has two important implications. First, from a

-33-

practical standpoint, it makes the construction of standard Oaxaca-Blinder-type decompositions of the wage
differences between white m en and Hispanic men of varying English language proficiencies extremely
sensitive to the arbitrary choice of whose returns are considered the ‘base’ group of returns. That is, one
may get a very different sense of the importance of establishment-level segregation when one asks the
hypothetical question, “how much would an H ispanic who does not speak English well get paid if he had
his human capital and establishment characteristics but were paid for those like a white man?” versus the
hypothetical question, “how much would a white man get paid if he had his human capital and
establishment characteristics but were paid for those like an H ispanic who does not speak English?” As a
result, we have chosen not to present these type of decompositions. Second, from a research standpoint, we
find the differences in returns to human capital characteristics by English language proficiency fascinating,
and we have found virtually no references to this phenomenon elsewhere.35 Some of these differences may
be due to the fact that the majority of poor English speakers in our sample are immigrants, whose human
capital may have been attained in foreign countries. However, in unreported results from the full sample of
the SEDF, where the sample sizes are large enough to allow estimation of human capital regressions by
English language proficiency for U.S. natives alone, we find similar results, at least for returns to age and
marriage. We plan to explore this phenomenon more fully in future research.
In Panel A, column (1), of Table 11, for Hispanic workers who speak English very well, the
coefficient on the share Hispan ic is !0.146; these Hispanic workers m ake up more than half of the sample
of Hispanics. The coefficient on the share Hispanic for workers who speak English well is !0.149 as
reported in column (2); it falls to !0.089 in column (3) for those who speak English poorly, and it is !0.092
for those who do not speak English. The fact that the magnitude of this coefficient declines as one moves
from those who speak English very well or well to those who speak English poorly or not at all, combined
with the decreases in returns to human capital, suggest to us that perhaps Hispanic workers with poor
English language proficiency simply have poor job opportunities, regardless of their own hum an capital

35

Trejo (19 97) reports lower returns to education and experience for immigrant whites and Me xicans, which in the
literature on immigration is interpreted as indicating that the human capital immigrants acquired in their home
countries do es not transfer p erfectly to the U.S. labo r mark et.

-34-

and the ethnic composition of their co-workers, so that there is much less room for variation in these factors
to affect their wages. There is some evidence supporting this in Panel B, where the inclusion of detailed
establishment controls eliminates systematic differences in the effect of the share Hispanic between the
groups. H owever, regardless of the specification, the negative effect of share Hispanic persists across all
language categories, indicating that, regardless of English language proficiency, there is a w age penalty
associated with working with other Hispanics.
We examine the impact of segregation by English language proficiency along with Hispanic
segregation separately by language proficiency groups in Table 12. The sp ecifications are the same as in
Table 11 except that we now add the shares of Hispanic co-workers in each language category. Looking
first at Panel A, the coefficients on the Hispanic English language proficiency shares do not display a clear
pattern as one m oves across columns (1)-(4). All but two of the coefficients are negative, and m ost are
statistically significant. The impact of working with a large share of Hispanic workers who do not speak
English is negative for all four groups, and a higher share of workers in this lowest language category is
always associated with the largest wage penalties. However, this effect is not particularly weaker (and
certainly not positive) for workers who do not speak English. Similarly, the negative impact of working
with a large share who speak English poorly is strongly negative for three of the four groups. Again,
thou gh, this wage penalty is not weaker for those who speak English poorly or not at all. If anything, it
appears that there is some evidence that the penalties for working with H ispanics with poor E nglish
proficiency are somewhat stronger for those whose own language proficiency is weak. The same
qualitative results hold in Panel B, although paralleling the earlier results the wage penalties overall are a
bit smaller.
These results do not provide evidence that, for Hispanic workers, there are wage advantages (which
may offset some of the wage penalties associated with own Hispanic ethnicity and weak own language
proficiency) to working with Hispanics of similar language ability. For example, if there are transaction
costs associated with language and these impact wages, one would expect to find a positive interaction for
Hispanic non-English speakers when they work with other Hispanics who do not speak English, all else

-35-

equal. This is inconsistent with the finding in column (4) that, for Hispanic workers who do not speak
English, the coefficient on the share Hispanic who do not speak English is negative and significant, and
indeed larger than the estimated coefficients of the other language share variables.
Instead, these results are entirely consistent with an alternative discrimination-type crowding model
where employers crowd Hispanics with poor English ability into a restricted set of establishments, lowering
the marginal products and hence wages of all Hispanics who work in those establishments. 36 On the other
hand, there may be transaction costs of the type associated with the language discrimination model, but
enough labor market mobility and hence sensitivity to the outside market such that the characteristics of coworkers d o not affect w ages, yet poorer langu age skills are still associated with lower wages. But this is
hard to reconcile with the negative effects on wages of the share of co-workers who are Hispanic or who
have poor language skills.
D. Possible Biases
There are two potential sources of bias in our estimated effects of own language skills and coworker language skills. First, the effects of own language may be upward biased because of underlying
heterogeneity (ability?) that is correlated in the same direction with both language skills and wages (e.g.,
Borjas, 1994). On the other hand, in part because language skills are self-reported, they may be measured
with error. To the extent that results from classical measurement error carry over, this would be expected
to bias the estimated effects of own language skills toward zero (Dustmann and van Soest, forthcoming).
On net, the overall direction of bias is unclear, as these two biases are offsetting. Of more interest to us
than the estimated effects of own language skills are possible biases in the estimated effects of the language
skills of co-workers. But given the segregation by language skills that we document, own language skills
and co-worker skills are positively correlated, so the bias in the estimated effect of co-worker language
skills is in the opposite direction to the bias in the estimated effect of own language skills.
Using G erman panel data, Dustmann and van Soest propose som e estimators to control for these
sources of bias in ow n language skills. They conclude that dow nward bias from measurement error is

36

Recall that within establishments the imp act of crowd ing is greater on wage s of Hispanics.

-36-

quantitatively more important. If this were true in our data as well, then the estimated effects of co-worker
language skills may be overstated. However, we believe there are some legitimate questions about the
identification strategy used by Dustm ann and van Soest, 37 and it is not clear that the results generalize to the
United States.
We can also look at the estimated returns to schooling for Hispanics for evidence of downward bias
in the estimated effects of own language skills. As Table 8 showed, education is strongly positively
correlated with better language proficiency, so that measurement error bias in own language skills w ould
also bias up ward the estimated return s to schooling for H ispanics. Yet in Table 11 the estimated returns to
schooling are a shade weaker for Hispanics than for whites, and the estimates decrease as English
proficiency falls, suggesting that the strong effects of co-worker langu age skills for H ispanics are real,
rather than spu riously stemm ing from measurement error. 38
Finally, to partially assess the influence of measurement error on the estimated effects of co-worker
language skills, we re-estimated some of the basic models after collapsing the four categories for own
language into two broader categories, on the assumption that there may well be misclassification error
between the ‘not at all’ and ‘poor’ categories, and between the ‘well’ and ‘very well’ categories, but that
misclassification across these two broader groups is far less likely. For the co-worker shares this
measurement error should average out, so we do not collapse their language categories. If the effects of
poor language proficiency of co-workers do not weaken upon doing this, we might conclude that
measurement error in own language skills does not impart a quantitatively important bias to the estimated
effects of co-worker language skills. In the resulting estimates, the effects of co-worker language skills on
wages of Hispanics did not w eaken and if anything gen erally becam e som ewhat stronger. This is not a
clean test, however, as the combination of categories for own language skills may entail specification error

37

For example, their instrumental variables estimation relies on leads and lags of reported own language skills serving
as valid instruments. But if the past time pattern of accumulation of language skills, or the expected future pattern, has
anything to do with current wag es, these instrume nts are not valid. This seems d ifficult to rule o ut. For exam ple, a
job that offered wage growth in the past may have offered stronger incentives for language acquisition, and a job that
offers oppo rtunities for language acquisition in the future may pay a lower wag e currently.
38

Of course this is not decisive, as the true return to schooling for Hispanics may be lower than is indicated by the
estimates.

-37-

that, by aggregating individuals with different language skills, leads to overly strong estimated effects of
co-worker language skills. But it at least provides some evidence that estimates of the effects of co-worker
language skills are not extremely sensitive to measurement error in own language skills. While we cannot
assert that we have unbiased estimates of the effects of co-worker language skills, we believe we have
rather compelling evidence that wages of Hispanic workers are lowered, possibly substantially, when they
work alongside oth er H ispanics with low E nglish proficiency.
V. The Impact of Segregation in California and Florida
In this paper we examine the role of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and by English language
proficiency. Clearly, by definin g segregation only along these dim ensions we m ay be m issing the im pacts
of segregation along other dimensions that define the identities of Hispanic workers and that may be linked
to transaction costs of communication. Because Hispanics in the United States come from very divergent
countries of origin, ranging from Mexico to Spain, treating Hispanics as a monolithic group obscures
potentially important differences between them, such as in human capital and culture, that may affect how
they communicate with each other and with whites in the workplace.
Examining the role of alternative definitions of identity for Hispanic workers is beyond the scope
of this paper, so instead, in this section, we replicate the results we presented above separately using data
from California and Florida. This serves tw o purposes. First, it provides a robustness check for the full
U.S. sample results. Second, it suggests important avenues for future research into the importance of
language and ethnicity for Hispanics in the workplace, sin ce as w e show below, Hispanic workers in
California and Florida are quite different along one important dimension.
In Table 13 we present means for the sample of men from C alifornia and Florida wh o are used in
the full U.S. sample results. Column (1) presents means for white men from California, and the
corresponding means for white men from Florida are in column (3). Column (2) presents means for
Hispanics from California and its counterpart for Florida is colu mn (4). C alifornia is a much bigger state
than Florida and therefore represents a much bigger fraction of the U.S. sample that we use. Even given
this, Californians make up a disproportionately large fraction of our Hispanic sample; over 38% (26,126) of

-38-

the full sample of Hispanics that we use come from California, whereas 6% of the full sample of Hispanics
come from Florida.
The first thing to note about the differences between California and Florida is the distributions of
educational attainment by ethnicity. White m en in California are m ore ed ucated than w hite m en in
Florida;39 77.5% of the white men from C alifornia have more than a high school education as com pared to
69.9% of the white men from Florida. In contrast, the Hispanic m en in our sample from California are less
educated, on average, than the Hispanic men from Florida. In California, only 32.6% of the Hispanic men
have more than a high school degree, while in Florida 50.3% of the Hispanic men have more than a high
school degree. The differences for Hispanics are particularly stark when one considers that 19% of Florida
Hispanics have at least a B.A., while only 8.2% of California Hispanics have a B.A. or ad vanced degree.
These differences in educational attainment may help explain the fact that average w ages for white m en in
California are higher than for white men in Florida, whereas average wages for Hispanics in California are
lower than for Hispanics in F lorida. In addition to differences in educational attainment, H ispanic m en in
our sample in California are, on average, four years younger than Hispanic men in Florida (34.7 versus
38.9), and both white and Hispanic men are slightly less likely to be married in California than in Florida.
In addition to differences in observable characteristics of individu als between the states, there is
evidence that California establishments are less segregated by Hispanic ethnicity than Florida
establishm ents. For exam ple, for white men in C alifornia, the average share of co-workers who are
Hispanic is 20.4% ; for white m en in Florida the correspond ing figure is 16.9% . Conversely, for H ispanic
men in California the average share of co-workers who are Hispanic is 51.1%, whereas in Florida it is over
6 percentage points higher, at 57.5% . Differences in the patterns of segregation by English language
proficiency across the states are much less pronounced, and the standard deviations of the Hispanic English
language proficiency shares are large.
In Table 14 we present results from wage regressions for California and Florida for whites and

39

Recall that the samples are limited to men aged 16-65 who were working full time in the previous year, so retirees
are excluded from the sample.

-39-

Hispanics separately, using the specification where we include the establishment share Hispanic and the
establishment shares of Hispanics in each English language proficiency category (along with the other coworker characteristics and 1-digit industry controls). Th ese results corresp ond to the full sam ple results in
Table 10 (columns (2') and (2")). 40 The key result in Table 14 is the differences in the coefficients on the
share of co-workers who are Hispanic across the two states. The coefficient on the share Hispanic for
whites in California is !0.046, similar to that for the full United States. For Hispanics in California, the
coefficient on share Hispanic (!0.106) is smaller than that for the full U nited States, but is still large in
magnitude. That is, just as in the full U.S . sample, these specifications point to a heavy wage pen alty for
Hispanics when they work in an establishment that is heavily Hispanic, but a much smaller penalty for
whites.
The estimated coefficients for the share Hispanic in Florida are starkly different from those in
California and the full sam ple. For both w hites and Hispanics the coefficient on the share of co-workers
who are Hispanic is positive and statistically sign ificant (0 .161 for whites, and 0.081 for Hispanics). In
Florida, then, there is no evidence that segregation by Hispanic ethnicity has a negative impact on wages,
and in fact for whites there is sizable a wage premium for working with Hispanics. In con trast to the results
for the share Hispanic variable, the results on the coefficients of the English language proficiency shares
are reasonably consistent between California and Florida.
The differences between California and Florida in the impact on w ages of segregation by Hisp anic
ethnicity is consistent with the notion that Hispanic ethnicity is not a rich enough description of these
workers to capture important features of labor m arket segregation or comm unication among w orkers.
Indeed in our sample, as in the full SED F, the com position of Hispanics in California and Florida is
markedly different along the dimension of nativity, or ancestry. In Table 15 we present country or region
of ancestry for the Hispanics in our sample from the two states. In California, 79% of the sample of
Hispanics are of Mexican origin, whereas in Florida only 5% are. In contrast, 54% of the Florida sample of

40

W e do not present results for California and Florida separately by English language proficiency category because the
samp le sizes b ecome sm all.

-40-

Hispanics are of Cuban origin whereas only 1% of the Hispanic workers in California are of C uban origin.
We leave it to future research to establish whether these differences in country of origin for Hispanics drive
the differences in the impact of Hispanic segregation on wages, but no one would question that the political
experiences and cultures of Cuba and M exico, an d of Cuban and M exican immigrants, are quite different.
VI. Con clusions and Fu ture Research
In this paper we document the construction of a large, new matched employer-employee data set
for the United States for 1990. We use this data set – the 1990 DE ED – to establish a wide array of
empirical facts regarding the importance of workplace segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and language
proficiency. In particular, we document strong segregation along these dimensions. We then explore the
influences of segregation by Hispanic ethnicity and English language proficiency on wages. The evidence
points to substantial wage penalties for Hispanics when they are segregated into workplaces with high
shares Hispanic, and particularly with high shares of Hispanics with poor English language proficiency.
In part to shed some light on the sources of segregation, we also consider whether the patterns of
wage penalties appear to be consistent with transaction costs that might make it more efficient to group
workers w ith poor E nglish language proficiency together to minimize comm unication prob lems, and fail to
find such evidence. Som e might argue that we do not provide an explicit test of the transaction cost
hypothesis, because in a labor market with enough mobility the wage penalties associated with transaction
costs stemming from co-workers’ language skills would equalize across establishments. However, such a
view is difficult to reconcile with the estimated negative im pact of the share Hispanic or the sh are with
poor language skills on individ ual w orkers’ wages. On the surface, then, the data are more con sistent with
crowding of Hispanics and those with poor language skills into a set of jobs, which results in low wages
(and presumably low marginal products) for workers in those jobs.
Another perspective on the negative effects of poor language skills of Hispanic co-workers on
Hispanics is that there are negative externalities associated with language skills. This is potentially quite
interesting, because if poor language skills impose costs on others, the private incentives to invest in language
skills will be too low, and efficient levels of language acquisition will not be achieved.

-41-

Aside from the particular results reported here, the richness of the data we have constructed and the
empirical findings we present suggest many avenues for research that we plan to pu rsue. First, there are
many ways to define language, and we will explore the impact of alternative definitions of language on the
wages of Hispanics and other workers in future work. In particular, since the SEDF contains information
on language spoken at home, we will define more finely the spoken languages of workers in the workplace,
so that an establishment where no one speaks English but everyone speaks Spanish would not be treated
similarly to an establishment where no one speaks English and w orkers speak a variety of languages.
Moreover, we will examine whether cultural norms are a better way to define language differences in the
workplace for Hispanics, by disaggregating Hispanics by country of origin.
Second, there are natural extensions to the empirical example we present here. In Lang’s model of
language transaction costs, the cost is incurred when managers must speak with workers, and where
managers speak the majority language but workers may not. In the empirical work we present here, we do
not distinguish between man agers and workers in defining the group with whom a worker must
communicate. Because the DEED contains information on occup ation, it may be possible to group workers
into managerial and non-managerial roles within an establishment and more formally test the specifics of
the m odel. Perh aps more importantly, it is not just with co-workers or managers that a worker may need to
communicate. If firms in industries such as retail trade sell to workers who live near to these firms, the
language of trade is likely to be the language of the local residents (see Lazear (2000) for a formal model of
trade with multiple languages), and there can be transaction costs in com municating with customers.
Because of this, wage penalties associated with poor English language ability are likely to be smaller when
a worker speaks the (non-English) language of customers. Since we know the business addresses of
establishm ents in the DEE D, and we know the composition of nearby residents to these establishments
from the SEDF , we can limit the sample to workers who work in industries that are likely to serve a local
population (such as small retail establishments), and use measures of the language composition of nearby
residents to these establishments to explore whether there is a positive wage premium associated w ith
speaking the language of on e’s cu stomer base, or w hether this mitigates an y negative w age effects

-42-

associated with lower English language proficiency. Such evidence may also bear on hypotheses related to
custom er discrimination (B ecker, 1971 ).
In previous work (Hellerstein and Neum ark, 1999; Hellerstein, et al., 1999), we used earlier
matched data on manufacturing establishments to test for wage discrimination against women by specifying
and estimating a production function in order to recover estimates of marginal productivity differentials
between workers, which we then compared to estimated wage equations. For manufacturing
establishments in the DEED we can perform similar analyses examining whether wage differences by race,
ethnicity, and language proficiency can be explained by productivity differences, and more specifically
asking whether the transaction cost hypothesis receives empirical support from the production side.
Finally, from our standpoint, the most important piece of our future research agenda using the
DEED is to explore the link between residential and workplace segregation. The empirical results we
present here suggest the possibility that Hispanics with poor English language skills may have poor labor
market opportunities, leading to low er returns to hum an capital and sm aller effects of ethnic segregation.
There are many possible reasons why these workers may have poor labor market opportunities, but one
leading theory that has been proposed is that of ‘spatial mismatch’ (e.g., Kain, 1968). In spatial mismatch
models, residential segregation exists in a way that prevents some workers from having access to good
jobs, lowering wages and em ploym ent levels for these workers. The DEE D is uniquely suited to
examining the link between residential and workplace segregation, not just for Hispanics but for blacks as
well, because as a match between a household data set and an establishment data set, the DEED contains
information on residential addresses and workplace addresses of all workers. We plan to examine the
relation ship betw een residential and workplace segregation, and to examine the impact of this relationship
on labor market outcomes (such as wages and employment) for blacks and Hispanics.
We have laboriously and carefully constructed the 1990 DEED in order to be able to further our
research agenda and assist the Censu s Bureau in meeting some of its objectives,41 and we have plans to

41

The 19 90 DE ED is the property of the U.S. Census Bureau, and while proprietary, is available to other researchers
who meet the Census B ureau criteria for restricted-use d ata.

-43-

construct the corresponding 2000 version of the DEED when the Long-Form information from the 2000
Decennial Census is available at the Census Bureau. We are confident that the quality and scope of the
data we have constructed will allow us to gain new insights into the mechanisms and importance of
segregation in the labor market.

-44-

References
Ashenfelter, Orley C., and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vols. 3A-3C (Amsterdam:
Elsevier S cience P ublishers).
Ashenfelter, Orley C., and Richard Layard, eds. 1986. Handbook of Labor Economics, V ols. 1-2
(Am sterdam: Elsevier Science P ublishers).
Abowd, John M., and F rancis K ramarz. 1999. “T he A nalysis of Labor Markets Using M atched EmployerEmployee D ata.” In Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3B
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers), pp. 2629-710.
Bayard, Kimberly. 2001. “Measurem ent Error and Inter-Industry Wage Differentials.” M imeograph, Board
of Governors of the Federal R eserve System.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David N eumark, and Ken neth T roske. 2000 . “Th e New W orkerEstablishment Characteristics Database.” Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
Establishment Surveys (American Statistical Association), pp. 981-90.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and K enneth Troske. “New Evidence on Sex
Segregation and Sex D ifferences in Wages from Matched E mployer-Employee D ata.” Forthcoming in
Journal of Labor Economics.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske. 1999. “Why Are Racial and
Ethnic Wage Gaps Larger for Men than for Women? Exploring the Role of Segregation Using the New
Worker-Establishm ent Characteristics D atabase.” In John C. Haltiwanger, Julia I. Lane, James R. Spletzer,
Jules J.M. Theeuw es, and Ken neth R . Troske, eds., The Creation and Analysis of Employer-Employee
Matched D ata (Am sterdam: Elsevier Science B .V.), pp. 175-203.
Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, Secon d Edition (C hicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Bergmann, Barbara. 1974. “Occupational Segregation, Wages and Profits when Employers Discriminate by
Race or Sex.” Eastern Economic Journal, Vol. 1, Nos. 1-2, pp. 103-10.
Borjas, George J. 1994. “The Economics of Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 32, pp.
1667-717.
Cockburn, Ian and Zvi Griliches. 1987. “Industry Effects and App ropriability Measures in the Stock
Market’s Valuation of R&D and Patents.” NBER Working Paper No. 2465.
Du stmann, Christian, and Arthur van Soest. “Language and the Earnin gs of Im migrants.” Forthcoming in
Industrial and Labor Relations Review.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan. 1998. “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
Microeconomic E vidence.” NBE R W orking Paper No. 6803.
Groshen, Erica L. 1991. “The S tructure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is it Wh o You A re, What
You D o, or Where You W ork?” Journal of Human R esources, Vol. 26, No. 3, Summer, pp. 457-72.
Hellerstein, Judith, and David Neumark. 1999 . “Sex, Wages, and Productivity: An E mpirical Analysis of
Israeli Firm-Level Data.” International Economic Review, Vol. 40, No. 1, February, pp. 95-123.
Hellerstein, Judith, and David N eum ark. 1998. “Wage D iscrimination, Segregation, and Sex Differences in

Wages and P roductivity Within and Between Plants.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 37, No. 2, April, pp. 23260.
Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Kenneth R. Troske. 1999. “W ages, Productivity, and Worker
Characteristics: Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions and Wage Eq uations.” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 17, No. 3, July, pp. 409-46.
Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Kenneth R. Troske. 2002. “M arket Forces and Sex
Discrimination.” Journal of Human R esources, Vol. 37, No. 2, Spring, pp. 353-80.
Kain, John. 1968 . “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 82, No. 2, M ay, 1968, pp. 175-97.
Lang, Kevin. 1986. “A Language Theory of Discrimination.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 101,
No. 2, May, pp. 363-82.
Lazear, Edward P. 1999. “Culture and Language.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, No. 6, Part 2,
December, pp. S95-126.
Lengermann, Paul A. 2001. “Is it Wh o You A re, Where You W ork, or With Whom You W ork?
Reassessing the Relationship Between Skill Segregation and Wage Inequality.” Mimeograph, University of
Maryland.
Lubotsky, Darren. 20 00. “Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings.”
Mimeograph, P rinceton U niversity.
Mairesse, Jacq ues, and Nathalie Greenan. 1999. “Using E mployee Level D ata in a Firm Level Econometric
Study.” In John C. Haltiwanger, Julia I. Lane, James R. Spletzer, Jules J.M. Theeuwes, and Kenneth R.
Troske, eds., The Creation and An alysis of E mployer-Employee M atched D ata (Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science B.V.), pp. 489-514.
MatchW are Technologies, Inc. 1997 . AutoMatch 4.2 User Manual (Burtonsville, M D).
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In O rley C. Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard, ed s., Handb ook of Labor E conomics, V ol. 1 (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers), pp. 64192.
Trejo, Stephen. 1997. “W hy Do Mexican Americans Earn Low W ages?” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 105, December, pp. 1235-68.
Troske, Kenneth. 1998. “The Worker-Establishm ent Characteristics D atabase.” In John Haltiwanger,
Marilyn E. M anser, and Robert Topel, eds., Labor Statistics Measurement Issues (Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press), pp. 371-404.
Willis, Robert J. 1986. “W age Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital Earnings
Functions.” In Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handb ook of Labor E conomics, V ol. 1
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers), pp. 525-602.

Table 1: Linking the Three Files: Information Available in Each File
SSEL

Write-In File

Business name and address

ø

Business name and address
Unique person identifier

Many characteristics:

SEDF

Industry

Limited demographic information for
individual workers including each
worker’s:

Geographic location

Occupation

Total employment

Industry

ø

Unique person identifier

Demographic, household, and labor market
information, including:
Sex
Age
Race/ethnicity

Payroll
Education
Indicator for whether the
establishment is a single-unit
enterprise or part of a multiunit firm

English language proficiency
Earnings

Unique establishment identifier
(can be used to match to other
Census Bureau establishmentor firm-based data sets)

Hours
Occupation and industry
Immigration
Similar information for other individuals in the
household
Detailed geographic information on worker’s
residence and workplace

Table 2: Two-Way Frequency of Hand-Checked Scores for All Hand-Checked Data
from First Version of DEED
Score B
Score A

1

2

3

4

5

Row total

1

9,930
66.16

2,229
14.85

291
1.94

56
0.37

79
0.53

12,585
83.85

1,126
7.50

406
2.71

95
0.63

30
0.20

1,657
11.04

158
1.05

123
0.82

252
1.68

533
3.55

40
0.27

101
0.67

141
0.94

2
3
4
5

93
93
0.62
0.62
Column
9,930
3,355
855
314
555
15,009
total
66.16
22.35
5.70
2.09
3.70
100
Note: Percent of sample in cell is reported in italics in the second entry of each box. We have recorded all
non-matching scores above the diagonal.

Table 3: Linear Probability Estimates for Bad Match Quality as Functions of Worker Characteristics

Intercept
Age
Age 2 /100
Full-time
Fem ale
Black
Hisp anic
Less than high
school
Some college
B.A.
Advanced degree
Speak English:
Well
Poo rly
Not at all
Work in MSA
No block
No tract
No tract × MSA
No block × MSA
State:
California
Colorado
Florida
Maryland
New Y ork
Pennsylvania
Texas
Industry:
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Wholesale
Retail
FIRE
Occupation:
Manager
Service
Farming
Production
Laborer
R2

Coefficient
(1)
0.135
-0.002
0.002
-0.019
0.028
0.069
-0.004
-0.006

Std. error
(2)
(0.032)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.010)

Coefficient
(3)
0.122
-0.001
0.001
-0.020
0.029
0.055
-0.003
-0.008

Std. error
(4)
(0.032)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)

Coefficient
(5)
0.149
0.000
0.000
-0.018
0.008
0.050
-0.002
0.001

Std. error
(6)
(0.033)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)

Coefficient
(7)
0.140
0.000
0.000
-0.017
0.009
0.047
-0.002
-0.001

Std. error
(8)
(0.033)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)

0.016
0.022
0.055

(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.010)

0.013
0.017
0.044

(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.010)

0.006
0.001
0.018

(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.011)

0.008
0.004
0.023

(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.011)

-0.007
0.009
-0.048
0.021
0.009
-0.023
0.041
-0.067

(0.017)
(0.023)
(0.042)
(0.021)
(0.049)
(0.045)
(0.060)
(0.062)

-0.011
0.005
-0.054
0.007
0.005
-0.027
0.053
-0.053

(0.017)
(0.023)
(0.042)
(0.021)
(0.049)
(0.045)
(0.060)
(0.061)

-0.005
0.019
-0.035
0.001
0.001
-0.021
0.054
-0.036

(0.017)
(0.023)
(0.042)
(0.020)
(0.048)
(0.045)
(0.059)
(0.061)

-0.007
0.016
-0.037
0.002
0.001
-0.021
0.054
-0.037

(0.017)
(0.023)
(0.042)
(0.020)
(0.048)
(0.045)
(0.059)
(0.061)

-0.002
-0.020
0.052
0.046
0.072
-0.030
0.007

(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)

-0.007
-0.024
0.041
0.038
0.061
-0.042
0.003

(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)

-0.007
-0.024
0.041
0.039
0.061
-0.042
0.004

(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)

-0.020
-0.078
-0.062
0.004
-0.072
-0.026
0.088

(0.029)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.009)

-0.017
-0.075
-0.060
0.005
-0.070
-0.025
0.090

(0.029)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.008)
(0.009)

-0.003
0.020
0.122
-0.001
0.007

(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.063)
(0.010)
(0.009)
0.0433

0.0104

0.0221

0.0428

Note: There are 14,954 observations. Sample includes all hand-checked observations on individuals employed and at
work in 1990 in the United States. The omitted categories are: Illinois(state), services (industry), and support
(occupation).

Table 4: Scored Match Rates for “Problem” Industries

Industry
number

Industry name

Proportion of

Share of

Number of times

matches coded

employment in

industry met

“unacceptable”

the DEED

“bad” criteria

641

Eating and drinking places

0.576

5.639

3

712

Real estate, including real estateinsurance offices

0.502

1.404

4

700

Banking

0.462

2.995

4

710

Security, commodity brokerage, and
investment companies

0.344

1.153

2

812

Offices and clinics of physicians

0.268

1.839

4

601

Grocery stores

0.264

2.731

4

831

Hospitals

0.185

7.566

3

410

Trucking service

0.172

1.545

2

441

Telephone communications

0.154

1.041

2

711

Insurance

0.133

2.986

2

841

Legal services

0.127

1.380

2

832

Nursing and personal care facilities

0.118

1.482

1

591

Department stores

0.104

1.703

1

510

Professional and commercial
equipment and supplies

0.100

1.001

1

Table 5: Means of Worker Characteristics
SEDF

Age
Fem ale
Married
Female×
married
W hite
Hisp anic
Black
Full-time
Number of kids
(if female)
High school
diploma
Some college
B.A.
Advanced
degree
Ln(hourly
wage)
Hourly wage

All workers
DEED
NWE CD

DEED - NWECD SEDF
SEDF
(4)
(5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

37.08
(12.78)
0.46
0.60
0.25

37.51
(12.23)
0.47
0.65
0.28

38.61
(12.23)
0.47
0.68
0.30

0.42

1.52

0.02
0.04
0.02

0.02
0.07
0.04

0.82
0.07
0.08
0.77
1.57
(1.62)
0.34

0.86
0.05
0.05
0.83
1.53
(1.55)
0.33

0.87
0.04
0.07
0.82
1.84
(1.65)
0.39

0.04
-0.01
-0.03
0.06
-0.04

0.05
-0.03
-0.01
0.05
0.27

-0.01

0.30
0.13
0.05

0.32
0.16
0.05

0.30
0.11
0.04

2.21
(0.70)
12.10
(82.19)
39.51
(11.44)
46.67
(11.05)
22576
(26760)

2.30
(0.65)
12.89
(37.07)
40.42
(10.37)
48.21
(9.35)
25581
(29475

2.24
(0.64)
11.76
(25.77)
39.91
(10.18)
47.95
(9.70)
22485
(21232)

0.01
0.04
0.33
0.05
0.07
0.17
0.08
0.24
3,291,213

0.01
0.00
0.49
0.07
0.03
0.09
0.02
0.28
904,589

Hours worked
in 1989
W eeks worked
in 1989
Earnings in
1989
Industry:
Mining
0.01
Construction
0.07
Manufacturing
0.25
Transportation
0.08
W holesale
0.05
Retail
0.20
FIRE
0.08
Services
0.26
Observations
12,143,183

SEDF
(6)

Full-time workers
DEED
NWE CD DEED - NWECD SEDF
SEDF
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

37.69
(11.27)
0.42
0.64
0.24

37.87
(11.06)
0.44
0.67
0.26

38.96
(11.10)
0.44
0.70
0.28

0.18

1.26

0.02
0.03
0.02

0.02
0.06
0.04

0.87
0.05
0.05
–
1.51
(1.53)
0.34

0.87
0.04
0.07
–
1.83
(1.63)
0.40

0.04
-0.01
-0.03
–
-0.05

0.05
-0.03
-0.01
–
0.27

0.05

0.82
0.06
0.08
–
1.57
(1.59)
0.35

-0.01

0.05

0.02
0.03
0.01

0.00
-0.02
-0.01

0.31
0.14
0.05

0.33
0.17
0.06

0.30
0.11
0.04

0.02
0.02
0.01

-0.01
-0.03
-0.01

0.10

0.03

0.76

-0.50

0.92

0.41

0.30

-0.21

1.54

1.28

0.37

0.32

300 5.4

-90.8

2.31
(0.54)
11.73
(11.73)
41.89
(5.56)
50.65
(3.79)
25280
(20804)

-0.01

-0.34

2.38
(0.57)
12.98
(12.07)
42.41
(6.03)
50.71
(3.71)
28559
(29336)

0.06

0.79

2.31
(0.58)
12.22
(11.27)
42.11
(6.12)
50.33
(4.25)
26465
(26852)

209 3.5

-118 5.2

0.00
-0.03
0.08
-0.02
0.02
-0.03
0.00
-0.02

0.00
-0.07
0.24
-0.03
-0.02
-0.11
-0.07
0.03

0.00
-0.03
0.08
-0.03
0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.01

0.00
-0.07
0.26
0.00
-0.03
-0.07
-0.07
0.01

Note: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.

0.01
0.01
0.07
0.04
0.28
0.36
0.08
0.06
0.06
0.08
0.16
0.14
0.09
0.09
0.24
0.23
9,375,086 2,725,599

0.01
0.00
0.54
0.08
0.03
0.07
0.02
0.25
742,188

Total employment

Table 6: Means for Establishments
SSEL
DEED
NWECD
17.57
52.68
61.64
(253.75)
(577.39)
(276.14)

DEED - SSEL
35.11

NWECD - SSEL
44.07

Establishment size:
1 - 25

0.88

0.65

0.68

-0.24

-0.20

26 - 50

0.06

0.15

0.11

0.09

0.05

51 - 100

0.03

0.10

0.09

0.07

0.06

101 +

0.03

0.10

0.12

0.07

0.10

Mining

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.01

Construction

0.09

0.07

0.00

-0.02

-0.09

Manufacturing

0.06

0.13

0.29

0.07

0.23

Transportation

0.04

0.05

0.09

0.01

0.06

Wholesale

0.08

0.11

0.09

0.03

0.01

Retail

0.25

0.24

0.21

-0.01

-0.04

FIRE

0.09

0.10

0.04

0.01

-0.05

Services

0.28

0.26

0.26

-0.03

-0.02

0.81

0.82

0.61

0.00

-0.21

North East

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.00

-0.02

Mid Atlantic

0.16

0.15

0.14

0.00

-0.01

East North Central

0.16

0.20

0.23

0.04

0.07

West North Central

0.07

0.08

0.12

0.01

0.04

South Atlantic

0.18

0.16

0.14

-0.02

-0.04

East South Central

0.05

0.05

0.08

0.00

0.03

West South Central

0.10

0.10

0.11

0.00

0.01

Mountain

0.06

0.05

0.05

-0.01

-0.01

Pacific

0.16

0.15

0.10

-0.02

-0.07

397
(5064)

1358
(10329)

1519
(11155)

961

1122

21.02
(1385.12)
–
0.23

24.24
(111.79)
0.17
0.42

18.56
(76.08)
0.29
0.36

3.22

-2.46

–
0.19

–
0.13

Industry:

In MSA
Census Region:

Payroll ($1000)
Payroll/total employment
Share of employees matched
Multi-unit establishment

N
5,237,592
972,436
137,735
Note: 55 establishments in the DEED sample do not have valid county data from the SSEL. For these 55, the
workers reported place of work was used to determine MSA status.

Table 7: Log Wage Regressions with Aggregated Industry and Occupation Dummies

Intercept
Age
Age 2 /100
Black
Hispanic
Married
High school diploma
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Work in MSA
Female
Full-time
Female × full-time
Industry:
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Retail
FIRE
Services
Occupation:
Manager
Support
Service
Farmer
Production
R2
N

SEDF
(1)
0.746
(0.002)
0.041
(.0001)
-0.039
(.0001)
-0.061
(0.001)
-0.093
(0.001)
0.080
0.000
0.104
(0.001)
0.184
(0.001)
0.257
(0.001)
0.400
(0.001)
0.575
(0.001)
0.198
0.000
-0.171
(0.001)
0.237
(0.001)
-0.126
(0.001)

All
DEED
(2)
0.721
(0.003)
0.045
(.0001)
-0.042
(.0002)
-0.058
(0.001)
-0.083
(0.001)
0.071
(0.001)
0.101
(0.001)
0.182
(0.001)
0.250
(0.001)
0.392
(0.001)
0.575
(0.002)
0.194
(0.001)
-0.187
(0.001)
0.219
(0.001)
-0.131
(0.002)

NWECD
(3)
0.676
(0.006)
0.043
(.0003)
-0.040
(.0003)
-0.063
(0.002)
-0.073
(0.003)
0.079
(0.001)
0.124
(0.002)
0.201
(0.002)
0.312
(0.002)
0.402
(0.002)
0.531
(0.003)
0.165
(0.001)
-0.137
(0.003)
0.256
(0.002)
-0.180
(0.003)

SEDF
(4)
0.681
(0.002)
0.056
(.0001)
-0.055
(.0001)
-0.070
(0.001)
-0.098
(0.001)
0.083
0.000
0.129
(0.001)
0.208
(0.001)
0.268
(0.001)
0.426
(0.001)
0.599
(0.001)
0.202
0.000
-0.295
0.000
–

Full-time
DEED
(5)
0.687
(0.003)
0.057
(.0002)
-0.056
(.0002)
-0.062
(0.001)
-0.083
(0.001)
0.071
(0.001)
0.122
(0.001)
0.202
(0.001)
0.259
(0.001)
0.417
(0.001)
0.602
(0.002)
0.197
(0.001)
-0.316
(0.001)
–

NWECD
(6)
0.709
(0.006)
0.054
(.0003)
-0.053
(.0004)
-0.069
(0.002)
-0.079
(0.003)
0.073
(0.001)
0.136
(0.002)
0.214
(0.002)
0.307
(0.002)
0.415
(0.002)
0.552
(0.003)
0.162
(0.001)
-0.312
(0.001)
–

–

–

–

0.197
(0.002)
0.019
(0.001)
0.061
(0.001)
0.117
(0.001)
-0.173
(0.001)
0.022
(0.001)
-0.069
(0.001)

0.142
(0.004)
0.025
(0.002)
0.049
(0.001)
0.103
(0.002)
-0.172
(0.001)
0.027
(0.001)
-0.042
(0.001)

0.239
(0.007)
-0.047
(0.024)
0.127
(0.003)
0.177
(0.004)
-0.160
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.005)
0.026
(0.003)

0.189
(0.002)
0.016
(0.001)
0.062
(0.001)
0.112
(0.001)
-0.181
(0.001)
0.023
(0.001)
-0.066
(0.001)

0.143
(0.003)
0.023
(0.002)
0.049
(0.001)
0.102
(0.001)
-0.172
(0.001)
0.030
(0.001)
-0.040
(0.001)

0.233
(0.006)
-0.077
(0.022)
0.126
(0.003)
0.183
(0.003)
-0.175
(0.003)
-0.018
(0.005)
0.012
(0.003)

0.301
(0.001)
0.116
(0.001)
-0.050
(0.001)
-0.116
(0.003)
0.137
(0.001)
0.358
12,143,183

0.322
(0.001)
0.114
(0.001)
-0.063
(0.001)
-0.132
(0.007)
0.139
(0.001)
0.396
3,291,213

0.288
(0.002)
0.066
(0.002)
-0.094
(0.002)
-0.156
(0.010)
0.138
(0.002)
0.369
904,589

0.290
(0.001)
0.116
(0.001)
-0.087
(0.001)
-0.121
(0.003)
0.136
(0.001)
0.426
9,375,086

0.305
(0.001)
0.112
(0.001)
-0.095
(0.001)
-0.139
(0.006)
0.135
(0.001)
0.448
2,725,599

0.272
(0.002)
0.065
(0.002)
-0.110
(0.002)
-0.159
(0.010)
0.130
(0.002)
0.442
742,188

Note: The dependent variable is the log of hourly wages. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

Table 8: Means for Men from DEED in Establishments with At Least One Matched Hispanic Worker
Hispanic and speak English:

Log(wage)
Age
Age2 /100
Age - 18
(Age - 18)2 /100
Married
High school degree
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Live in MSA
Hispanic × don't speak English

White
(1)
2.748
(0.538)
39.604
(10.691)
16.828
(8.896)
21.604
(10.691)
5.810
(5.113)
0.756
(0.429)
0.278
(0.448)
0.226
(0.418)
0.086
(0.281)
0.223
(0.416)
0.105
(0.306)
0.859
(0.348)
--

Very well
(3)
2.392
(0.539)
34.768
(10.443)
13.179
(8.138)
16.768
(10.443)
3.902
(4.461)
0.663
(0.473)
0.298
(0.458)
0.247
(0.431)
0.075
(0.263)
0.104
(0.305)
0.042
(0.201)
0.905
(0.293)
--

Well
(4)
2.249
(0.483)
37.165
(11.065)
15.037
(8.942)
19.165
(11.065)
4.897
(5.035)
0.754
(0.431)
0.226
(0.418)
0.141
(0.348)
0.044
(0.204)
0.038
(0.191)
0.018
(0.132)
0.932
(0.251)
--

Poorly
(5)
2.020
(0.450)
36.274
(11.508)
14.482
(9.165)
18.274
(11.508)
4.664
(5.109)
0.694
(0.461)
0.137
(0.344)
0.059
(0.236)

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

0.100
(0.135)

Hispanic
(2)
2.284
(0.536)
35.542
(10.882)
13.817
(8.592)
17.542
(10.882)
4.261
(4.757)
0.685
(0.464)
0.251
(0.433)
0.189
(0.391)
0.058
(0.233)
0.073
(0.261)
0.031
(0.173)
0.919
(0.273)
0.043
(0.202)
0.146
(0.353)
0.206
(0.405)
0.438
(0.308)

0.367
(0.288)

0.479
(0.305)

0.594
(0.295)

0.701
(0.270)

0.007
(0.061)
0.047
(0.163)
0.130
(0.255)
0.816
(0.308)

0.046
(0.142)
0.146
(0.252)
0.198
(0.279)
0.610
(0.383)

0.013
(0.063)
0.050
(0.125)
0.089
(0.157)
0.848
(0.229)

0.033
(0.099)
0.114
(0.184)
0.570
(0.314)
0.283
(0.287)

0.072
(0.144)
0.568
(0.298)
0.147
(0.188)
0.212
(0.244)

0.481
(0.296)
0.221
(0.219)
0.125
(0.168)
0.173
(0.212)

0.304
(0.178)
0.233
(0.121)
0.087
(0.077)
0.185
(0.147)
0.076
(0.102)
38.849
(4.577)
0.693
(0.147)
327,190

0.272
(0.219)
0.222
(0.198)
0.066
(0.110)
0.121
(0.163)
0.041
(0.096)
37.254
(6.627)
0.654
(0.235)
69,103

0.292
(0.224)
0.250
(0.203)
0.075
(0.115)
0.142
(0.174)
0.050
(0.107)
37.192
(6.348)
0.650
(0.232)
41,812

0.267
(0.212)
0.202
(0.186)
0.060
(0.106)
0.104
(0.147)
0.033
(0.083)
37.808
(6.817)
0.671
(0.231)
14,256

0.220
(0.202)
0.161
(0.174)
0.046
(0.098)
0.077
(0.127)
0.023
(0.069)
37.047
(7.082)
0.651
(0.246)
10,092

0.183
(0.188)
0.131
(0.163)
0.038
(0.089)
0.060
(0.117)
0.016
(0.056)
36.153
(7.667)
0.627
(0.259)
2,943

Hispanic × speak English poorly

--

Hispanic × speak English well

--

Share of co-workers who are Hispanic
Share of Hispanic co-workers who:
Don't speak English
Speak English poorly
Speak English well
Speak English very well
Share of co-workers with:
High school degree
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Average age of workers
Share married
Observations

Not at all
(6)
1.825
(0.409)
36.164
(12.665)
14.682
(10.082)
18.164
(12.665)
4.903
(5.616)
0.640
(0.480)
0.081
(0.273)
0.030
(0.169)
0.019
(0.137)
0.014
(0.120)
0.009
(0.095)
0.947
0.952
(0.225)
(0.213)
---

Note: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. The higher education categories for Hispanics who speak English poorly
or not at all had to be merged because of small sizes and Census Bureau confidentiality rules. The co-worker characteristics are
always computed excluding the reference worker.

Hispanic
Share of co-workers
who are Hispanic
× Hispanic
Age
Age 2/100
Married
High school degree
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Live in MSA

Pooled
(1)
-0.135
(0.003)
–
–
0.044
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.143
(0.002)
0.148
(0.003)
0.241
(0.003)
0.289
(0.004)
0.519
(0.004)
0.727
(0.006)
0.147
(0.007)
no

Table 9: Log Wage Regressions Including Hispanic Ethnicity
Men from DEED in Establishments with At Least One Matched Hispanic Worker
Pooled
Pooled
Whites
Hispanics
Pooled
Whites
(1')
(2)
(2')
(2")
(3)
(3')
-0.090
-0.108
–
–
-0.104
–
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
–
-0.104
-0.037
-0.168
-0.034
0.080
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.012)
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.039
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.127
(0.002)
0.107
(0.002)
0.177
(0.002)
0.221
(0.003)
0.415
(0.003)
0.586
(0.003)
0.008
(0.016)
no

0.043
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.131
(0.002)
0.115
(0.002)
0.182
(0.003)
0.227
(0.003)
0.418
(0.004)
0.596
(0.005)
0.114
(0.007)
yes

0.046
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.134
(0.002)
0.112
(0.003)
0.178
(0.003)
0.223
(0.004)
0.412
(0.004)
0.587
(0.005)
0.109
(0.007)
yes

0.035
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.117
(0.004)
0.104
(0.005)
0.176
(0.005)
0.225
(0.008)
0.407
(0.008)
0.575
(0.014)
0.087
(0.010)
yes

0.041
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.131
(0.002)
0.113
(0.002)
0.183
(0.003)
0.224
(0.003)
0.420
(0.004)
0.596
(0.005)
0.095
(0.005)
yes

0.044
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.134
(0.002)
0.110
(0.003)
0.178
(0.003)
0.220
(0.004)
0.414
(0.004)
0.587
(0.005)
0.090
(0.005)
yes

Hispanics
(3")
–
-0.099
(0.009)
–
0.034
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.117
(0.004)
0.098
(0.005)
0.164
(0.005)
0.214
(0.008)
0.390
(0.008)
0.558
(0.014)
0.085
(0.008)
yes

Pooled
(4)
-0.043
(0.004)
–
-0.216
(0.011)
0.039
(0.000)
-0.054
(0.001)
0.127
(0.002)
0.104
(0.002)
0.174
(0.002)
0.218
(0.003)
0.411
(0.003)
0.583
(0.003)
0.007
(0.016)
no

Co-worker
characteristics
3-digit industry and
no
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
establishment size
Establishment
no
yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
yes
fixed effects
Observations
396,293
396,293
396,293
327,190
69,103
396,293
327,190
69,103
396,293
R2
0.47
0.32
0.49
0.45
0.42
0.51
0.47
0.44
0.43
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, based on clustering by establishment. Regressions include state and 1-digit industry fixed effects, and dummy
variables for immigration cohorts for Hispanics. Age is adjusted by subtracting off 18, to better capture years in the labor market. The employment size categories are 124, 25-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, and 1000 and up. When the 3-digit industry controls are added the 1-digit controls drop out. 55,793 establishments are
represented in the sample. The R2 values reported in columns (1') and (4) are for the within-establishment variation. In column (4), the share Hispanic effect for whites is
subsumed into the establishment fixed effects.

Table 10: Log Wage Regressions Including Language Skills
Men from DEED in Establishments with At Least One Matched Hispanic Worker
Hispanics
Whites
Hispanics
Whites
Hispanics
(1)
(2)
(2')
(3)
(3')
Share of co-workers who are Hispanic
-0.146
-0.041
-0.141
0.070
-0.073
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.009)
Hispanic × don't speak English
-0.249
–
-0.206
–
-0.214
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.011)
Hispanic × speak English poorly
-0.165
–
-0.137
–
-0.144
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.007)
Hispanic × speak English well
-0.057
–
-0.039
–
-0.041
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
Share of Hispanic co-workers who:
Don't speak English
–
0.067
-0.094
0.077
-0.077
(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.017)
Speak English poorly
–
0.008
-0.056
0.020
-0.031
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.010)
Speak English well
–
-0.007
-0.039
0.003
-0.019
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.008)
Co-worker characteristics
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
3-digit industry and establishment size
no
no
no
yes
yes
Observations
69,103
327,190
69,103
327,190
69,103
R2
0.42
0.45
0.43
0.47
0.45
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, based on clustering by establishment. Regressions include state and
1-digit industry fixed effects, and dummy variables for immigration cohorts for Hispanics. The employment size categories are
1-24, 25-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, and 1000 and up. When the 3-digit industry controls are added the 1-digit
controls drop out. 55,793 establishments are represented in the sample. The other controls listed in Table 9 are also included,
but not reported here.

Table 11: Log Wage Regressions by Ethnicity and Language Category
Hispanic Men from DEED in Establishments with At Least One Matched Hispanic Worker
Speak English:

A. With basic controls and co-worker
characteristics
Share of co-workers who are Hispanic
Age
Age 2/100
Married
High school degree
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Live in MSA
R2
B. Add 3-digit industry and establishment size
controls
Share of co-workers who are Hispanic

Very well
(1)

W ell
(2)

Poorly
(3)

No t at all
(4)

-0.146
(0.011)
0.042
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.128
(0.005)
0.108
(0.006)

-0.149
(0.017)
0.028
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.109
(0.009)
0.070
(0.009)

-0.089
(0.020)
0.017
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.085
(0.010)
0.020
(0.013)

-0.092
(0.039)
0.008
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
0.062
(0.018)
0.059
(0.028)

0.169

0.138

0.059

0.130

(0.007)
0.233
(0.010)
0.402
(0.009)
0.595
(0.015)
0.100
(0.010)
0.42

(0.011)
0.133
(0.018)
0.320
(0.023)
0.354
(0.038)
0.061
(0.017)
0.32

(0.018)
0.071
(0.029)
0.128
(0.041)
0.118
(0.050)
0.110
(0.025)
0.30

(0.038)
**
**
**
**
**
**
0.009
(0.047)
0.23

-0.064
-0.098
-0.050
-0.067
(0.011)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.040)
R2
0.45
0.36
0.33
0.30
Observations
41,812
14,256
10,092
2,943
Note: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, based on clustering by establishment. Basic controls include state and
1-digit industry fixed effects, and dummy variables for immigration cohorts. Panel B includes the controls reported in Panel A.
Age is adjusted by subtracting off 18, to better capture years in the labor market. The employment size categories are 1-24, 2549, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, and 1000 and up. When the 3-digit industry controls are added the 1-digit controls drop
out. 55,793 establishments are represented in the sample. ** indicates too few observations cell to report statistics.

Table 12: Log Wage Regressions Including Language Skills
Hispanic Men from DEED in Establishments with At Least One Matched Hispanic Worker
Speak English:

A. With basic controls and co-worker
characteristics
Share of co-workers who are Hispanic
Share of Hispanic co-workers who don't speak English
Share of Hispanic co-workers speak English poorly
Share of Hispanic co-workers speak English well
R2
B. Add 3-digit industry and establishment size
Share of co-workers who are Hispanic

Very well
(1)

Well
(2)

Poorly
(3)

Not at all
(4)

-0.146
(0.011)
-0.068
(0.037)
0.006
(0.020)
0.028
(0.014)
0.42

-0.162
(0.018)
-0.156
(0.039)
-0.097
(0.024)
-0.119
(0.014)
0.32

-0.110
(0.020)
-0.186
(0.033)
-0.136
(0.019)
-0.028
(0.026)
0.31

-0.137
(0.040)
-0.168
(0.037)
-0.107
(0.044)
-0.085
(0.051)
0.24

-0.058
-0.110
-0.074
-0.125
(0.011)
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.043)
Share of Hispanic co-workers who don't speak English
-0.087
-0.115
-0.169
-0.165
(0.037)
(0.039)
(0.033)
(0.041)
Share of Hispanic co-workers speak English poorly
-0.010
-0.056
-0.098
-0.080
(0.020)
(0.024)
(0.020)
(0.045)
Share of Hispanic co-workers speak English well
-0.016
-0.058
-0.012
-0.070
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.026)
(0.053)
R2
0.45
0.36
0.33
0.30
Observations
41,812
14,256
10,092
2,943
Note: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, based on clustering by establishment. Basic controls include state and
1-digit industry fixed effects, dummy variables for immigration cohorts, and the other controls listed in Table 9. The
employment size categories are 1-24, 25-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, and 1000 and up. When the 3-digit industry
controls are added the 1-digit controls drop out. 55,793 establishments are represented in the sample.

Table 13: M eans for Men from DE ED in Establishm ents w ith At Least
One Matched Hispanic Worker, California and Florida
California

Log(wage)
Age
Age2 /100
Married
High school degree
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Live in MSA

White
(1)
2.886
(0.550)
39.816
(10.984)
17.059
(9.221)
0.685
(0.465)
0.171
(0.377)
0.261
(0.439)
0.098
(0.297)
0.273
(0.445)
0.143
(0.350)
0.980
(0.138)

White
(3)
2.656
(0.573)
39.142
(10.905)
16.510
(9.054)
0.716
(0.451)
0.230
(0.421)
0.239
(0.426)
0.107
(0.310)
0.247
(0.431)
0.106
(0.308)
0.966
(0.182)

0.204
(0.168)

Hispanic
(2)
2.305
(0.530)
34.719
(10.674)
13.193
(8.309)
0.657
(0.475)
0.216
(0.411)
0.185
(0.388)
0.059
(0.236)
0.058
(0.234)
0.024
(0.152)
0.984
(0.127)
0.058
(0.234)
0.186
(0.389)
0.211
(0.408)
0.511
(0.297)

0.169
(0.183)

Hispanic
(4)
2.303
(0.559)
38.903
(12.401)
16.672
(10.295)
0.717
(0.451)
0.208
(0.406)
0.215
(0.411)
0.098
(0.297)
0.128
(0.335)
0.062
(0.241)
0.992
(0.088)
0.074
(0.262)
0.151
(0.358)
0.205
(0.404)
0.575
(0.322)

0.013
(0.083)
0.061
(0.171)
0.137
(0.234)
0.789
(0.301)

0.063
(0.161)
0.184
(0.265)
0.200
(0.263)
0.552
(0.381)

0.013
(0.088)
0.049
(0.169)
0.152
(0.279)
0.786
(0.335)

0.076
(0.183)
0.152
(0.247)
0.202
(0.273)
0.570
(0.378)

0.200
(0.161)
0.266
(0.151)
0.096
(0.092)
0.220
(0.163)
0.101
(0.119)
20.450
(5.122)
0.631
(0.175)
49,170

0.224
(0.203)
0.225
(0.202)
0.068
(0.112)
0.113
(0.158)
0.040
(0.094)
18.517
(6.628)
0.624
(0.242)
26,126

0.263
(0.172)
0.250
(0.145)
0.112
(0.107)
0.197
(0.153)
0.071
(0.099)
20.439
(4.901)
0.659
(0.170)
8,554

0.242
(0.223)
0.227
(0.215)
0.098
(0.146)
0.135
(0.179)
0.054
(0.120)
21.585
(7.707)
0.658
(0.250)
4,145

Hispanic × don't speak English
Hispanic × speak English poorly
Hispanic × speak English well
Share of coworkers who are Hispanic
Share of Hispanic coworkers who:
Don't speak English
Speak English poorly
Speak English well
Speak English very well
Share of co-workers with:
High school degree
Some college
Associates degree
B.A.
Advanced degree
Average age of worker
Share of workers married
Observations

Florida

Note: Standard deviations are reported in paren theses.

Table 14: Log Wage Regressions In clud ing Language Skills
Men from DEED in Establishments with At Least One M atched Hispanic Worker
California
Florida
Wh ites
Hispanics
Wh ites
Hispanics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Share of co-workers who are Hispanic
-0.046
-0.106
0.161
0.081
(0.021)
(0.015)
(0.040)
(0.028)
Hispanic × don't speak English
-0.193
-0.228
(0.015)
(0.039)
Hispanic × speak E nglish poorly
-0.123
-0.210
(0.010)
(0.031)
Hispanic × speak E nglish well
-0.008
-0.109
(0.009)
(0.026)
Share of Hispanic co-workers who:
Don't speak En glish
0.067
-0.134
0.111
-0.072
(0.037)
(0.024)
(0.052)
(0.060)
Speak E nglish poorly
-0.004
-0.090
0.032
-0.080
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.044)
(0.043)
Speak E nglish well
-0.001
-0.045
-0.07
-0.065
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.02)
(0.037)
Observations
49,170
26,126
8,554
4,145
R2
0.39
0.45
0.38
0.37
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in paren theses, based on clustering by establishment.
Regressions include co-worker human capital characteristics, state and 1-digit industry fixed
effects, dummy variables for immigration cohorts, and the other controls listed in Table 9.

Table 15: Hispanic Ancestry Composition
California
(1)

Florida
(2)

%

%

Central America

4.15

3.64

Cuba

1.26

53.61

Mexico

78.86

5.28

Puerto Rico

1.74

12.57

Other

11.32

24.90

Appendix Table A1: Distribution of Matches
by Pass and Round
Total
%

Total
%

Pass 1

490,408
14.9

Pass 9

60,987
1.85

Pass 2

385,627
11.72

Pass 10

19,215
0.58

Pass 3

702,355
21.34

Pass 11

7,027
0.21

Pass 4

523,534
15.91

Pass 12

25,737
0.78

Pass 5

227,557
6.91

Pass 13

85,646
2.60

Pass 6

376,436
11.44

Pass 14

55,098
1.67

Pass 7

165,877
5.04

Pass 15

35,040
1.06

Pass 8

119,877
3.64

Pass 16

10,792
0.33

Total

3,291,213
100

Appendix Table A2: Hypothetical Matched Observations and Hand-Check Scores
______________________________________________________________________________________________________
Score1=1 & Score2=1:

Score1=2 & Score2=2:

Worker-supplied information:
T ile s ‘ R’ Us
244 0 M ain S t.
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=703

SSEL information:
Tiles ‘R’ Us, Inc.
244 0 S M ain
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=703

T ile s ‘ R’ Us
224 0 E M ain S t.
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=703

Tiles ‘R’ Us, Inc.
244 0 S M ain
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=703
or

Score1=3 & Score2=3:

T ile s ‘ R’ Us
Shopping Plaza
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=703

Tiles ‘R’ Us, Inc
PO B ox 222
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=703

G ro ce ry S to re Ch ain N am e
G ro ce ry S to re Ch ain N am e
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=601

G ro ce ry S to re Ch ain N am e
244 0 S M ain
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=601
or

Score1=4 & Score2=4:

T ile s ‘ R’ Us
2440 S Main St
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=703

Tiles ‘R’ Us, Inc
2400 US H ighway 10
Gotham, SW 11110
Industry=703

Shelbyville Hose
M ain
Shelbyville, SW 110011
Industry=121

Shelbyville Manufacturing
244 0 S M ain
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=200
or

Score1=5 & Score2=5:

Bank of Gotham
2440 Main St
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=700

Bank of Gotham
300 Fen wick R
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=700

Gotham Shop & Save
2440 Main St
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=603

Gotham Engine R epair Co.
2400 Peaceful St
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=751
or

Re liable C ar R epa ir
200 Main St
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=751

Reliable Dry Cleaners
2440 Main St
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=771

Score1=1 & Score2=2:

Shelbyville Hospital
M ain
Shelbyville, SW 11101
Industry=831

Shelbyville Hospital
2440 Main St
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=831

Score1=1 & Score2=3:

Shelbyville Gas W orks
244 0 M ain S t.
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=201

Shelbyville Gas W orks
244 0 M ain S t.
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=641 (Eating Place
industry code)
or

Ch uck & D ave’ s B ait
Highway 10
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=601

Chu ck & D ave’s
2440 Highway 10
Shelbyville, SW 11111
Industry=601

Score1=2 & Score2=5:

A1 M anufacturing
244 0 M ain S t.
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=201

A1 M anufacturing C redit Union
244 0 M ain S t.
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=702

Score1=2 & Score2=3:

Gotham Bank
Gotham Bank
G oth am , S W
Industry=700

Gotham Bank
244 0 M ain S t.
Gotham, SW 11111
Industry=700

______________________________________________________________________________________________________
Note: In these examples, Shelbyville is a small city or a town and Gotham is a major city.

Figure 1: Histograms for Industries by Error Rates Based on First Round of Hand-Checking

Figure 2: Histograms for Segregation by Ethnicity and Language Proficiency

