                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DRUG TREATMENT AS A CRIME FIGHTING TOOL


                                           Mireia Jofre-Bonet
                                            Jody L. Sindelar


                                          Working Paper 9038
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9038


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




We thank Jenny Williams for her useful comments as a discussant of this paper at the 2001 International
Health Economics Association Conference in York, UK. We also thank Tracy A. Falba, the seminar
participants at the Yale School of Public Health, and two anonymous referees for their comments. We are
indebted to A. Thomas McLellan for allowing use of the clinical trial data he collected. Funding: The authors
acknowledge the generous support of grants to Yale, numbers P50 DA09241, U10DA1308, NIAAA K02-
AA00164 and NIDA R01 DA14471-01. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Mireia Jofre-Bonet and Jody L. Sindelar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Drug Treatment as a Crime Fighting Tool
Mireia Jofre-Bonet and Jody L. Sindelar
NBER Working Paper No. 9038
July 2002
JEL No. I1, J0



                                              ABSTRACT

        Drugs and crime are known to be correlated, but the direction of causality and the magnitude of
the relationship have not been well established. We take a new approach to estimating this relationship
and examine a little used, multi-site dataset of 3,500 inner-city drug users entering treatment. We analyze
the change in crime and in drug use pre and post treatment, controlling for other covariates. We take first
differences to address omitted variable problems. For our sample, we find that treatment reduces drug
use which, in turn, reduced drug decreases crime. Reduced drug use due to treatment is associated with
54% fewer days of crime for profit, ceteris paribus. Our evidence suggests that, reduced drug use is
causally related to reduced crime. This finding is robust to different specifications and subsamples. Our
findings broadly suggest that drug treatment may be an effective crime-fighting tool. Given the huge and
growing expense of the criminal justice system, drug treatment might be cost-effective relative to
incarceration.




Mireia Jofre-Bonet Ph.D.                                          Jody L. Sindelar Ph.D.
Yale School of Public Health                                      Yale School of Public Health
PO Box 208034                                                     PO Box 208034
60 College Street                                                 60 College Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8034                                          New Haven, CT 06520-8034
Tel: 203-785-6299                                                 and NBER
Fax: 203-785-6287                                                 Tel: 203-785-5287
mireia.jofre-bonet@yale.edu                                       Fax: 203-785-6287
                                                                  jody.sindelar@yale.edu
                                                                                                3




I.      Introduction

        Crime reduction is a current top priority of society. The primary approach to
reducing crime in the US has been through the criminal justice system, especially the
prison system. The increasingly large number of people incarcerated has been correlated
with a fall in crime, but it has taken a large toll on society in terms of government
expense for prisons, as well as in personal and family costs. The toll on the minority
community has been disproportionately heavy. Because many who are incarcerated use
and abuse illicit drugs, treatment for illicit drugs has the potential for being an effective
tool for prevention of crime. For instance, data collected on defendants in 23 cities
indicates that 51% to 83% of arrested males and 38% to 80% of arrested females were
under the influence of at least one illicit drug at the time of arrest.[1]

        If drugs cause crime, then reducing drug use through treatment could also
reduce crime. Treatment is considerably less costly, both monetarily and in other ways
as well. Outpatient counseling-based treatment can cost about $300 per episode,
methadone treatment costs less than $3,000 per year and a year in prison costs about
$23,000 on average. The government funds both the criminal justice system and most
treatments for inner city illicit drug abusers. Thus, the government might be able to
produce crime reduction more cost-effectively by moving towards treatment. To a very
limited extent, treatment is used to reduce crime through jail diversion programs, drug
courts, and other programs. However, in order to make better use of treatment as an
alternative, more needs to be known about the magnitude of the impact of treatment for
drug abuse on crime and whether the reduction in treatment caused the change in crime.

        Objective. The objective of this paper is to estimate the extent to which a change
in drug use that results from treatment reduces crime and whether changes in drug use
are causally related to changes in crime. We focus only on crime-for-profit (e.g. theft,
larceny, prostitution, and drug dealing). We exclude drug possession because it is
almost tantamount to drug use. Further, it is not per se the type of crime that has the
greatest negative externalities for society.

        Methods. We use a longitudinal data set composed of inner-city drug users who
sought treatment for their drug dependence. Inner-city drug users would be a group
                                                                                             4


likely targeted for a policy designed to reduce crime via drug treatment. We have
evidence on crime and drug use at baseline and also at about seven months later for
3,502 individuals entering treatment. We also have information on socio-economic,
demographic, health, and criminal justice characteristics. We calculate the change in
drugs and crime, comparing the drug user at entry into a treatment program and at seven
months post entry. While much research in this area is plagued by the omitted variable
problem and unobserved individual heterogeneity that can be causing both crime and
drugs, we overcome this problem, in part, by taking advantage of the longitudinal data.
We are also able to address the issue of causality.

       Findings. We find that for our sample of those in treatment, there is a strong
positive and significant relationship between the change in drug use and crime. We find
that treatment reduces drug use and that reduced drug use is associated with more than
half as many days of crime-for-profit. Further, we establish that, for these drug users in
treatment, reduced drug use is causally related to reduced crime.

       Enhancements to the literature. There are several features of our study that
represent enhancements to the extant literature. We tackle a policy relevant question.
We have a large sample, which allows precise estimates. Our sample is composed of
inner-city drug users, which may be a group at high risk of committing crime and a
target group for crime prevention interventions. We can overcome aspects of the
omitted variable problem and unobserved individual heterogeneity that can be causing
both crime and drugs. We are able to establish the causal relationship between drug use
and crime. Further, we draw on several lines of research that complement each other
yet are typically not analyzed together in economics.
II.    Background

       We analyze the extent to which treatment reduces drug use and reduced drug use,
 in turn, reduces crime. We structure our investigation based on findings from two lines
 of research: 1) the drug/crime linkage and 2) treatment effectiveness. We combine
 these lines of research and use treatment effectiveness data to investigate issues of
 causality for drugs and crime.
                                                                                             5


       1. Do drugs cause crime?

       Despite all of the attention and concern focused on the crime/drug link, the
causal relationship between drugs and property crime is still murky. Findings conflict
and empirical estimates that control for simultaneity and confounding factors are not
conclusive. Ample statistics show an association between drugs and crime. Descriptive
statistics indicate that about two thirds of the adult arrestees and more than half of the
juvenile arrestees tested positive for at least one drug. About 22% of Federal prisoners,
37% of property offenders, and 42% of drug offenders said they had committed their
current offense while under the influence of drugs.[2] Some are in prison for drug
possession alone while many are drug users incarcerated for other crimes.

       Theories
   There are several theories as to why drugs could cause crime. Perhaps the most
common view is that drug users commit crimes to finance their habit. Another view is
that some stimulant drugs, such as cocaine, amphetamines and their derivatives, are
thought to induce violent behavior through their pyschopharmocological properties ([3],
[4],[5],[6],[7]). There is evidence that some drugs change the nervous system,
temporarily and/or long-term, in ways that may predispose an individual to commit
crimes. Goldstein [8] and others suggest that, because illicit drugs are consumed,
conflicts are resolved outside the law, very often in violent ways.
   Yet, there are reasons to question the causal relationship. Drug use may be correlated
with crime, but not caused by drug use. The vast majority of people who use drugs do
not commit crimes other than that of drug possession. Another view is that both drug use
(especially heroin) and crime are caused by third factors, such as social isolation and
economic marginality ([9], [10], [11]). Speckhart and Anglin [12] find that criminality
precedes drug use temporally. This could be evidence that drugs do not cause crime,
supporting the view, instead, that individuals involved in crime are drawn into use of
drugs. However, there is some evidence that, even for those individuals that commit
crime prior to drug use, a reduction in drug use decreases crime and treatment for drug
dependence reduces drug use and crime ([13],[14]).


       Empirical Evidence
                                                                                            6


       Economic studies. There are some economic studies on the extent to which
drugs cause crime using aggregate longitudinal data. Corman and Mocan [15] ind a
causal relationship between drug use and property-related felonies. Grogger and Willis
[16] find that the introduction of crack in New York City during the 1980’s had
substantial effects on violent crime, but essentially no effect on property crime. They
suggest that crack cocaine was a technological innovation that increased violence on the
part of distributors, but decreased property crime on the part of consumers. DeSimone
[17] studies the relationship between cocaine prices and property and violent crime
accounting for the endogeneity of cocaine prices. He shows that higher cocaine prices
decrease rates of murder, rape, robbery and assault, although the result for assault is
sensitive to the inclusion of other variables.

       In contrast to the aggregate data studies, Markowitz [18] uses individual level
data. The use of micro level data on individuals can overcome some of the problems
associated with the use of aggregate time series data. Markovitz examines the
relationship between drug and alcohol prices and the incidence of criminal violence
using the 1992, 1993, and 1994 National Crime Victimization Surveys. She finds that
decriminalizing marijuana results in higher incidence of robbery, and higher cocaine
prices decrease these crimes. Higher beer taxes lead to lower assault rates, but not a
reduction in rape or robbery. Markovitz uses data on victims, thus excludes “victimless”
crimes (e.g., prostitution and drug dealing) and some other crimes. As in the use of
official reports, victim reports result in under-reporting.

       Non-economic studies. Researchers using other disciplinary approaches have
also investigated the extent to which drug use causes crime. McClothin [19] and Hser
[20], for instance, use an ethnographic approach and analyze data from the Civil Addict
Program, a treatment program in California. Males were duressed into treatment by the
criminal justice system. The researchers followed these individuals over decades,
producing studies at various points in time. A key finding is that, when drugs are used
most actively, crime is committed most intensively. They view this result as evidence
that drugs and crime are correlated, but not necessarily evidence that drugs cause crime.
Later studies by this group, using more sophisticated analytical modeling, concluded
that drug use causes crime in the US. They noted, however, that in other countries, such
as Great Britain, drug use and crime were not necessarily correlated ([21]).
                                                                                               7


       Fagan [22] and Inciardi [23] draw on literature from sociology, psychology and
other areas. They conclude that there is insufficient evidence to conclude that drug use
causes crime. They cite the reasons listed above, such as: 1) third factors causing both
crime and drugs; and 2) evidence on crime temporally predating drug use. Fagan [22]
further argues that the expansion of crack marketing created economic opportunities for
those previously unemployed, underemployed in informal work, and/or working for low
wages. Thus, by creating alternative sources of income, drug selling might have had a
negative effect on robbery and theft instead of a positive one.

       Our work draws on the disparate lines of economic research cited above. The
economic studies use aggregate time series data, rely on official reports of crime, and
sometimes focus on price of drugs. Governmental data under-report crime substantially
and aggregate data do not allow study of individual behaviors. Price of drugs is
considered one of the main policy tools, e.g., greater drug interdiction and enforcement
would increase the price of drugs. Instead, we focus on individual behavior, use self-
reported crime, and analyze treatment as the crime prevention tool. Like most of the
economic studies, and unlike other lines of research, we use a large data set. Our data
set is composed of pooled multi-site drug treatment effectiveness studies that gather
data from the drug addict prior to treatment and seven months after. We focus on
causality and take advantage of the pre/post data to address causality and to control for
omitted variables.

       2. Drug treatment effectiveness

        There are many studies of the effectiveness of drug treatment in reducing drug
use. See Gerstein and Harwood’s report [24] for a review of effectiveness treatment.
The evidence is that, on average, treatment reduces drug use, although there is
heterogeneity by individuals, type of drug, and by treatment modality. While treatment
has been shown to reduce drug use significantly, many people do not completely quit
using drugs, but rather reduce their quantity or frequency. Relapse and re-entry into
treatment is common. Thus, treatment is not a cure, but rather reduces use for some.
       Despite the fact that many do not get completely “cured,” there are gains to
treatment. Weatherburn et al. [25] argue that treatment of drug dependence has
consistently been shown to be effective at reducing both drug use and the crime
associated with this use. French et al.[26], for instance, find that drug treatment produces
                                                                                                          8


gains to society that outweigh the costs. The reduction of crime is an important
component in the benefits of treatment. Rajukmar and French [27] found a reduction in
crime-related costs in the year following treatment that averaged more than $19,000 per
patient, comparing very favorably to the yearly cost of almost any kind of treatment.
Also, there are a few papers that try to compare the cost-effectiveness of drug abuse
treatment to incarceration for adults and juveniles, i.e., Caulkins, Rydell, Everingham,
Chiesa and Bushway [28], Hubbard et al. [29], and Spooner Mattick and Noffs [30].
        Our analyses differ from most treatment effectiveness studies in several ways.
Many treatment studies have a relatively small number of observations. We use a large,
multi-site data set that allows estimation of precise relationships. Most effectiveness
studies have used drug use as their primary outcome. Instead, we focus on the reduction
in drug use as a mechanism for reducing crime. Treatment effectiveness studies that have
focused on crime are Ball [14], Anglin and Perrochet [21], Anglin and Speckhart [31],
and Chaiken and Chaiken [32]. Dole and Nyswnder ([33], [34]) use findings on
reduction in crime as a primary focus in garnering support for the development and
expansion of methadone maintenance.
III.    Model
        In this section, we propose a theoretical model of individual behavior in which
drug users’ decisions to commit crime-for-profit are related to drug use. The
implications of this model justify our empirical approach, as explained in Section V.
Formally, we assume that the drug users’ utility depends on drug consumption (d), the
composite good (x), and illegal activities that produce income (c). Besides entering the
utility function directly, the number of crimes affects individuals’ marginal utility of
drug use and their purchasing capacity.1 The number of crimes for profit and drug use
increases the probability of arrest. We exclude drug consumption in our indicator of
crime, c, because we are interested in other types of crime, not drug possession. Drug
use would necessarily imply drug possession. Our indicator of crime does not include
mere “drug possession,” but individuals may be “caught” for drug use. Besides, drug



1
  Our sample is mostly unemployed, thus, for simplicity, we do not include the possibility that crime
substitutes for work (“crime as work” model) and we do not look at the labor supply decision.
Nevertheless, note that we could include hours of work as another decision variable without much variation
in the analysis. A further problem of the “crime as work” model in this setting is the possibility of joint
production, i.e., that illegal and legal work can happen simultaneously.
                                                                                                             9


use may alter the perception of crime risks and benefits, and, thus, the probability of
being caught by the criminal justice system.

         We assume that agents choose the optimal goods consumption, drug use, and
number of crimes in order to maximize their expected utility, EU(x,d,c). We assume
that the utility function is separable in drug use, crime, and consumption, and that
individuals take into account the odds of being “caught” by the criminal justice system
and the costs, in terms of utility, that being caught would involve. Thus, the individual’s
problem is to choose the amount of composite good, x, drug use, d, and the number of
crimes, c, that maximize his expected utility subject to his budget constraint:

          EUx,d,c(x,d,c)= p[U(x) + V(d;εd) +W(c;εc)-k(d,c,z)]+ (1−p)[ U(x) + V(d;εd)
                                               +W(c;εc)],

subject to:

          Pxx+ Pdd=I+cwc

where p=p(c,d,z,e) denotes the probability of being caught, which depends on: the
number of criminal activities for profit committed, c; the level of drug use, d; the
individual characteristics, z; and, the level of police enforcement, e.

         The term k(d,c,z) denotes the disutility experienced by the individual when he is
caught. We assume that being caught causes negative utility because of the possible
embarrassment and discomfort that being caught may cause, the punishment received,
and the opportunity costs of the punishment. Thus, it depends on: the number of crimes
committed; the individual characteristics; and the intensity of drug use.2

         U(x) is the utility derived from the composite good, x; V(d;εd) is the utility
derived from drug consumption, d, given the idiosyncratic taste for drugs, εd. W(c;εc) is
the utility obtained from committing crimes, c, given the idiosyncratic taste for criminal
activity, εc. We assume that the unobserved idiosyncratic taste for drugs and for criminal



2
  For simplicity, but without loss of generality, we assume that if the individual gets caught, he incurs in a
disutility of k(d,c,z) instead of making the utility derived from other goods' consumption, drugs and crime,
contingent on being caught or not. Note that we could easily include additional possible states, such as
“being arrested but not incarcerated”, and “being arrested and incarcerated” with their respective associated
punishments. For the clarity of our exposition, we adopt this simpler more generic specification of “being
caught” versus not and make the intensity of the punishment depend on the crime involvement of the
individual, his drug use and his characteristics.
                                                                                                            10


activities for profit, εd and εd, are correlated and distributed as a bivariate normal,
Ν(0,σd,σc,σdc). We assume that U’>0, U’’<0; Vd’≥0, Vd’’≤0, Wc’≤0, and that Wc’’≥0. 3
        We can rewrite the individual maximization problem as:

                  Maxx,c,d EU(x,c,d)= U(x) + V(d;εd) +W(c;εc) -p(c,d)k(d,c,z)

subject to:

                                   x+Pdd=I+wcc (where Px=1)

                                   x≥0, c≥0, d≥0

The first order conditions (F.O.C.) of this constrained maximization problem are:

                         ∂EU(x,c,d)/∂x=U’-λ=0

                         ∂EU(x,c,d)/∂c=[Wc’(c)-pc’ k –pkc’+λ wc] c≤ 0

                         ∂EU(x,c,d)/∂d=[Vd’(d)-pd’ k- pkd’-λ Pd] d≤ 0,

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier and the F.O.C. for d and c allow for corner solutions,
i.e., no drug use and/or no crime.

        Note that the marginal utility of committing one additional criminal activity for
profit equals Wc’(c)-pc’k–pkc’, which is composed of three elements:

        a) Wc’(c) is the marginal direct disutility of committing crimes;

        b) -pc’k captures the fact that a change in crime activity changes the probability
              of being caught and this alters the likelihood of incurring in the utility loss, k;

        c) -pkc’ reflects how crime affects the severity of the expected “punishment” in
              terms of utility if the individual gets caught.

        Observe that the marginal utility of committing crime is affected by the level of
drug use through both pc’k and pkc’. The intensity of drug use affects the marginal utility
of crime-for-profit because drugs might alter: a) the perception of the risks and benefits
of crime (captured by p’c and p); and b) which type of punishment, in terms of utility, the
individual faces if he gets caught.

        The marginal utility of consuming drugs equals Vd’(d)-pd’k- pkd’ , which, again, is
composed of these factors:

3
  We assume that the crime-for-profit that our sample of drug abusers commits does not produce utility in
itself. Nevertheless, this model could be used to analyze the implications of a setting in which crime
                                                                                            11


    a) Vd’(d) is the marginal “immediate” utility of consuming drugs;

    b) –pd’k, reflects that a change in drug consumption changes the probability of being
        caught by pd’, altering the likelihood of incurring in the utility loss, k;

    c) -pkd’ connotes that using drugs affects the expected nature of the punishment, in
        terms of utility, k.

        The marginal utility of drug use is affected by the number of crimes committed
both through pd’k and pkd’. The rationale is that crime committing alters the non-
monetary costs of drug use by affecting the likelihood of being caught and the
punishment, in terms of utility, that the individual has to face if caught.

        From the first order conditions of the agent’s expected utility maximization
problem, it follows that, given the unobservable idiosyncratic taste for drugs and crime,
εd and εc, we can obtain a reduced form for the demand of drugs and the number of
crimes-for-profit. These reduced form demands depend on: the illegal drug prices; the
average payoff of crime; the level of police enforcement; the individual’s social-
demographic characteristics; and, his income:

                                     d*=d(Pd,wc,e,z,I;εd,εc)

                                     c*= c(Pd,wc,e,z,I;εd,εc)

        Although solving for the explicit expression of the optimal illegal activity level is
beyond the scope of this paper, by using the budget constraint and the above results,
given an amount of optimal drug intake, d*, we can infer the optimally chosen amount of
illegal activities for profit, c*:

               c*= c(d*, I, Pd,wc,;εd,εc)=1/wc(x*-I)+(Pd/wc)d*(Pd,wc,e,z,I;εd,εc)

        Assuming linearity, crime at baseline can be expressed as:

               c1*= α+ β1d1*+β2 z1+β3wc1+β4Pd1+β5e1+β6x1*+β7I1+(εd1+εc1)

and, thus, crime at follow-up is:

              c2*= α+ β1d2*+β2 z2+β3wc2+β4Pd2+β5e2+β6x2*+β7I2+(εd2+εc2).

        Therefore, taking increments:

       ∆c*= α+ β1∆d*+β2 ∆z+β3∆wc+β4∆Pd+β5∆e+β6∆x*+β7∆I+(∆εd+∆εc). (1)


produces utility besides income.
                                                                                             12


       Assuming that, for a time difference short enough, ∆wc=0, ∆Pd=0, ∆e=0, and ∆I=0;
and, introducing the fact that ∆x*=0 -since Ux’(x1*)= Ux’(x2*)=λ =constant and U’’(x)<0, we
can rewrite (1) as:

                            ∆c*= α+ β1∆d*+β2 ∆ž+∆εd+∆εc , (2)

where ∆ž are those socio-economic and demographic characteristics that do change in the
time interval considered.

       In the following section, we explain the data set and the variables we have at
hand. And, in section V, we detail how we estimate the equation of interest and how we
overcome the implicit endogeneity problems.
IV.    Data and variables
       Data: The data set that we use differs in source and type from those previously
used to analyze the crime/drug connection. We use longitudinal, individual level data
on inner-city drug users who enter treatment for drug addiction. The Central Data
Registry comes from multiple clinical trials or experimental field studies of the
effectiveness of drug treatment that were conducted in Philadelphia [35]. The studies
were conducted by the Treatment Research Institute at the University of Pennsylvania
and Modern Psychiatric System/Deltametrics, Inc. in Philadelphia. It is feasible to pool
the data sets because a common instrument, the Addiction Severity Instrument, was
used to collect data ([36]). Further, these studies and observations had many
similarities, including the goals of treatment, questionnaire, sample characteristics, and
timing of the baseline and seven month follow-up surveys. Individuals in our sample
were in outpatient care, either methadone maintenance or a non-pharmacological
counseling-based approach. In our analysis, we control for each specific study and type
of treatment, but otherwise combine the data into a meta-data set. The sample is
composed of individuals who entered treatment for drug dependence. Thus, they are not
a random sample. However, for our purposes, they are an appropriate sample. The
inner-city, drug-abusing individuals compose the group that includes many of the
individuals who commit violent crimes and/or property crime, crimes that often cause
negative externalities for the rest of the society. A relatively large percentage of them
have been involved with the criminal justice system in their lifetime.
                                                                                             13


        The Addiction Severity Index (ASI) is the standard assessment instrument used
nationally to assess outcomes in treatment of addiction. The ASI was administered at
baseline and at about 7 months afterwards. Many individuals in outpatient counseling-
oriented treatment had about a month of treatment, thus, the follow-up interview
occurred about 6 months after treatment had stopped. For those in methadone
maintenance, treatment would likely still be ongoing at the seven-month follow-up.
The ASI uses a ‘last 30-day’ recall period for ‘current’ drug use, crime and other
problems. This same 30-day recall timeframe is used for both baseline and follow-up.
The ASI relies on self-reported data, which is a potential limitation for the reports on
drug use and crime. However, in these treatment settings, self-report drug use and
urinalysis results tend to be highly correlated ([37], [38], [39]). Further, self-reported
crime does not suffer the under-reporting of official records, which is more often used
in studies of economic crime and drugs [40].

        Data were collected on the standard set of social, economic and demographic
variables, as well as on drug use and crime. In addition, variables were collected on past
treatment for drug use, parole status, and previous prison terms. The ASI assesses other
problems, such as medical, psychiatric, employment, social, and family functioning in
the last thirty days.

        Sample characteristics:

        Demographics and labor market. We have 3,502 valid observations. This is
largely a minority and male population. Table 1 reports the sample mean characteristics.
The mean age is a little less than 36 years old, but the range is from 15 to 75. Almost
70% of the population is male. About 32 % of the population is white, while 56% is
African –American and 11% is Hispanic. Seventy percent of these subjects had
psychological problems in their lifetime and 30% a chronic condition. The average
number of years of school completion is almost 12. The average monthly income before
starting the treatment is $684 from which an average $148 comes from welfare and $70
is disability pension. In the thirty days prior to the baseline interview, they had worked
an average of about seven days in a paid job and had been involved between one and
two days in illegal activities for profit.

        Crime. We focus on crime-for-profit, not drug possession, because drug
possession would naturally occur with drug use. Crime-for-profit includes larceny,
                                                                                                14


burglary, shoplifting, drug dealing, prostitution and others. Approximately 9% of the
sample reported to having committed crime-for-profit in the thirty days before entering
treatment; and, 11% reported having committed crime-for-profit at either baseline or
follow-up. About 24% of the population is on parole or probation at baseline and 38%
have been in jail at some point in their lifetime. These latter numbers include
individuals who could have been incarcerated for drug possession and sales, as well as
income producing crimes and violence. Eight percent of the sample has received illegal
earnings during the month prior to the baseline, and 9% has been detained during that
same period. Almost 79% of the sample had committed crimes and/or had been
involved with the criminal justice system at some point in their lifetime.

        Drug use and treatment. For most of our sample, this is not the first time in
treatment. At baseline, around 59% of the sample had been in treatment previously.
This pattern of repeated treatment is consistent with drug treatment clientele across the
nation. For drug abusers, treatment, relapse and re-entry are common. The substances
used by those in our sample are: heroin, cocaine, cannabis, sedatives, amphetamines,
barbiturates, hallucinogens, inhalants, other opiates (besides heroin and methadone),
and alcohol.

        Variables:

        The variables that we use in the estimation are displayed in Table 2. The first
part of the table contains the acronym, definition, mean, standard deviation and range
for the key variables. We are interested in the change from baseline to follow-up for
each variable. Thus, we calculate the change using data at baseline and follow-up.
        Crime. As our measure of crime, we use the self-reported number of days in the
last 30 that the individual has engaged in illegal activities for profit. The number of
“days in illegal activity for profit” is an appropriate indicator for our study since it is a
measure of crime that eliminates possession of controlled substances as a crime. The
ASI asks specifically about the number of days as an outcome because of the high
validity in reporting when responding with number of days. The benefits of this measure
of crime have been confirmed by several researchers [41]. Self-reporting of crime has a
large advantage over alternative sources; official records picks up only a small percentage
of the crimes that are committed. While there is likely to be some under-reporting of
crime, this group of crime-involved drug users may be relatively willing to report crimes
                                                                                               15


as illicit activities are more acceptable among this group. For example, about 70% of the
sample has been involved in crime at some point in their lifetime. That is, either at
baseline, at follow-up or at other points during their lifetime, they have been either
detained, arrested, in jail, or involved in illegal activities for profit.
        Change in crime is measured as the change in the number of days committing
crime from baseline to follow-up. On average, individuals in our sample reduce ‘crime-
for-profit days’ by less than 1 day, with a standard deviation of 5.40 days, a minimum of
-30 days and a maximum of +30 days. At baseline, the sample commits about 1.28 days
of crime out of thirty. Thus, average crime is reduced by about 60% from baseline to
follow-up.
        Drug use. The ASI asks how many days in the past 30 the individual has used
drugs by specific drug at baseline and follow-up. Because the same questions are asked
at both time periods, we can calculate the changes in drug use. We examine separately
heroin, alcohol, and an aggregate measure of use of all illicit drugs other than heroin. In
the first specification, we consider heroin separately from other illicit drugs because
treatments such as methadone have been designed specifically to treat heroin. Alcohol
is treated as a separate category since its use is legal. Further, programs for illicit drug
treatment do not typically, explicitly attempt to reduce alcohol use. We aggregate
cocaine use into the category of “drugs other than heroin and alcohol”.

        Our sample used, respectively, 2.36, 9.05, and 6.87 days of heroin, other drugs
and alcohol at baseline. The change in use of heroin, other drugs, and alcohol is -1.59, -
5.66, and -4.62 days, respectively, with standard deviations of 6.51, 13.33, and 9.90.
Our alternative specification of the set of drug variables aggregates heroin and all other
drugs into a composite measure indicating “days of use of any drugs.” Individuals in
our data set reduced days using any drug by 7.24 with a standard deviation of 15.53.

        Treatment. We include a set of dummy variables indicating each specific
program from which the observations were drawn. These dummies control not only for
type of treatment, but also for quality of treatment, geographic location and other clinic
based factors. We report our results for outpatient.

        Other variables. Social, economic and demographic variables are also available
in the ASI. There are other outcomes measured in the ASI that may well be affected by
drug treatment and change over time. These include psychological well-being, family
                                                                                            16


functioning, and physical health. The information relative to these variables is measured
in the ASI at baseline and at follow-up. In each case, they are measured as the number
of days out of the last 30 that the individual has had problems in each domain: physical
health, mental health and family functioning. Days of psychological problems, family
problems and medical problems are reduced, on average, by 3 days, 2 days and 1 day,
respectively. We estimate alternative specifications using these variables.
V.     Econometric Model

       To investigate the responsiveness of crime to drug use as derived in section III,
we need to estimate an equation of the form:
                             ∆c*= α+ β1∆d*+β2 ∆ž+η (2),

where η is the error term, i.e. η=∆εc+∆εd.

       Equation (2) states that, for intervals of time short enough, the change in the
optimal number of crimes for profit, ∆c*, depends on: 1) the change in the optimal level
of drug use, ∆d*; 2) the change in those exogenous socio-economic and demographic
characteristics that change in the time period studied, ∆ž; and, 3) the change in the
idiosyncratic taste for drugs and crime, η. As explained in the previous section, we have
data on individuals at entry into treatment and at a seven-month follow-up. Thus, we
have their drug use, d1 and d2; their rates of crime, c1 and c2; and their time-dependent
socio-economic and demographic characteristics, ž1 and ž 2, at baseline and follow-up.4
Therefore, we can calculate the change in crime, drug use, and time-variant social
demographic characteristics from pre to post treatment.

       Note that, by taking differences, we have eliminated most of the observed and
unobserved individual fixed factors that might simultaneously influence drug use and
crime. Nevertheless, estimating equation (2) requires solving the problem that, in
principle, as explained in section III, the change in the optimal amount of drug use, ∆d*,
depends on εd and εc. Therefore, ∆d* is not an exogenous variable. To solve this
difficulty, we use the fact that the drug use reduction we observe is due to drug
addiction treatment and, thus, an “externally induced” change in drug use. Thus, drug
use change resulting from treatment is uncorrelated with the individual’s taste for drugs
                                                                                                            17


and crime. Under this assumption, the simultaneity problem of change in crime and
change in drugs disappears. Therefore, Equation (2) can be modified in the following
way:

                             ∆c= α+ β1∆d*(t)+β2 ∆ž+ η                               (2’)

where, t, is drug abuse treatment, and cov(∆d*(t),η)=0.

         There are several observational facts that support the view that substance abuse
treatment imposes an ‘exogenous’ change in drug use. About 24% of our sample is
coerced into treatment through the criminal justice system. For them, treatment is
exogenously determined. For those who are not on parole, it is reported that most
individuals enter treatment reluctantly with family or friends as the coercive factor [24].
Even for those who voluntarily seek care, treatment is a shock to their drug intake
decision. Further, admittance to treatment is not always instantaneous. Patients have to
wait often long periods of time to start treatment. Thus, even if the time to enter
treatment might be decided ‘endogenously’, by the time patients get into treatment, the
time might not be individually optimal anymore. We take advantage of the view that the
reduction in drug use due to treatment is not related to the unobservable taste for drugs
and crime, εd and εc, but to an external factor (treatment) that is exogenous to the
individual stochastic idiosyncrasies. And, thus, the correlation of εd and εc is not
relevant for the estimation of equation (2).

         We could allow treatment to have a direct as well as an indirect effect on the
change in crime. An alternative specification is:

                            ∆c= β’d ∆d*(t) + β’z∆ž + β’t t + η                      (2’’)

         Nevertheless, there are grounds for believing that drug treatment would have
only an indirect impact on crime through the change in drug use. Treatment for
substance abuse is designed primarily to reduce drug use. In fact, there is an increasing
demand for enhanced services to offer specialized services to affect directly areas such
as employment, family functioning, health, etc., because of the concern that drug
treatment is too narrowly focused on drug reduction alone. For most of our samples, we


4
  Note that most individual traits affecting crime such as age, gender, race, and others do not change in the
intervening seven months period. But, some factors, such as, family functioning, mental health, and
physical health may be influenced by treatment and thus change over this short time period.
                                                                                               18


estimate β’d using both specifications (2’) and (2’’) using program centers dummies as a
proxy of treatment characteristics.
VI.    Results, Interpretation, and Limitations
       a. Results
       Our results show that a change in drug use through treatment has a large and
significant impact on the number of days involved in illegal activities. This conclusion is
robust across specifications and sub-samples. We are primarily interested in the
coefficients on the drug and alcohol indicators. Across different sets of control variables,
the coefficients on these key indictors are always positive and significant and tend to be
of similar magnitude. Results are displayed in Table 3 and are interpreted in Table 4.
       Base results. We consider our base case to be the results corresponding to our
largest sample. We will make comparisons to this case. These results are displayed in the
first column of Table 3. The sample size is 3,502. The results indicate a positive and
significant coefficient on each of the changes in days using heroin, other drugs and
alcohol. The coefficient on the change in heroin use is 0.146 with a t-statistic of 5.93.
Similarly, the coefficients on ‘other drugs’ and alcohol are also highly significant and
positive. The coefficients for these are 0.075 and 0.026, respectively, with t-statistics of
6.88 and 2.87.
       Family Functioning. In addition to the three drug and alcohol variables, we also
have included the three other time varying indicators in the basic equation. They are
change in family functioning, health, and mental health. We have suppressed the
coefficients on these variables as they are of concern only as controls. Change in family
functioning is typically significant across the specifications and is always positive. The
other two are never significant.
       Treatment Programs. Our sample is drawn from observations from multiple
programs. Programs vary by treatment type, geographic location, and also by the average
severity of drug dependence and/or criminality of those enrolled in the program. Thus,
we use a set of identifiers that control for the factors that vary across programs.
Unfortunately, the program identifier is missing for some of the observations. To
determine how the program dummies affect the results, we estimate regressions with and
without program dummies for the sample that does have the program identifiers (2,737
observations). We do not display the coefficients on treatment programs.
                                                                                               19


           We can view the impact of controlling for program identifiers by comparing the
specifications with and without these program identifiers with the sample of 2,737.
Column 2 of Table 3 displays these results. When the program identifiers are added, the
magnitude of the coefficient on heroin declines from 0.145 to 0.133 and the level of
significance declines somewhat, while still remaining very significant. The coefficient
and level of significance are very similar for “other drugs”. Both the coefficient and the
significance level increase for alcohol when the program identifiers are added. The
coefficient goes from 0.023 to 0.037, and the t-statistic from 2.36 to 3.05.
           Outpatient only. Outpatient and inpatient programs may differ in many ways that
are not completely picked up by the program identifiers. Patients receiving inpatient care
are likely more severely addicted, for example. Thus, we next restrict our sample to only
those in outpatient care. There are too few individuals in inpatient to allow for an
inpatient only regression. When we estimate the regressions for those in outpatient care
only, we find very similar results to our base case (see Column 3 of Table 3). When we
add the program controls to the outpatient group, the coefficient of heroin declines, as
does the level of significance. Other drugs have a slight increase in both magnitude and
significance. Alcohol increases in both magnitude and significance. This is the same
pattern exhibited for the entire sample.
           Increase versus decrease in drug use. Table 3 includes two additional sets of
results: we analyze whether the positive relationship between the change in drugs and
change in crime holds similarly for both those who decrease (1,413) and those who
increase (293)5 their drug use. Column 4 reports the estimates for the sample of
individuals that experience a decrease in drug use while column 5 reports the estimates
for those that increase drug use instead. We find positive relationships between crime
and drugs (and alcohol) for both those who decrease and those who increase their drug
use. The coefficients for those that decrease drug use are close to the full sample
coefficients, especially without controls by program (although the alcohol intake change
coefficient is not significant without controls for treatment effects). The coefficients for
those that increase drug use have borderline levels of significance and, in general, are
lower than the full sample coefficients. The lower level of significance for those that
increase drug use could be due to the smaller sample size. Alternatively, it could be due


5
    Note that 1,031 individuals do not change their number of days of aggregate drug intake.
                                                                                                         20


to the fact that those who increase their drug use are unusual in some dimensions6. It is
unlikely that treatment causes drug use to increase.
          Policy targets. Treatment might be more cost-effective if it could be targeted
towards those at higher risk for committing crime. Thus, we analyze two subgroups to
determine the extent to which the drug/crime relationship holds. The first subgroup is
those individuals that have committed crime at baseline or follow-up (342). The second
group is those that are on parole at baseline (594). Columns 6 and 7 of Table 3 display
the regression estimates for these two subgroups.
          Those who have been involved in crime in the recent past might be a good group
to target, as they may be likely to continue crime in the future as well. A previous history
of crime could serve as a relatively observable indicator of a likelihood of future crime.
In our sample, about 11% commit criminal activities at baseline and/or at follow-up. For
this subgroup, the estimated coefficients and the levels of significance are greater than for
the base case. The coefficients on the drug indicators are two to three times as large as
for the base case sample when there are no controls for program. For the sample of those
crime involved, adding program indicators reduces the magnitude of the coefficients and
the levels of significance, although they are still larger than for other samples.
        Those on parole at baseline have necessarily committed crime in the relatively
recent past and may be likely to commit in the future as well. For those on parole and
for which the program indicators are not missing, the coefficient on heroin is of smaller
magnitude and significance level when compared to the base. The coefficient on other
drugs is slightly larger, but of lower significance while still significant. The coefficient
on alcohol is smaller but is not significant.

          Comparing the coefficients for those on parole versus those who have recently
    committed crime, we could speculate that parole itself is aimed at reducing crime.
    Thus, it may be that, for this group, crime is not reduced as much as a result of
    reduced drug use as much as for others who have been crime involved but are not
    currently on parole. Those on parole are likely to have entered treatment as a


6
 Drug use for this group of drug increasers may have been fluctuating rather than exhibiting a trend. Also,
other factors may have contributed to a worsening situation. Their baseline drug use could have been
abnormally low compared to their standard. And, although we cannot verify this possibility, they also may
be composed of the group who dropped out of treatment early, in which case, their dropout, crime and drug
behavior may have been affected by other factors.
                                                                                              21


stipulation of the criminal justice system and, in addition, they are being monitored by
the criminal justice system.

      b. Interpretation

      We want to interpret these results so that they can be useful. We would like to
know: Is the finding of a significant decline in crime due to a reduction in drugs
important from a policy perspective? Is a coefficient of 0.323 important relatively? In
this section, we place these numbers in the context and interpret them.

      We calculate the change in crime attributable to reduced drug use by using the
estimated coefficients on drug use and the actual change in drug use from the raw data
(column 1 of Table 4). The coefficients reported in Table 3 are estimates of the partial
derivative of crime with respect to drug use, ∂c/∂d. From our data, we can calculate
the actual change in drug use for each drug, ∆d. Combining the actual change in drug
use with the coefficients estimating the impact of the change in drug use reduction on
the change in crime, we can calculate the change in crime attributable to the change in
drug use, ceteris paribus, ∆C=∂c/∂d ∆d.

       The coefficients, ∂c/∂d, displayed in Table 3 are repeated in the first column of
Table 4 for convenience. These coefficients correspond to the estimates obtained when
controlling by the program, with the exception of our ‘base case’, which does not
include program controls. Column 2 in Table 4 displays the statistics on the change in
drugs, ∆d. Column 3 reports the estimated change in crime attributable to the change in
drugs, ∆c, as explained above. In column 4, we report the decline in crime as a
percentage of the total crime at baseline attributable to the decline in drug use (∆c / c).
The number of days involved in illegal activities at baseline, c1, is listed in column 6 of
Table 4.

      The estimated coefficients, the magnitude of days of drug use, and the number
of days committing crime at baseline allow us to calculate the elasticity of crime with
respect to drug use: ε = ∂c/∂d• d1/c1, where d1 and c1 are days of drug use and days of
crime at baseline. Column 7 of Table 5 reports these elasticities for each sub-sample.
These elasticities provide a measure of the sensitivity of the change in crime to the
change in drug use. More specifically, the elasticity indicates the percentage change in
                                                                                              22


the level of crime at baseline for a 1% in the level of drug use at baseline. Below, we
discuss these calculations for each subgroup.

       Full sample. For the full sample, the mean number of days in illegal activities at
baseline is 1.28 days. Using the template for calculations described above, we estimate
a 18% reduction in crime due to the reduction in days of heroin use. Similarly, the
reduction in crime days attributable to reduced consumption of other drugs and alcohol
would explain 33% and 9% of all crime, respectively. Thus, while the coefficients may
appear to be relatively small, they represent a fairly large percentage change in crime.
For heroin, the impact on crime is relatively large (i.e., a relatively large coefficient),
but the reduction in days using heroin is relatively small. For other drugs, the impact is
relatively small, but there is a fairly large reduction in days of drug use. The implied
elasticity is 0.27 for heroin, 0.53 for other drugs, and 0.14 for alcohol. To put this
elasticitiy in perspective, the elasticity of the number of crimes to imprisonment
calculated by Spelman [42], for instance, range from 0.12 to 0.20 with a best guess of
0.16, concluding that, taking into account recidivism, current incarceration rates avert
perhaps no more than 8% of crimes. Note that, in our case, we obtain the elasticity of
“days of crime-for-profit” with respect to a change in the number of days of drug use.
To the extent that the number of actual crimes per day of crime might be more than
one, our estimates are only a conservative estimate of the total crime averted due to
each day of no drug use. The number of crimes per day of crime is not known. There
exists a quite wide range of estimates on the number of crimes per year per offender
(see [43] for a summary). Further, no nationally representative study has firm estimates
of the number of crimes and days per crime that could be used to calculate crimes per
day.

       Outpatient. The sub-sample of those in outpatient treatment has a comparable
number of days of drug use at baseline and approximately the same crime rate at
baseline (1.31) as the overall sample. The reduction in heroin explains a higher
percentage of the initial crime (25%), and the reduction in all other drugs and alcohol
intake explain a lower percentage (21% and 6%, respectively) than they do for the full
sample. The corresponding elasticities are higher than for the full sample for heroin
and lower for other drugs and alcohol. Overall, the results for outpatient are somewhat
similar to those for the full sample.
                                                                                             23


       Involved in crime. Compared to the full sample, the subsample of those involved
in crime has more days of drug use and alcohol at baseline, substantially more crime at
baseline (10.97), a greater drop in days of drug use, and coefficients of greater
magnitude as. While decline in the absolute number of days of crime is large,
nevertheless, the reductions in heroin and other drugs explain a lower percentage of all
crime committed by this group at baseline (15%, 21% and 12%, respectively). The
corresponding elasticities are lower for heroin and other drugs, but higher for alcohol as
compared to the full sample.

       On parole. The subsample of those in outpatient treatment has a similar number
of days of heroin use, lower days of other drugs days, alcohol, and crime (1.04) at
baseline as compared to the full sample. The reduction in heroin explains the same
percentage of all crime (19%) as compared to the full sample, and the reduction in all
other drugs and the alcohol explain a higher (37%) and lower percentage (5%),
respectively. The corresponding elasticities are almost identical for heroin, a bit higher
for other drugs, and lower for alcohol. Overall, the results for those on parole are
comparable to those for the full sample.

       c. Limitations

       Although we suggest that this data set has many strengths, it poses some
limitations as well. One is that we do not have a random sample of all drug users. On
the other hand, we believe that our sample may be representative of inner-city drug
addicts seeking treatment, which may be a target group for crime reduction, especially
crime reduction via treatment. Another concern is that both drug use and crime are self-
reported. However, studies have shown self-reported drug use to be a good proxy for
objectively measured drug use (e.g. urinalyses). The primary alternative source of data
for crime is official records, which are well known to under-report crime. Studies have
suggested that self-reports are better measures of crime than official reports [40].
Further, we are making comparisons of self-reports pre and post treatment; any self-
report bias is not likely to vary much in over a seven-month period. Another
consideration is that these individuals are less stigmatized by reporting drug use and
crime as compared to a random sample of all individuals and, thus, may be less likely to
make false reports.
                                                                                           24


       The use of a thirty days timeframe is potentially a concern in that it may offer
too short of a horizon. However, one concern is that a with a longer time horizon, the
response becomes less accurate. Thirty days is used as the timeframe in the ASI on the
grounds that crime and drugs are reported with greater reliability and ease using this
time frame as opposed to a longer timeframe [36]. A large number of studies of drug
treatment effectiveness use the ASI for evaluating drug and crime outcome. Thus, the
use of a 30-day timeframe is common in the effectiveness literature. Further, frequency
of ‘days’ of crime and drug use is used in the ASI instead of reporting quantity of drug
use and of crimes on the grounds that frequency (days) is highly correlated with
quantity. Ball and Ross [41] recommend the use of ‘days of crime’ as opposed to crime
acts. Nonetheless, we do not know the extent to which thirty days is representative of a
longer time horizon nor do we know the precise correlation between quantity and
frequency (days) for each crime and drugs.

       The measure of crime that we use is defined to be ‘crime-for-profit’. This
would include robbery, burglary, drug dealing, and other crimes that produce some
income. It explicitly excludes drug possession as a crime. Thus, the impact of treatment
on crime for a broader definition including drug possession would be underestimated.
With respect to violent crimes, note that violence may occur in some crime-for-profit
but not others. Thus, our estimates account for only a part of violent crimes.


VII.   Summary, conclusions and policy

       Our study uses longitudinal data to analyze how the reduction in drug use due to
substance abuse treatment affects criminal activity for profit. We use a novel approach
and data set to analyze the relationship between crime and drugs. Using longitudinal
data pre and post treatment and first differencing to measure change, we are able
eliminate some of the omitted variable problems that plague previous studies. We
analyze a low-income, inner-city, drug-addicted sample. This is a sample that is likely
to commit property crime and other crimes-for-profit in order to finance their drug
habit. We use self-reported crime, which avoids the problem of under-reporting of
crime detected in official records of arrests and convictions. Our use of individual level
data is an improvement over the aggregate level data used in the past. We focus only
                                                                                             25


 on crime-for-profit, not drug possession, as the crime of drug possession must occur
 with drug use.

       We find a strong positive relationship between a reduction in crime-for-profit
 and a reduction in drug use. Moreover, we find that the crime reduction induced by
 reduced drug use and alcohol intake explains a very high percentage of the crime at the
 beginning of the treatment. In terms of elasticities, for each 1% reduction in heroin,
 other drugs and alcohol use days, we calculate that there is a reduction in crime-days of
 0.27%, 0.53% and 0.14%, respectively.

       Our findings broadly suggest that drug treatment may be an effective
crime-fighting tool. Treatment reduces not only the crime of drug possession, but also
crime-for-profit. Current public policy emphasizes the criminal justice system, and
incarceration in particular, as a mechanism to combat crime. Given the huge and
growing expense of the criminal justice system, drug treatment might be a policy to
expand relative to incarceration for some drug users. Treatment is currently used to
some extent both in and out of prison. For example, drug courts allow judges to
mandate treatment instead of prison. However, drug courts and treatment in prison are
used to only a very limited extent compared to their potential use.

        The government pays all of the costs of incarceration and most of the costs of
treatment. A treatment episode is much cheaper than an episode of jail: a year in jail
costs about $23,000 on average and an ‘episode’ can be multiple years. An outpatient
treatment costs less than $300 for the full course of outpatient counseling based
treatment and less than $3,000 for a year of methadone treatment[26]. Both prison and
treatment have high recidivism rates, but treatment has positive side effects (e.g.,
reduction in HIV and better family functioning), while prison has largely negative side
effects (e.g., ‘deviance training’, disintegration of the family, and predatory acts in
prison). Much of the recent increase in the prison population is due to drug possession.
Thus, drug treatment would reduce this type of crime to the extent that it is effective in
reducing drug use as well are crime-for-profit. Of course, one would need more specific
information on costs and benefits to be able to make cost-benefit comparisons across
prison versus treatment. However, these results suggest strongly that treatment should
be analyzed to determine if it is a cost-effective alternative to prevent future crime for
drug abusing individuals. Targeting treatment to high-risk populations might make it
                                                                                           26


more cost-effective in reducing crime, e.g. treating only drug users who have been
arrested and/or convicted of crime.

       California’s so called “proposition 36” is a current focal point for the ongoing
debate about treatment versus criminal justice. According to this policy, some
individuals who are caught using illicit drugs will be sent to treatment for drug
dependence instead of prison. Implementation of this policy highlights that the issue of
prison versus treatment is more than an academic debate. It also highlights that
implementation demands more than information that ‘treatment’ may be cost-effective.
There are many aspects that need to be known that are beyond the scope of this paper.
Both treatment and prison have high recidivism rates and drug treatment has high drop
out rates. Thus, a detailed comparison is difficult. There are many kinds of treatment
ranging from counseling only to medical maintenance to aftercare. Criminal justice
interventions can vary as well. Determining which type of treatment is more effective as
a crime fighting tool is beyond the scope of the paper. However, we have provided
empirically-based findings that reduced drug use due to treatment can reduce crime.
These can serve as a building block for policy development.
                                                                                    27




                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: Social Demographics and
                         Other Characteristics (3,502 observations)


                       Variable                             Average     Standard
                  (values at baseline)                                  Deviation
% males                                                        69%
Years of age                                                 35.73        8.41
Years of education                                           11.64        2.23
% White                                                      32%
% African-American                                           56%
% Hispanic                                                   11%
Total Income                                                $684.13    $891.96
Welfare                                                     $148.33    $253.26
Pension                                                      $70.77    $302.09
# days worked                                                   6.43      9.49
# days illegal activities                                       1.28      5.09
Have been in a drug treatment before                         59%
Had psychological problems lifetime                          71%
Has chronic condition                                        30%
Ever in jail                                                 38%
On parole or probation at baseline                           24%
Involved in illegal activities last 30 days at baseline       9%
Received illegal earnings during last 30 days at baseline     8%
Was detained last 30 days at baseline                         9%
                                                                                                    28


                 Table 2: Variables Names, Meaning and summary statistics
             Variables measuring change from baseline to the 7 months follow-up:

                                                                   Aver-     Stand.   Mini-       Maxi
 Variable*                         Meaning
                                                                    age       Dev.    mum         mum
b-crime         Number of days involved in illegal activities
                for profit (besides drug possession) in the last     1.28      5.09           0      30
                28 days at baseline
f-crime         Number of days involved in illegal activities
                for profit (besides drug possession) in the last     0.50      3.22           0      30
                28 days at follow-up
c-crimeday      Change in number of days involved in illegal
                activities for profit (besides drug possession)      -0.78     5.40      -30         30
                in the last 28 days
b-heroin        Heroin use days in the last 28 days at baseline      2.36      6.69           0     30
f-heroin        Heroin use days in the last 28 days at follow-
                                                                     0.69      3.58           0      30
                up
c-heroin        Change in heroin use days in the last 28 days        -1.59     6.51      -30        30
b-othdrug       All drugs but heroin use days in the last 28
                                                                     9.05     14.62           0     140
                days at baseline
f-othdrug       All drugs but heroin use days in the last 28
                                                                     3.40      8.84           0      90
                days at follow-up
c-other         Change in all drugs but heroin use days in the
                                                                     -5.66    13.33     -120        64
                last 28 days
b-alldrugs      All drugs (including heroin) use days in the
                                                                     4.09     10.12           0      90
                last 28 days at baseline
f-alldrugs      All drugs (including heroin) use days in the
                                                                    11.34     16.96           0     140
                last 28 days at follow-up
c-alldrugs      Change in number of all drug-use days in the
                                                                     -7.24    15.53     -120        64
                last 28 days
b-alcoh302      Alcohol use days in the last 28 days at
                                                                     6.87      9.63           0      30
                baseline
f-alcoh301      Alcohol use days in the last 28 days at follow-
                                                                     2.25      5.57           0      30
                up
c-alcohol       Change in alcohol use days in the last 28 days       -4.62     9.90      -30        30
b-psycday       Number of psychological problem days in the
                                                                     7.82     11.10           0      30
                last 28 days at baseline
f-psycday       Number of psychological problem days in the
                                                                     4.43      8.50           0      30
                last 28 days at follow-up
b-famprob       Family problems’ days in the last 28 days at
                                                                     2.34      6.36           0      30
                baseline
f-famprob       Family problems’ days in the last 28 days at
                                                                     1.25      4.70           0      30
                follow-up
c-famprob       Change in the number of psychological
                                                                     -1.08     7.28      -30         30
                problems’ days in the last 28 days
b-medprob       Medical problems’ days in the last 28 days at
                                                                     4.74      9.32           0      30
                baseline
f-medprob       Medical problems’ days in the last 28 days at
                                                                     3.74      8.29           0      30
                follow-up
c-medprob       Change in medical problems’ days in the last
                                                                     -1.01    10.53      -30         30
                28 days

*Note “b-s” stands for (variable at) baseline, “f-“ for follow-up and “c-“ for change from
baseline to follow-up.
Table 3: Estimates of the impact of the change in heroin, other drugs and alcohol intake on illegal
                                          activities days

 Model :                                                      Ordinary Least Squares*
 Dependent
                                                                        c-crime
  variable:

                 1                 2                   3                   4                   5                   6                  7
                            Full Sample-
 Sample: Full Sample        Tx controlled
                                               Outpatient Only     Decrease drugs      Increase Drugs      Crime Involved      On Parole

# obs :        3502          2737            2204            1413            293             342             594
                        wo prg with prg wo prg with prg wo prg with prg wo prg with prg wo prg with prg wo prg with prg
c-hr             0.146 0.146 0.133 0.151 0.139 0.146 0.110 0.135 0.133 0.323 0.236 0.124 0.115
                 (5.93) (5.62) (4.87) (5.63) (4.81) (5.22) (3.24) (1.84) (1.65) (5.57) (3.55) 2.54 (2.02)
c-oth            0.075 0.080           0.085 0.070         0.075 0.083         0.095 0.062         0.058 0.234         0.234 0.101        0.100
                 (6.88) (6.13)         (6.17) (4.58)       (4.63) (5.25)       (4.98) (1.75)       (1.12) (5.88)       (4.72) 3.50        (3.20)
c-alc            0.026 0.023           0.037 0.027         0.036 0.019         0.034 0.090 0.101 0.307                 0.259 0.017        0.023
                 (2.87) (2.36)         (3.05) (2.10)       (2.42) (1.16)       (1.94) (1.88) (1.894) (4.37)            (3.20) 0.65        (0.93)

R-sq                 0.11   0.11        0.34    0.10        0.11    0.13        0.17    0.14        0.16    0.35        0.43   0.18        0.16

T-statistics between brackets. Heterocedastic consistent standard deviations used.
*These coefficients were obtained controlling for the change in the number of days of medical problems, the change in the
number of days of psychological problems, the change in the number of days of family problems, and program identifiers.
  Table 4: Summary of the Effects of Changes in Drug Use or Crime Days


                                1           2            3            4            5           6             7
                                                                                  Days
                           Coefficient   Change in   Calculated   % change in                 Days
                                                                                Drug Use
                                         Days Drug   Change in    Crime from                 Crime
                            (∂c/∂d)                                                at                    Elasticity
                                           Used       Crime        Baseline                At Baseline
                                                                                Baseline
                                           (∆d)         (∆c)        (∆c/c1)                    (c1)
                                                                                  (d1)
Sample: Full
# Observations = 3,502
Actual Decrease in Crime
       = -0.78 days
Heroin                       0.146         -1.6        -0.23         18%          2.36        1.28         0.27
Other                        0.075         -5.7        -0.42         33%          9.05        1.28         0.53
Alcohol                      0.026         -4.6        -0.12          9%          6.87        1.28         0.14

VIII.   Sample:
        Outpatient
# Observations = 2204
Actual Decrease in Crime
       = -0.64 days
Heroin                       0.151         -2.2        -0.33         25%          3.18        1.31         0.37
Other drugs                  0.070         -4.0        -0.28         21%          7.93        1.31         0.42
Alcohol                      0.027         -3.1        -0.08          6%          5.48        1.31         0.11

Sample: Crime Involved
# Observations = 342
Actual Decrease in Crime
       =-6.25 days
Heroin                       0.323         -5.2        -1.69         15%          8.13       10.97         0.24
Other drugs                  0.234         -9.6        -2.25         21%         19.66       10.97         0.42
Alcohol                      0.307         -4.1        -1.26         12%          7.55       10.97         0.21

Sample: On Parole
# Observations = 594
Actual Decrease in Crime
       =-0.57 days
Heroin                       0.124         -1.6        -0.20         19%          2.07        1.04         0.25
Other drugs                  0.101         -3.8        -0.38         37%          5.99        1.04         0.58
Alcohol                      0.017         -2.8        -0.05          5%          4.91        1.04         0.08
                                                                                                       32


References:

1.     Drug Use Forecasting in 24 Cities in the United States 1987-1997. 1998, National Institute of
       Justice.
2.     Drug and Crime Facts: Drug use and crime. 2001, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
3.     Giannini, A.J., Miller, N.S., Loiselle, R.H., and Turner, C.E., Cocaine-associated violence and
       relationship to route of administration. J Subst Abuse Treat, 1993. 10(1): p. 67-9.
4.     Post, R.M. and Kopanda, R.T., Letter: Cocaine, kindling, and reverse tolerance. Lancet, 1975.
       1(7903): p. 409-10.
5.     Post, R.M. and Kopanda, R.T., Cocaine, kindling, and psychosis. Am Jour of Psychiatry, 1976.
       133(6): p. 627-34.
6.     Post, R.M., Psychiatric manifestations and implications of seizure disorders, in Medical Mimics of
       Psychiatric Disorders, Extein and Gold, Editors. 1986, American Psychiatric Press: Washington
       D.C. p. 35-91.
7.     Davis, W., Psychopharmacologic Violence Associated with Cocaine Abuse: Kindling of a Limbic
       Dyscontrol Syndrome? Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 1996. 20: p. 1273-1300.
8.     Goldstein, P., The drugs/violence nexus: A tripartite conceptual framework. J Drug Issues, 1985.
       15(4): p. 493-506.
9.     Clayton, R.R. and Tuchfeld, B.S., The Drug-Crime Debate - Obstacles to Understanding the
       Relationship. J Drug Issues, 1982. 12(2): p. 153-166.
10.    Hammersley, R., Forsyth, A., Morrison, V., and Davies, J.B., The relationship between crime and
       opioid use. Br J Addict, 1989. 84(9): p. 1029-43.
11.    McBride, D.C. and McCoy, C.B., Crime and Drugs - the Issues and Literature. J Drug Issues,
       1982. 12(2): p. 137-152.
12.    Speckart, G. and Anglin, M., Narcotics and crime: An analysis of existing evidence for a causal
       relationship. Behav Sci Law, 1985. 3(3): p. 259-282.
13.    Speckart, G. and Anglin, H., Narcotics use and crime: An overview of recent research advances.
       Contemp Drug Probl, 1986. 13(4): p. 741-769.
14.    Ball, J., Rosen, L., Flueck, J., and Nuro, D., The criminality of heroin addicts: When addicted and
       when off opiates, in The Drugs-Crime Connection, Iniciardi, J., Editor. 1981, Sage Publications:
       Beverly Hills.
15.    Corman, H. and Mocan, H.N., A Time-Series Analysis of Crime and Drug Use in New York City.
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 1996. 5463: p. 19.
16.    Grogger, J. and Willis, M., The Introduction of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in Urban Crime
       Rates. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 1998. 6353: p. 26.
17.    DeSimone, J., The Effect of Cocaine Prices on Crime. Econ Inq 2001. 39(4): p. 627-643.
18.    Markovitz, S., An Economic Analysis of Alcohol, Drugs and Violent Crime in the National Crime
       Victimization Survey, in NBER. 2000.
19.    McGlothlin, W.H., Anglin, M.D., and Wilson, B.D., Narcotic Addiction and Crime. Criminology,
       1978. 16(3): p. 293-315.
20.    Hser, Y., Anglin, D., and Powers, K., A 24 year follow-up of California narcotics addicts. Arch
       Gen Psychiatry, 1993. 50: p. 577-584.
21.    Anglin, M.D. and Perrochet, B., Drug use and crime: A historical review of research conducted by
       the UCLA Drug Abuse Research Center. Substance Use & Misuse, 1998. 33(9): p. 1871-1914.
22.    Fagan, J. and Freeman, R.B., Crime and work, in Crime and Justice: a Review of Research, Vol
       25. 1999, Univ Chicago Press: Chicago. p. 225-290.
23.    Inciardi, J.A., Drug Use and Criminal Behavior, in The Drugs-Crime Connection. Beverly Hills,
       CA: Sage, Inciardi, J., Editor. 1981., Sage Publications: Beverly Hills, CA.
24.    Gerstein, D.R. and Lewin, L.S., Treating drug problems. N Engl J Med, 1990. 323(12): p. 844-8.
25.    Weatherburn, D., Topp, L., Midford, R., and Allsopp, S., Drug Crime Prevention and Mitigation:
       A Literature Review and Research Agenda. 2000, Bureau of Crime and Statistics: NSW-Australia.
26.    French, M., Salome, H., Sindelar, J., and McLellan, A., Benefit-Cost Analysis of Addiction
       Treatment: Methodological Guidelines and Application Using the DATCAP and ASI. Health Serv
       Res, 2002. 37(2): p. 433-455.
27.    Rajkumar, A.S. and French, M.T., Drug abuse, crime costs, and the economic benefits of
       treatment. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 1997. 13(3): p. 291-323.
                                                                                                      33

28.   Caulkins, J., Rydell, L., Everingham, S., Chiesa, J., and Bushway, S., An Ounce of Prevention, A
      Pound of Uncertainty: The Cost-Effectiveness of School-Based Drug Prevention Programs., in
      RAND Drug Policy Research Center. 1999: California.
29.   Hubbard, R., Marsden, M., Rachal, J., Harwood, H., Cavanaugh, E., and Ginzburg, H., Drug
      Abuse Treatment: A National Study of Effectiveness, in THe University of North Carolina Press.
      1989: Chapel Hill, NC.
30.   Spooner, C., Mattick, R., and Noffs, W., The Nature and Treatment of Adolescent Substance
      Abuse. Supplement to NDARC Monograph #26, in National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
      Monographs. 1999: Sydney, Australia.
31.   Anglin, M. and Speckart, G., Narcotics use and crime: A multisample, multimethod analysis.
      Criminology, 1988. 26(2): p. 197-233.
32.   Chaiken, J.M. and Chaiken, M.R., Drugs and Predatory Crime. Crime and Justice-a Review of
      Research, 1990. 13: p. 203-239.
33.   Dole, V. and Nyswander, M., A medical treatment for diacetylmorphine (heroin) addiction. J Am
      Med Assoc, 1965. 193: p. 646-650.
34.   Dole, V.P. and Nyswander, M.E., Methadone maintenance treatment. A ten-year perspective.
      Jama, 1976. 235(19): p. 2117-9.
35.   McLellan, A.T., Grissom, G.R., Zanis, D., Randall, M., Brill, P., and O'Brien, C.P., Problem-
      service 'matching' in addiction treatment. A prospective study in 4 programs [see comments].
      Comment in: Arch Gen Psychiatry 1997 Aug;54(8):691-4. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 1997. 54(8): p.
      730-5.
36.   McLellan, A.T., Kushner, H., Metzger, D., Peters, R., Smith, I., Grissom, G., Pettinati, H., and
      Argeriou, M., The Fifth Edition of the Addiction Severity Index. J Subst Abuse Treat, 1992. 9(3):
      p. 199-213.
37.   Chermack, S.T., Roll, J., Reilly, M., Davis, L., Kilaru, U., and Grabowski, J., Comparison of
      patient self-reports and urinalysis results obtained under naturalistic methadone treatment
      conditions. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 2000. 59(1): p. 43-9.
38.   Jofre-Bonet, M. and Petry, N.M., Trading Apples for Oranges: “Trading apples for oranges?
      Results of an experiment on the effects of
      heroin and cocaine price changes on addicts’ polydrug use”, in working paper. 2002.
39.   Joyner, L.M., Wright, J.D., and Devine, J.A., Reliability and validity of the addiction severity
      index among homeless substance misusers. Substance Use & Misuse, 1996. 31(6): p. 729-51.
40.   Anglin, M.D. and Speckart, G., Narcotics use, property crime, and dealing: structural dynamics
      across the addiction career. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 1986. 2((4)): p. 355-375.
41.   Ball, J. and Ross, A., The Effectiveness of Methadone Maintenance Treatment. 1991, New York:
      Springer-Verlag.
42.   Spelman, W., Criminal Incapacitation. 1994, New York: Plenum Press. 338.
43.   Chan, J., The limits of incapacitation as a crime control strategy, in Bureau of Crime Statistics
      and Research of NSW. 1995: Australia.
