NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR MARKET INSTITUTIONS AND DEMOGRAPHIC EMPLOYMENT PATTERNS

Giuseppe Bertola
Francine D. Blau
Lawrence M. Kahn

Working Paper 9043
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9043

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

We are grateful to Richard Disney and to seminar participants at Cornell, Turin, and Juan March Institute
(Madrid) for helpful comments; to Justin Wolfers for help in assembling and using the macroeconomic data
set made available by him and Olivier Blanchard; and to David Neumark for providing us with demographic
data. Excellent research assistance was supplied by Julian Messina, Abhijay Prakash, and especially Thomas
Steinberger. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Giuseppe Bertola, Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Institutions and Demographic Employment Patterns
Giuseppe Bertola, Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 9043
July 2002
JEL No. J1, J2, J5, J6, E2

ABSTRACT
Using data from 17 OECD countries over the 1960-96 period, we investigate the impact of
institutions on the relative employment of youth, women, and older individuals. Theoretically, we show
that labor market institutions meant to improve workers’ income share imply larger disemployment
effects for groups whose labor supply is more elastic. Using an empirical model that allows us to control
for unmeasured country-specific factors that affect relative employment and unemployment, we find that,
for both men and women, more extensive involvement of unions in wage-setting significantly decreases
the employment rate of young and older individuals relative to the prime-aged, with no significant effects
on the relative unemployment of these groups. In contrast, a larger role for unions has insignificant effects
on male-female employment differentials, but raises female unemployment relative to male
unemployment. These results suggest that union wage-setting policies price the young and elderly out of
employment and drive disemployed individuals in these groups to non-labor-force (education, retirement)
states. A possible scenario for women is that high union wages encourage female labor force
participation, but that women who would otherwise be disemployed by high wage floors are able to find
work in unregulated sectors or are absorbed by public employment.

Giuseppe Bertola
Dept. of Economics
European University Institute
San Domenico di Fiesole I-50016
Florence, Italy
and CEPR

Francine D. Blau
Dept. of Labor Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
NBER and CESifo

Lawrence M. Kahn
Dept. of Labor Economics
and Collective Bargaining
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and CESifo

1. Introduction
In 1973, OECD standardized unemployment rates were between 2 and 3.2% for most European
countries, and even lower in several (OECD 1983). By 1995, unemployment had risen in all of
these countries, averaging 10.7% in the European Union (OECD 2000). The experience of the
United States strongly contrasts with that of these other OECD countries. In 1973, U.S.
unemployment was 4.8% or roughly double that of other OECD countries. By 1995 it was 5.6%
or about half that of the European Union. This reversal of unemployment fortunes motivates a
vast literature aimed at explaining these and other patterns of cross-country unemployment
evolution. Some studies emphasize European labor market institutions, such as high levels of
union coverage and generous social insurance benefits, as reasons for high unemployment
(OECD 1994; Siebert 1997; Nickell and Layard 1999; Nickell, Nunziata, Ochel, and Quintini
2001). Restrictive monetary policy in Europe (Ball 1997 and 1999) and other macroeconomic
shocks are found to explain a large portion of diverging unemployment experiences, especially
when interacted with institutional wage rigidities (Blanchard and Wolfers 2000; Ball 1997;
Bertola, Blau and Kahn 2002). Public employment patterns have also been shown to play a
potentially important role (Algan et al, 2002). Finally, and most relevantly to our approach here,
within-country unemployment developments are empirically related to broad wage-inequality
changes, and such demographic factors as a more rapidly falling size of the youth population also
arguably contributed to the decrease in the U.S. relative unemployment rate (Bertola, Blau and
Kahn 2002).
This paper’s perspective is complementary to that of aggregate unemployment analyses.
We investigate the effects of macroeconomic forces and labor market institutions on the relative
employment of specific demographic groups—youth, women, and older individuals. Our focus
on the labor market outcomes of these groups is most readily justified by the fact that their
unemployment and (especially) employment rates are much more variable than those of primeage males (Bertola, 1999). The labor market position of demographic groups other than primeage males has, not surprisingly, featured very prominently in the policy debates of industrialized
labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

countries. Considerable attention has been paid to youth employment problems in Europe
(Blanchflower and Freeman 2000). The labor market prospects of older workers importantly
affect national policies to insure the living standards of the elderly and the sustainability of
pension systems in the face of an aging population. And, while it is unclear whether or not
equal-opportunity prescriptions and parental leave policies have actually raised female
employment and labor force participation (Blau and Kahn 2000a, Ruhm 1998), the relative
employment outcomes of women are closely scrutinized in most OECD countries.
There are, in addition, important methodological reasons to focus on the relative
employment of subgroups. This approach makes it possible to formulate and test sharper
predictions of the effects of labor market institutions than is the case for aggregate labor market
indicators. Consider, for example, centralization of union wage setting and employment
protection legislation (EPL). More centralized wage bargaining may or may not increase overall
wages and unemployment, because the greater bargaining power associated with more extensive
union coverage may be offset by wage restraint resulting from the union’s awareness of macrolevel wage effects (Calmfors and Driffill 1988; Nickell and Layard 1999). Centralized wage
setting does, however, tend to cause some compression of the distribution of wages in practice
(Blau and Kahn 1996a, b), and such compression should unambiguously decrease the relative
employment of low-productivity worker groups regardless of whether it decreases or increases
each group’s employment level. EPL also has ambiguous effects on overall employment, since it
discourages both layoffs and hires. But if, as is likely, it has smaller effects on inflows from out
of the labor force than on layoff rates, it should increase unemployment (and decrease
employment) of labor market entrants, such as youths and women, relative to incumbents. In
these and other instances, theory has ambiguous implications for aggregate employment and
unemployment rates, but offers sharp predictions on group-relative effects of labor market
institutions.
Empirical testing of predictions about group-relative effects is also simpler than in the
case of aggregate outcomes. First, reverse causality (such as increasing generosity of
2

unemployment insurance benefits in response to high unemployment) may well be less important
when one is examining relative employment or unemployment than their corresponding
aggregates. Second, studying relative employment alleviates the potential biases in crosssectional studies due to omitted country-specific variables to the extent that they affect the
employment of different groups in a similar way. However, these omitted factors may affect
relative employment outcomes by influencing the various subgroups differently. For this reason,
in our empirical work, we control for country effects. We are able to do so because we have
compiled a data base with time-varying institutional measures.
This paper offers not only new empirical results, but also a simple and novel
interpretation of wage compression and disemployment of “outsiders.” Specifically, in Section
4, we present a model of union behavior which shows that policies meant to increase workers’
surplus from employment imply larger union wage markups and hence larger falls in
employment for groups with more elastic labor supply, other things equal. This model implies
that union bargaining will raise the relative wages and lower the relative employment of youth,
older individuals and women (compared to the prime-aged and males) to the extent that these
groups have more elastic labor supply schedules, as is likely. Intuitively, unions choose to raise
the wages most for groups with the best alternatives to paid employment: schooling (youth),
home production (women), and retirement (older individuals). As we discuss below, wage
compression (at least for young workers and women relative to prime age men) and relative
disemployment of outsiders are hard to rationalize under other models of union behavior.

2. Previous empirical approaches
Our paper is similar in spirit to a group of cross-country, time series studies of the impact of
institutions on the overall unemployment rate (Belot and van Ours 2000; Bertola, Blau and Kahn
2002; Scarpetta 1996; Daveri and Tabellini 2000; Nickell, Nunziata, Ochel and Quintini 2001).
We offer new insights and evidence by focusing on relative employment, as is also recently done
by Jimeno and Rodriguez-Palenzuela (2001), who however study only youth and prime-age
3

relative unemployment rates and (assuming fixed institutions) do not control, as we do below, for
country-specific effects in estimating the impact of institutions on relative employment.
There is abundant evidence that labor market institutions affect the wage distribution, but
evidence on the impact of institutions on relative employment is mixed (Blau and Kahn 1999;
2002). Within-country studies focusing on the impact of changes in union coverage or in
institutions associated with collective bargaining have found evidence of negative effects on lowskill employment from union intervention.1 Evidence from cross-country studies, however, is
scarce and less conclusive. Studies comparing two or three countries with different levels of
unionization offer mixed support for theoretical predictions: in most of the studies, unionization
is found to imply more compressed and less flexible wage structures, but not less favorable
employment opportunities for low-skill workers; however, in one study both the predicted wage
and employment outcomes for the less-skilled were observed, although the employment effects
were small.2
Country studies may offer valuable (if often only implicit) detailed controls for countryspecific factors.3 However, they yield evidence that is not only mixed, but also hard to
extrapolate to other countries and periods. More readily generalizable are cross-sectional studies
that pool data across a number of countries with different institutional arrangements. Nickell and
Bell (1995) find little evidence of more pronounced relative unemployment increases for the
1

See, e.g., Edin and Topel’s (1997) study of Sweden’s “solidarity bargaining” period of 1968-1983, and Kahn’s
(1998) study of the Norwegian 1987-91 wage-compression episode. In both cases, raising floors resulted in sharp
employment declines for low-skill or low-education workers (and in low wage industries, on which see also Davis
and Henrekson, 1997).
2
For example, Card, Kramarz and Lemieux (1999) found that over the 1980s, relative wages were more rigid in
France than in Canada, where in turn wages were less flexible than in the U.S. Yet, relative employment across skill
levels changed similarly in all the three countries. Krueger and Pischke (1998) and Blau and Kahn (2000a) similarly
find that the wages and employment of low-skill German workers both changed more favorably than those in the
U.S. over the 1980s. However, in Freeman and Schettkat’s (2000) study of the US and Germany from the 1970s to
the 1990s, the relative wages of low-skill men fell in the United States compared to Germany, while their relative
employment fell in Germany compared to the US. But these effects were too small to account for much of the rise
in the overall German unemployment rate compared to the US.
3
Among the many country-specific features influencing employment outcomes alongside standard labor market
institutions, availability of public sector jobs for low-skill workers may play an important role. See Blau and Kahn
(2000a) for a discussion of the German-U.S. case, Edin and Topel (1997) and Björklund and Freeman (1997) for
evidence on Sweden, Kahn (1998) for the Norwegian case, and Algan et al (forthcoming) for theory and evidence on
the impact of public jobs on aggregate employment and unemployment.

4

less-educated in countries with more rigid labor markets. In contrast, Kahn (2000), analyzing
data from 15 OECD countries over the 1985-94 period, finds that collective bargaining and
coordinated wage-setting are not only negatively associated with age-related and educationrelated wage differentials, but also with the relative employment of the young (but not the lesseducated). Similarly, Blau and Kahn (1996a) find for the 1980s that, among men, the
employment-to-population ratio of low skilled relative to middle skilled workers (defined by age
and education) was higher in the U.S. and the UK than in countries (Germany, Austria, Norway)
with more highly unionized labor markets and more compressed wage structures. A problem
with these and other cross-sectional studies is that omitted country-specific factors may account
for the observed relative wage and relative employment patterns. For example, Nickell (1997,
p.66-67) notes that most of the apparent employment effects of EPL are accounted for by low
female employment rates in Southern Europe – with no effect on prime-age males – and that the
evidence may thus reflect cultural difference rather than policy effects.
We overcome these problems with earlier country studies by examining the impact of
institutions on relative employment in a regression context. Unlike this earlier work, we
examine 17 countries over the 1960-96 period and hence obtain more readily generalizable
results. And, in contrast to earlier cross-sectional studies, our data on time-varying institutions
enable us also to control for country effects and thereby address concerns of country-specific
omitted variables, such as the cultural factors Nickell (1997) mentions. Finally, none of these
earlier studies provides any theoretical justification for the phenomena of wage compression and
relative disemployment of outsiders, a central focus of the theoretical model presented below.

3. The facts
Figure 1 displays descriptive graphs of each country’s employment rate for 1995-96 plotted
against the rate for 1970-74. The data are presented separately by sex and refer to three age
groups: young (15-24), prime-aged (25-54), and older (55+). The employment rate is the
proportion of the population in the indicated age-sex group that is employed. Employment rates
5

are averaged over the indicated period and the graphs include the subset of countries for which
complete data are available in both periods: Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Italy, Japan,
Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Each graph includes a 45° line to
clarify the trend (note that the origins of the horizontal and vertical axes are not the same across
graphs).
The first column of graphs in Figure 1 displays information on youth. Employment rates
of young men (in the top graph) fell over the period in all countries. The decline was relatively
small in the United States, where the employment rate fell from 58.5% to 53.6%, compared to a
considerably larger decrease from 67.3% to 46.3%, on average, in the other countries. Only
Canada had a smaller decline than the United States. Employment rates of young women (in the
bottom graph) also fell in most countries, with the exception of the United States and Canada,
where the ratio increased, and Australia, where it was stable. As in the case of males,
employment rates of young women increased in the United States relative to the average for
other countries: the rate rose from 40.0% to 49.6% in the United States and fell from 49.2% to
41.2% elsewhere on average. Thus, for both young men and young women, the U.S. went from
being a relatively low employment rate country in 1970 to a relatively high employment rate
country in 1995. France, Italy, and Spain had especially large declines in the incidence of
employment for youth.
Consider next prime-age employment rates, shown in the middle column of graphs. In
marked contrast to the comparison for youth, the U.S. falls squarely in the middle of the crosscountry cluster of observations. For men, the employment rate declined from 93.1% to 88.3% in
the United States and from 94.3% to 86.0% elsewhere on average. The employment rates of this
demographic group are very narrowly concentrated around 95% in the earlier period. Their
dispersion increases in 1995-96, when all employment rates are lower (by modest amounts,
except in Spain and Finland). Both the declines and their dispersion, however, are modest in
comparison to that observed for young men. Employment of prime age men appears to have been

6

much better protected against the adverse labor market of the 1980s and 1990s than employment
of the young.
In contrast, to the declines in employment rates of prime age men, employment of primeage women rose substantially everywhere. The U.S. experienced a larger increase in
employment rates for this group (from 47.4% in 1970 to 73.4% in 1995) than the average for the
other countries (from 46.1% to 65.2%), but the difference was not large. And Canada and
Sweden had substantially larger increases in prime age women’s employment rates than did the
U.S.
Finally, consider the information displayed in the last column of graphs in Figure 1 for
older men and women. Employment rates of older men declined sharply in all countries. Those
of older women also tended to decline but more modestly, and from much lower initial levels.
Differences between the U.S. experience and that in the other countries for these groups were not
as large as for youth. The employment rate of older males fell by slightly less in the United
States (from 53.0% to 35.5%) than elsewhere (averaging 51.0% in 1970 and 30.2% in 1995).
For older women, the trends in employment rates in the United States and the other countries
were quite similar, falling from 23.6% to 20.8% in the U.S. and from 18.1% to 14.4% on average
elsewhere.

4. A simple model of labor market institutions and relative employment effects
It may appear somewhat puzzling that, in labor markets that are more unionized than in the
United States, employment of secondary worker groups (“outsiders”) is relatively low. If primeage male “insiders” wield greater bargaining power, should they not use that power to boost their
wages relative to outsiders, and work less as a result? In this section, we proceed to show with a
simple model that unions—or, more generally, policies and institutions aimed at improving
workers’ welfare—raise the relative pay (and lower the relative employment) of groups with
more elastic labor supply schedules. The model is focused on the wage-employment tradeoffs
faced by different groups of workers, and abstracts from many important aspects of union7

management bargaining. Combining optimizing behavior by union leaders and realistic
differences in group-specific participation elasticities, however, the model offers a simple
explanation both for wage compression by age and gender, and for larger disemployment effects
for young, female, and older individuals. As discussed below, this combination of relative wage
and employment outcomes is difficult to rationalize otherwise.
The basic insight can be illustrated in a simple log-linear analytical framework. The data
we analyze below cannot distinguish between the hours and participation dimensions of labor
supply: only zero-one employment and participation rates are available. Accordingly, we model
group-level labor demand and participation decisions in terms of within-group composition
effects at the level of an entire labor market, supporting a stylized representation of industrial
relations in many European countries. To focus on the relationship between group i’s
employment and wage, demand or supply cross-group interaction terms are omitted in the formal
model (we discuss the scope for such interactions briefly when summarizing the results below).
Consider the willingness-to-work function
wi=si +εi(li-ni),

(1)

where li denotes the logarithm of the number of participating individuals and wi the logarithm of
each worker’s take-home pay; si and ni are labor supply shifters; and εi is the inverse elasticity of
the group’s labor supply, which depends on factors such as non-labor income, partners’ wages,
and non-employment uses of time. The opportunity cost of working is constant within the group
if εi=0. Larger values of this parameter index increasingly inelastic labor supply schedules: as ε i
tends to infinity, labor market participation tends to ni, which may vary across groups but is
independent of the wage. Let labor market demand for the same group also be approximated by a
log-linear schedule,
wi=ai-ηili
where the parameter a indexes productivity, w is the log of employer labor cost, and 0<ηi<1 is
the elasticity of the inverse labor demand schedule facing group i.

8

(2)

Under competition, supply equals demand, and we have for log of competitive wages and
competitive employment:
wi =[ηi/(εi+ηi)]si - [εiηi/(εi+ηi)]ni + [εi/(εi+ηi)]ai ,
li =(ai– si)/( εi+ηi) + [εi/(εi+ηi)]ni .

(3)
(4)

Wages are quite intuitively predicted to be higher for groups with higher productivity (indexed
by a), smaller size (indexed by n), better things to do out of employment (indexed by s); the
ceteris paribus implications of different demand and supply elasticities are similarly intuitive.
Note that it is possible that some workers, such as women, encounter labor market
discrimination. Indeed, an extensive literature on the gender pay gap suggests that both gender
differences in productivity and discrimination play a role in causing the observed differential.4
The possibility of discrimination can easily be accommodated in the model by adjusting “true”
productivity by the discrimination coefficient with a representing adjusted productivity. Since
this issue is not central to our concerns here and leaves our basic reasoning unchanged, we do not
explore it further but note that the adjusted productivity interpretation of a is most likely the
relevant one for women.

4.1 Unionization and the elasticity of participation
Now suppose the group of workers with labor demand schedule as in (2) and marginal
opportunity costs of working as in (1) becomes unionized. For simplicity, we determine
employment from a “right-to-manage” perspective, where firms are free to adjust the quantity of
labor demanded.5 Unions and management bargain over wages, but employers are free to set
employment along their labor demand curves. Then, at union wages W (suppressing the group
subscript i), firm profits are F(L) –WL and the union surplus is WL – S(L), where F(•) is the
(concave) revenue function whose log marginal revenue product is expressed by equation (2), L
4

See for example, Blau and Kahn (2000b).
If there is employer monopsony or if there is efficient bargaining over both pay and employment, then wage
compression need not result in less employment for the groups whose wages are raised the most (Farber 1986; Card
and Krueger 1995).
5

9

is employment, and S(L) is the aggregate opportunity cost of working for the L employees, with
log marginal cost of working expressed by equation (1).
Under the right-to-manage labor demand constraint W=F’(L), consider an asymmetric
wage bargain that chooses W to maximize
F(L)-WL+ β(WL-S(L)),

(5)

where β is the relative weight of union objectives in the bargained outcome. This objective
function generalizes the outcome of competitive equilibrium (where β=1 yields maximization of
the total surplus F(L)-S(L) generated by employment) to allow for different weighting of
workers’ and employers’ surplus. If β >1, the objective weighs workers’ surplus (total wages
minus total opportunity cost) more heavily than employers' surplus (total value of production
minus wages). This represents in stylized fashion the impact of more unionized and/or regulated
labor markets. Since all incomes (from employment and non-employment) enter the objective
function linearly and with equal weight, distributional concerns within the group of workers are
assumed away by this specification.
The first order condition for maximization of (5) subject to W=F’(L),
F’(L)= βS’(L)-[(∂W/∂L)L+W](β-1),
can be rearranged to read
S’(L)=F’(L)[1-η(L)(β-1)/β]

(6)

where η(L)>0 is the elasticity of the inverse labor demand curve. The β=1 case yields
S’(Lc)=Wc=F’(Lc), the competitive solution. At the other extreme, S’(Lm)=F’(Lm)[1-η(⋅)] when
β→∞, and the employment level (Lm) preferred by a monopoly union is determined by a familiar
markup term. Cases where 1<β<∞ represent intermediate labor market configurations. Quite
intuitively, β>1 implies S’(Lm)>F’(Lm): as long as labor demand is downward sloping, marginal
productivity is less than average productivity, and a labor market allocation that privileges
workers' over employers' total surplus introduces a wedge between marginal opportunity cost
and marginal productivity.

10

Substituting from equations (1)-(4) and (6), we have the following expressions for the log
of the ratio of union to nonunion wages and employment (again suppressing the group subscript):
log(Wu/Wn) = {η/(ε+η)} [log(β) – log (β -ηβ + η)]

(7)

log(Lu/Ln) = (ε+η)-1 [log (β -ηβ + η) - log(β)],

(8)

where u and n subscripts signify union and nonunion quantities respectively.
In equation (6), the union’s markup over the opportunity cost of working evaluated at the
unionized employment level depends on the elasticity of demand and on the parameter indexing
the weight of workers’ objectives in labor market outcomes, but is independent of supply
elasticity. In equations (7) and (8), however, a more elastic group labor supply (i.e., a lower ε)
implies a larger wage increase, and smaller union employment relative to nonunion
employment.6 This result is quite intuitive: since the price of monopolistic wage setting is
shutting some individuals out of employment (and compensating them with the proceeds of
larger wage bills), high wage markups and large employment losses are less attractive when
those who lose jobs are on a steeply declining portion of their opportunity cost schedule. In this
case, the optimal wage increase is relatively small and, as the disemployed move down the
opportunity cost schedule, it is applied to a steeply smaller outside option.
It is highly likely that the same groups (skilled, prime age, males) that command high
wages in an unregulated labor market are also those whose labor supply is relatively inelastic
(Blundell and MaCurdy 1999). Compared to prime-age men, women are more likely to be
making choices between home production and market work (in many cases both types of work),
the elderly are more likely to be choosing between employment and retirement, and youth are
more likely to be choosing between work and school. Further, we may note that, at least with
respect to youth and older individuals, union policy could be viewed as rational in the context of
life-cycle labor supply decisions. From the individual’s perspective, it is optimal to allocate
periods of non-employment to stages in the life cycle when the value of alternative uses of time
6

Recall that the market-level participation schedule reflects the distribution of non-employment opportunities
across the population of workers; hence, its functional form reflects properties of that distribution, rather than the
shape of each individual’s utility function.

11

are highest. Thus the model implies that, other things equal, unions will compress wages by age
(for youth and for older workers too if under competition they would have earned less than the
prime aged) and gender. For given labor demand elasticities, wage compression results in
relatively large employment losses among young, elderly, and female groups with elastic
participation schedules.

4.2 Other determinants of relative-employment outcomes
Of course, other features of the economic environment bear on union behavior and labor market
outcomes. Within this model, however, only the labor supply elasticity effect can explain both
wage compression and high disemployment of people other than prime-age males. First, a larger
wage markup is optimal for worker groups with less elastic labor demand (see, for example,
Farber 1986). While low demand elasticity also reduces the employment implications of higher
wages, we show in Appendix A.1 that the combined effect is a greater employment loss:
intuitively, steeper labor demand endows the union with more monopoly power, and implies a
larger gain from restricting labor supply. International data on demographically-disaggregated
demand elasticities (or markups) are not available, and even in theory such parameters would in
general depend on complementarity and substitutability relationships between groups of workers.
However, any systematic variation of η across demographic groups would imply a larger
employment impact for worker groups – likely to include predominantly prime-age males – that
are less easily substituted by non-labor factors of production (Rosen, 1970). Thus the labor
demand elasticity effect predicts higher relative wages and lower relative employment for primeage men than for other groups, the exact opposite of what one finds. Second, a larger union
bargaining power parameter β also implies higher relative wages and lower relative employment.
To the extent that union bargaining power varies across demographic groups, as in Jimeno and
Palenzuela’s (2001) theoretical model, we would expect it to be larger for prime-age males.
Again, the prediction is for unions to raise wages and lower employment more for prime-age
men than for other groups, counter to what we observe.
12

Wage-setting centralization also bears intuitively on the model’s implications. The
derivations above assume that a union worker who loses his/her job has no alternative
employment available, an assumption that might characterize an encompassing union that
negotiates a contract covering a country’s entire workforce, a stylized view of Scandinavian or
Austrian corporatism. At the opposite end of the spectrum is the U.S.: in our data for 1994,
unions cover roughly 18% of American workers, and a disemployed union worker may well
have nonunion jobs available. Taking the U.S. case to its logical extreme, consider a union
organizing a company in an otherwise completely competitive labor market (we assume the
company has some monopoly power, so the union can survive). In this case, the union workers’
opportunity cost is constant at the competitive wage and is perfectly elastic. In the context of our
model, then, there is no reason for wage compression or relative disemployment of outsiders in
this economy (abstracting from differences across groups in bargaining power or the elasticity of
labor demand). At the other extreme, if we have a completely unionized economy with a central
wage bargain then the model presented above will apply, as the union maximizes the sum of
group-specific objective functions in the form of (5), and predict higher wages and larger
employment losses for groups with elastic participation schedules. This reasoning implies that
higher coverage by centralized collective bargaining institutions will lead to greater wage
compression and greater relative disemployment of outsiders.
Raising wages of “outsiders” like youth, older workers and women may also be a way for
“insiders” (prime-aged males) to reduce potential competition from such low wage workers.
Lazear (1983) makes an analogous point in explaining why unions flatten age-earnings profiles.
The desire to reduce competition from low wage workers has also been cited as a rationale for
union support for living wage and prevailing wage laws in the United States, which place a floor
under wages paid to contractors with local governments (Neumark 2001; Kessler and Katz
2001). Our model without demand-side interactions suggests an alternative, perhaps
complementary, union rationale for boosting the wages of these groups (their more elastic
participation schedules) and also highlights the relatively high value of non-employment to them.
13

To the extent this is the case, the negative employment effects of union policies that price out
low-wage labor become more socially acceptable.

4.3 Taxation
The model above characterizes unions as negotiating wages subject to being on the labor demand
curve. A downward sloping labor demand schedule yields inframarginal surplus to employers
and gives workers incentives to increase wages and accept employment losses as long as the
higher wage earned by those who are employed more than compensates for the labor income lost
by those who would be employed at the competitive wage. This compensation is implicit in
writing a standard union objective function as a linear sum of employment and non-employed
incomes. In reality, the relevant compensating transfers may take place within families, or may
be redundant if workers are risk-neutral or take turns in unemployment over their lifecycle.
However, it may be both theoretically and empirically interesting to note that the relevant
transfers can be quite explicit: institutions can leave the work choice to individuals, insert tax
wedges between employer costs and take-home pay, and distribute tax revenues to workers who
can no longer be employed.7
Suppose workers’ representatives in government enact a labor tax, let employment be
determined by individual price-taking demand and supply behavior, and distribute the tax
proceeds to workers. This arrangement might characterize countries with dominant labor or
social democratic parties, such as several in Continental Europe, and represents well
arrangements (still common in Scandinavian countries) whereby unions administer
unemployment benefit systems. Employment must maximize employers’ profits in light of the
gross wage, denoted Wr, to imply that employment satisfies Wr= F’(Ld), where Ld is labor
demand. And workers’ optimal acceptance of employment, on the basis of their non-employment
opportunities and of the net wage (1-τ)Wr, requires (1-τ)Wr=S’(Ls), where Ls is labor supply.
7

See Spilimbergo (1999) for a discussion of tax and subsidy determination as means of preventing competition from
lower-productivity workers in a cross-regional context. The relevant mechanism is the same as in Lazear (1983)
discussed above.

14

Taking into account these constraints, suppose the revenue of labor taxes is redistributed to
workers, and the tax rate is thus chosen to maximize:
F(Ld)-WLd+β[W(1-τ)Ls-S(Ls)+τWLs].
The optimal tax rate is then η(⋅)(β-1)/β. The relationship between F’(•) and L’(•) here is the
same as in the union wage bargaining model: the elasticity of supply again has no implications
for this tax rate, while it would bear on the Ramsey-optimal structure of tax rates aimed at
minimizing distortions induced by raising revenue for general purposes rather than for
distribution to workers. And the elasticity of labor supply has the same effects on relative wages
and relative employment, here as in the union bargaining model, in the comparison of laissez
faire and regulated labor market outcomes (see Appendix A.2).
Even if taxes are imposed by government and not necessarily spent on union members’
benefits, our framework predicts that the impact of taxes on wages and employment will in
general depend on labor supply and demand elasticities, as in ordinary models of payroll tax
incidence. If τ is the tax rate and log (1+τ) ≈ τ, then under competition we have
l(τ) ≈ (a-s+εn-τ)/(ε +η)

(9),

w(τ) ≈ (ε +η)-1[εa + ηs - ετ - εnη].

(10).

and, after taxes,

Obviously, a larger wedge τ decreases the group’s employment, and the effect is more
pronounced if ε +η is small (i.e., if the group’s participation and/or demand schedules are flatter).
And after tax wages fall more for groups with less elastic labor supply. Thus, a uniform payroll
tax will compress wages and lead to larger disemployment effects for outsiders. The role of
different labor supply elasticities in determining these effects is exactly the same as in the above
analysis of union bargaining. When employment and wage differentials are driven by taxes,
however, lower employment is accompanied by reduced labor market participation, rather than
unemployment (see Appendix A.3).

15

4.4 Summary
The basic implications of out theoretical approach are easily illustrated. The left-hand diagram in
Figure 2 shows the effects on wages and employment of a wedge between labor demand and
labor supply. The right-hand diagram repeats the exercise for the same labor demand function
and a different labor market participation function: the impact of the same wedge on wages and
employment, relative to the competitive outcome, is larger because the participation schedule is
flatter. In both diagrams, the counterpart of lower employment can be open unemployment if the
wedge is implemented by a binding wage floor, to imply that more individuals are willing to
work than can be employed at the going wage. Or it can be lower participation, if the wedge
represents taxes and lowers take-home pay along the labor supply curve (an outcome equivalent
from the collective point of view of workers, as discussed above, if the revenue of tax and
contribution schemes is redistributed to disemployed individuals).
The key point illustrated by the model is that, upon insertion of wedges between marginal
productivity and marginal willingness to work, differences in group supply elasticities can
(everything else given) imply higher relative pay and larger negative employment effects for
groups whose labor market attachment is more strongly influenced by the wage. This is obvious
in Figure 2, and the formal expressions above also indicate that examining the implications of the
bargaining influence of such “insider” subgroups as prime-age men cannot as readily explain
why unionized workers do not raise their own wages as much as the wages of “outsiders”.
Needless to say, many additional factors are potentially relevant in reality to the
outcomes of interest. While the model treats each group as a separable unionized entity,
complementarity or substitutability interactions across groups of workers are realistic on both the
demand and supply side of the labor market. Our baseline model features no labor demand
interactions across groups. This may offer a satisfactory approximation: empirically, skilled
prime-age workers are not close substitutes for youth, female, and elderly workers, while
individuals within these groups are closely substitutable for each other (Disney, 1996; see
Jimeno and Rodriguez-Palenzuela, 2001, for a formal model of imperfect substitutability). It may
16

be theoretically and empirically more important to account explicitly for income effects in
individual labor supply, and in particular for the effects (based on models of within-family
resource distribution) of primary workers’ wages on secondary workers’ participation incentives.
Other distributional effects could result from realistic uses of labor-tax revenues, and
implications for relative employment outcomes could easily derive from age- and genderdependent subsidization of employment and non-employment states. Moreover, different groups
within unions may have different levels of bargaining power. As long as realistic differences
between group-level participation elasticities are preserved, however, these and other extensions
would complicate the analysis without affecting the basic insight illustrated by Figure 2’s
reduced-form representation. In what follows we discuss the insight further and confront it with
empirical information.

5. Evolution over time of relative employment outcomes and institutions
Our cross-country time-series data set builds on that constructed and analyzed by Blanchard and
Wolfers (2000). We draw variables pertaining to overall unemployment and some labor market
institutions from the Blanchard-Wolfers dataset. We have added data on labor force by age
groups, population by age groups, and unemployment rates by age groups for male and female
workers separately. We have also included additional labor market institutions indicators as well
as additional data on changes in institutions over time (see Appendix B for details.) The
countries included are Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the UK, and the U.S.
To smooth out short-run fluctuations, and in light of infrequent availability of institutional
information, observations are arranged in 5-year intervals (1960-64 to 1990-94) along the time
dimension; the last observation refers to the shorter 1995-96 interval.
Table 1 reports cross-sectional and time-series demographic employment patterns, for
the set of countries with complete observations in 1970-74 and 1995-96; Figure 3 illustrates for
the same countries patterns of relative changes in employment incidence for prime-age vs. young
17

and prime-age vs. older individuals, separately by sex. The relative employment incidence of the
prime aged rose in virtually every case (the only exception is the Canadian comparison of prime
age and young men). On average, employment gaps across age groups rose by more in the other
countries than in the United States, and in Continental European countries (such as Italy, France,
and Spain) by more than in the Anglo-Saxon group including Canada and Australia. These
contrasts are stronger for the youth than for older individuals.
Our empirical specifications below aim at explaining these developments in terms of
variation in institutional features, also summarized for the same countries in Table 1. The
institutional variables most directly relevant to our theoretical arguments pertain to the extent
and character of union wage setting. Theory indicates that union involvement in relative-wage
setting, as indexed by the model’s parameter β, should concentrate employment losses on
“secondary” workers. And union power may affect demographic employment patterns more
directly by influencing which group(s) bear the brunt of layoffs. For example, unions may agree
to downsizing on the condition that older workers are separated first (OECD 1995; Casey 1992),
or that the most recent (and younger) employees are laid off on a last-in-first-out basis.
Time-varying data are available for collective bargaining coverage and degree of
coordination, as well as for union density. We see in Table 1 that there was considerable
variation across countries in collective bargaining coverage trends. Coverage fell sharply in the
UK, with declines centered in the 1980s under the Thatcher program, and declined more
moderately in four of the remaining countries, including the U.S. Coverage increased
significantly in France and Spain and was fairly stable in the remaining two countries. On
average, coverage in the U.S. fell by 3.5 percentage points, only somewhat more than the
average decrease of 2.3 percentage points in the other countries. Of course, coverage was much
less extensive in the U.S. than elsewhere in both years. As to collective bargaining coordination,
between 1970 and 1995 wage setting became less coordinated in Sweden, Australia and the UK,
while increases in coordination occurred in Italy and France. The other countries were stable in
this regard, and of course the U.S. had the lowest level of coordination, along with Canada. This
18

measure of coordination is not entirely satisfactory, since it does not reflect the decentralization
that has taken place in the U.S. since the 1980s (Katz 1993). Changes in union density were even
more diverse, with membership as a percent of wage and salary employment rising by 9-28
percentage points between 1970 and 1995 in Spain, Sweden and Finland and falling by 8-13
percentage points in Australia, Japan, the UK, the U.S. and France. Union density declined by
12 percentage points in the U.S., but rose by 3 percentage points, on average, in the non-U.S.
countries. While union density might appear to be redundant once we know what fraction of
workers are actually covered by collective bargaining contracts, a higher fraction of workers who
are union members may enable unions to pose a greater threat to management, all else equal.
Theory also indicates that labor taxes should also have a differential effect on the relative
employment of groups with differently elastic demand and supply schedules. Accordingly, we
include tax indicators as explanatory variables in our relative-employment regression below. The
model presented above, however, implies that taxes should not affect unemployment, and we test
this prediction as well. In Table 1, we see that labor tax rates (defined on an average National
Income Accounts basis, and including income and consumption tax revenues) rose in each
country except Japan, with especially large increases in Italy, Spain and Sweden. Taxes in the
U.S. rose by four percentage points less than the average for the other countries and the U.S. tax
rate remained below the other country average. France, Finland, Italy and Sweden had
especially high labor tax rates as of the mid-1990s.
In reality, of course, tax and expenditure patterns are more complex than in our simplified
theoretical framework. To the extent that the future benefits of individual workers are linked to
their own contribution history and this is internalized by labor supply behavior, labor taxation
would tend to be offset by reduced take-home pay at unchanged labor cost levels.8 However,
such wage decreases may be impossible for workers at or near binding wage floors, particularly
youth and possibly adult women as well. Thus, the impact of labor taxes depends on details of
8

See e.g. Summers (1989) for a discussion of this and related points in the context of mandated employment-related
benefits.

19

benefit schemes, and interacts with the structure of wage distributions and wage negotiations.
Some of our empirical specifications will allow for the latter interactions, but only limited
information is available on the former aspects.
Institutions other than wage setting and taxes would likely also play important roles in a
dynamic context. More stringent employment protection (EPL) reduces employers’ propensity to
hire and terminate workers, with fairly obvious implications for employment patterns across
demographic groups. In high-EPL markets, young labor market entrants and women with
intermittent participation spells should be over-represented among the unemployed and
underrepresented among the employed, who should in turn disproportionately include mature
male workers with high labor market attachment. The data summarized in Table 1 indicate that
changes in employment protection between 1970 and 1995 were somewhat diverse in this set of
countries, increasing in France, Sweden and the UK but decreasing in Finland, Italy and Spain.
By and large, the increases came in the 1970s, while the decreases came in the 1980s and 1990s.
Employment protection in the U.S. remained stable, and the weakest among OECD countries.
More generous UI coverage has similar effects, to the extent that it increases the level of
outside options in unions’ bargaining strategies and the latter aim at wage compression. Thus,
both greater employment protection and UI generosity would raise the young-prime age
employment rate differential. In our data, unemployment insurance (UI) replacement rates are
measured for the first year and the fifth year of unemployment. The former is a measure of
generosity for most unemployed workers, while the latter is an indicator of the duration of
benefits. On this basis, UI systems were on average more generous in 1995 than 1970.
Exceptions were the UK, which lowered first and fifth year replacement rates and Japan, which
lowered its first year replacement rate. It was during the 1970s that many UI systems became
more generous. Changes in the United States were less positive than those elsewhere.
Finally, retirement-related institutions should clearly impact the relative employment of
older workers, and that of other groups for whom older workers are substitutes or complements.
Table 1 shows data on changing characteristics of retirement systems. Basic replacement rates
20

in these programs rose everywhere between 1970 and 1995 with a smaller rise for the US than
for the other countries, on average, although this average is strongly driven by Spain’s large
increase. Replacement ratios for special disability and unemployment schemes for older workers
rose on average with a slightly larger rise in the US than elsewhere for disability schemes (.07
vs. .04) and a moderately larger rise for unemployment schemes in other countries than in the US
(.08 vs. no change). Finally, 10-year accrual rates were constant at zero in the US but fell
elsewhere on average, a change that reduced work incentives for older workers outside the US on
average (the 10-year accrual rate is the change in the replacement rate of retirement benefits for a
55-year old male who works an additional ten years). With the exception of the slightly larger
increase in US disability replacement rates, retirement institutions changed in ways that lowered
work incentives for older individuals by more outside the US than for the US.9
To summarize, on average, the institutions shown in Table 1 appear to have become more
interventionist in other countries relative to the United States between 1970 and 1995. To the
extent that these institutions produce reduced relative employment for younger and older
individuals, pattern of these changes is consistent with the different relative employment
experiences summarized in the top portion of Table 1, and in Figure 3. Specifically, as noted,
the gap between prime aged and younger individuals sexes and prime aged and older people
tended to rise much more in other countries than in the U.S., with especially large differences for
youth. These relationships are simply descriptive, however, and so far our qualitative comments
on the empirical fit of theoretical predictions were narrowly focused on the comparison of the
U.S. experience to that of other countries with complete data in the early 1970s and at the end of
the sample period. Below, we look more systematically at the relationship between changing
institutions and employment outcomes of demographic groups in a regression context that makes

9

Of the explanatory variables in our analysis, the retirement variables are perhaps the most likely to suffer from
reverse causation. We nonetheless present results including them in order to provide a sharper test of for the impact
of the collective bargaining and tax rate variables, our primary focus. Results for these variables were similar when
the retirement variables were excluded.

21

it possible to control for other influences and exploit all available time-series and cross-section
information.

6. Regression evidence
On the basis of the simple theoretical considerations above and in Appendix A, our empirical
specifications seek evidence of relative employment effects (from both collective wage-setting
and taxes) and relative unemployment effects (only from collective wage setting). We are also
interested in studying relative employment and unemployment effects from flow-based
demographic patterns induced by EPL, and from UI and pension arrangements.
We estimate equations of the following general form, with (11a) and (11b) estimated
separately for men and women, and subscripts denoting “prime aged” (p) or ages 25-54, “young”
(y) or ages 15-24, and “older” (o) or aged 55 and over:
log(ep/ey)jt = B’Xjt + aj + bt + ujta,

(11a)

log(ep/eo)jt = B’Xjt + aj + bt + ujtb,

(11b)

log(epm/epw)jt = B’Xjt + aj + bt + ujtc,

(11c)

where for country j and period t, e is the employment-to-population ratio (which we sometimes
refer to as the employment rate), m refers to men and w refers to women, X is a vector of
explanatory variables including the overall unemployment rate, births/population 15-24 years
prior to the current observation, collective bargaining coverage, coordination of wage-setting,
union density, an index of employment protection mandates, the first and fifth year UI
replacement rates, the retirement system average wage replacement rate, replacement rates for
older workers under special disability and unemployment schemes, the change in the retirement
wage replacement rate for 55 year old males who work an additional ten years (the accrual rate),
male and female normal retirement ages under public pensions, and the average total labor tax

22

rate (income plus payroll plus consumption taxes), a is a country effect, b is a period effect, and
ua, ub and uc are disturbance terms.10
In equations (11a) and (11b), the dependent variable is the relative employment rate of
the prime aged compared to younger and older individuals, respectively. In equation (11c), we
estimate the determinants of the employment rate gap between prime age men and prime age
women. Measuring relative employment effects in terms of log ratios is the appropriate metric
here, as in the literature on the relative wage implications of demand and supply shifts (e.g. Katz
and Murphy 1992). In all models, we correct for the heteroskedasticity due to correlation of
errors across observations for a country and for country-specific autocorrelation using a
generalized least squares procedure.
We are primarily interested in ascertaining whether labor market institutions affect
relative employment rates of particular groups, as measured by employment-to-population ratios.
However, variation in the dependent variable of equations like (11) reflects the different
incidence across groups not only of unemployment but also of out-of-the-labor-force status, and
labor market participation decisions are both theoretically interesting and policy relevant.
Hence, we also estimate models with relative unemployment as the dependent variable. In these
alternative equations, we use the raw difference between the unemployment rates of the various
groups as dependent variables.11
In equation (11), we control for overall unemployment and demographic factors, as well
as institutional variables, country effects and period effects. To the extent that the aggregate
unemployment rate effectively controls for macroeconomic factors, this specification provides a
sharp test of the relative employment hypotheses discussed earlier. Specifically, we expect
overall unemployment to have a positive effect on the young-prime age employment rate gap:
10

As noted by Ruhm (1998), availability of paid parental leave can influence relative employment and wage levels
of women. We were able to obtain some data on weeks of paid parental leave, which were kindly provided by
Christopher Ruhm and used in Ruhm (1998) and Ruhm (2000). Unfortunately, there was too little overlap between
his data and ours to allow us to allow us to control for parental leave policies.
11
Freeman and Schettkat (2000) argue that in comparing unemployment rates over time, raw differences (rather
than, for example, log differences) are the appropriate functional form.

23

due to downward wage rigidity, unemployment is likely to be concentrated on relatively lowproductivity individuals, and the young are likely to be at the end of a queue of individuals
looking for work. If we did not control for macro-level unemployment, then any observed
association between institutions and relative youth employment could be due to the effects of
institutions on overall unemployment rather than to the kind of union relative employment
effects we have highlighted above. Moreover, the prime age-older employment gap is also likely
to be positively affected by overall unemployment to the extent that retirement systems can be
used to reduce the employment of older workers in a recession. Overall unemployment is less
likely to raise the male-female employment gap because women are less likely to be employed in
cyclically sensitive sectors than men (Blau and Kahn 1981), although they are more likely than
men to be discouraged workers (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 2002).
Alternatively, it could be argued that results controlling for overall unemployment do not
fully capture the effects of institutions, since institutions can also affect overall unemployment
which in turn influences relative employment. Thus, we also estimated models with the overall
unemployment rate excluded, in effect estimating the total impact of institutions on relative
employment or relative unemployment rates.12
We include births/population 15-24 years prior to the current observation to control for
the relative supply of young individuals (see Korenman and Neumark 2000, and Jimeno and
Palenzuela 2001). At a given aggregate unemployment rate, a large cohort of young people is
expected to cause a deterioration in their labor market prospects and thus lower the employment
rate of the young relative to the prime-aged. We use prior births/population rather than current
youth population share because the former is less likely to be affected by current labor market

12

It is also possible that the overall unemployment rate is itself affected by the demographic composition of the
population, rather than by macroeconomic conditions only. Thus, in models not shown here, we replaced the raw
unemployment rate with one that corrects for demographic composition. For each country-period observation, we
took a weighted average of the unemployment rates for the following demographic groups: men age 15-24, men age
25-54, men age 55+, women age 15-24, women age 25-54, and women age 55+. For each observation, we used the
same set of weights, which were taken from the 16 country sample of 1980 observations. The results were virtually
identical to the ones reported below.

24

conditions, through migration, and is therefore more likely to be exogenous with respect to
current employment outcomes.

6.1 Relative employment
Table 2 contains basic regression results for relative employment.13 We begin by examining the
results for wage–setting institutions: collective bargaining coverage, coordination, and union
density.14 We find positive effects of collective bargaining coverage and coordination on the
prime age-youth employment rate differential for both men and women, with significant effects
in three of the four cases. However, union density has unexpected significant negative effects.
With respect to the prime age-older employment gap, the three union variables have positive
effects on the employment gap for both men and women that are significant, in all but one case.
Finally, in the case of the male-female employment gap, union density has a significantly
positive effect on the gap; however the coefficients on the remaining two union variables are
insignificant, with one positive (coordination) and one negative (collective bargaining coverage).
It is not surprising to find some perversely signed estimates for the coefficients on the
union-power indicators. The three union variables offer admittedly imprecise measures of similar
aspects of the institutional environment (the correlation is 0.360 for union density and collective
bargaining coverage; 0.210 for density and coordination; 0.360 for coverage and coordination).
In light of such multicollinearity, we evaluate the influence of these indicators as a group, using

13

We implemented unit root tests for our panel using a method suggested by Maddala and Wu (1999). Because of
our short panel, usually seven periods, we interpret these results very cautiously. To test for unit roots, we computed
Dickey-Fuller statistics for each country and their associated significance levels, using the approximations in
MacKinnon (1994). We then implemented the suggestion of Maddala and Wu (1999) to aggregate these individual
country tests using an exact Fisher test, under which –2 times the sum of the logs of the significance levels has a chisquared distribution with degrees of freedom equal to two times the number of countries. We accepted the null
hypothesis of a unit root for most of our variables under at least one of MacKinnon’s (1994) approximations. We
then repeated the process on the residuals from each of the models in Tables 2 and 3 and in each case rejected the
null hypothesis of no cointegration (albeit not taking into account the fact that the residuals are themselves estimated
variables due to the short panels). Thus, under these tests, we reject the hypothesis of spurious regression across our
time-averaged observations.
14
As explained in Appendix B, for countries for which the first period we observe coverage is, say, t0, we assign the
t0 value to all prior periods. Our basic results were the same when we included a dummy variable for these
observations.

25

the regression coefficients to predict the change in relative employment which would occur if all
the union-related variables were simultaneously changed from their average level in one region
of the world to their average level in another. Since the coefficients are estimated controlling for
country effects, these simulations give useful indications as to the effects of plausible long-run
differences in the three interrelated explanatory variables.
The “Scandinavia vs. North America” line of Table 2 shows the estimated relativeemployment effects of changing the union environment from that observed in Canada and the
U.S. (union density=27.8%, coverage=29.6%, coordination=1.0 on average) to that observed in
Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden (density=68.2%, coverage=80.4%, coordination=2.35).
The following lines compare North America to Northern Europe, North America to Southern
Europe, and the U.S. to the full set of non-U.S. countries, all comparisons involving substantial
increases in all of the union-related variables.15 Simulation results are similar in all cases.
Moving from North American values for the union-related variables to the values in each of the
other regions, or from U.S. to non-U.S.values, substantially increases the prime age-youth and
prime-age older employment gaps for both men and women. The prime age-youth effect ranges
from .16 to .25 log points for men and from .16 to .36 log points for women, while the prime
age-older effect ranges from .23 to .40 log points for men and from .37 to .53 log points for
women. The estimated effects are all highly statistically significant, with the exception of the
female prime-age youth effect for Scandinavia vs. North America, which is significant at the
11% level. In contrast to our results for the prime age-youth and prime age-older comparisons,
union wage-setting institutions are not found to have significant effects on male-female
employment differentials.
Turning to our findings for the other policies, we see that employment protection is found
to widen employment gaps by age in three out of four cases (the prime age-youth contrast for
15

Northern Europe consists of Belgium, France, Germany and the Netherlands and has density of 32.7%, coverage
of 87.5%, and coordination of 2.21; Southern Europe includes Italy, Portugal, and Spain and has values of 34.1% for
density, 76.3% for coverage, and 1.86 for coordination. In the U.S., density is 20.5%, coverage is 22.0% and
coordination takes its minimum value of 1.0, while in the non-U.S. countries, these variables average 43.6%
(density), 72.2% (coverage), and 2.02 (coordination) respectively.

26

women, and the prime age-older contrast for both men and women) with two of the estimated
effects being statistically significant. The negative coefficients estimated for male prime ageyouth employment differentials and male-female employment differentials are counter to
expectations, but not statistically significant.
Labor taxes are found to have positive effects on both male and female prime age-youth
employment differentials and the male-female prime age employment differential. While these
point estimates are consistent with the idea that tax wedges lead young workers and women to
forsake employment and engage in their relatively more attractive non-employment activities
(such as education or home production), the effects are not statistically significant. Moreover,
taxes have negative effects on the prime-age older worker relative-employment comparisons,
with a significant effect for the male prime age-older employment differential. These results are
not easily interpreted, and may reflect the pattern of public expenditures not accounted for by the
retirement and UI variables included in the model.16
Overall UI one and five year replacement rates narrow prime age-young and prime ageolder worker employment differentials in each case, with several significant effects. These
results suggest perhaps greater coverage by regular UI systems for prime age workers than for
other groups (we discuss the special UI systems for older workers below).

However, we

discount this interpretation because, when we examine relative unemployment rates of prime age
vs. older or younger workers (Table 3), we find opposite-signed effects for the one and five year
replacement rates in three of four cases, and these are usually insignificant. With respect to
male-female comparisons, though, higher first and fifth year replacement rates both significantly
raise the male relative unemployment rate, and the first year replacement rate significantly
16

In particular, the availability and quality of schooling may be an important determinant of cross-country and timeseries patterns in youth labor market participation. As an attempt to partially control for the effects of total
government spending, which may be confounded with labor taxes, we added a control for the fraction of
employment in the public sector, using the data used and kindly made available by Algan, Cahuc, and Zylberberg
(2002). We do not emphasize these results because government employment is clearly endogenous and because we
lose about 9% of the sample because of missing data. Nonetheless, the impact of labor taxes was similar to that in
Table 2. Even controlling for the level of public expenditures, the types of public expenditures may be correlated
with labor tax rates, complicating the interpretation of the tax variable.

27

lowers the male relative employment rate. The fifth year replacement rate has an insignificantly
positive effect on the male relative employment rate. These male-female comparisons suggest
greater UI system coverage of men than women.
The retirement-related variables have mixed effects on relative employment. Several
variables have the expected effects on the relative employment of older workers. For example, a
higher pension replacement rate significantly raises the employment of prime age vs. older
workers for women. Moreover, higher replacement rates for special disability and
unemployment programs for older workers, and lower retirement ages each have a positive effect
on the male prime age-older worker employment gap, with significant effects in each case except
for disability programs. On the other hand, a higher overall pension replacement rate has an
insignificant, negative effect on male prime age vs. older employment, and a higher accrual rate
for 55 year olds actually lowers the relative employment of men over 55.17
Finally, looking at economic and demographic conditions, we find that the overall
unemployment rate has a positive effect on the prime age-youth gap for men and women and the
prime age-older gap for men. The prime-age youth coefficients are highly significant, while the
male prime age vs. older worker unemployment rate coefficient is significant at the 7% level
(two-tailed test). The births variable has a positive effect on the prime age-youth employment
gap, with a significant effect for women, suggesting cohort crowding and imperfect substitution
between youth and adults (see also Korenman and Neumark 2000).

6.2 Relative unemployment
Table 3 shows results for relative unemployment rates using the same specification as in Table 2.
Focusing on the combined effect of the wage-setting variables shown in the last four rows of the
table, we usually find insignificant effects of unions on the relative unemployment of youth and
17

Our results for the retirement variables are partially consistent with those of Blöndal and Scarpetta (1999), who
examined the labor force participation rate of men 55-64 for 15 countries for the 1971-95 period. We do not discuss
their results in detail here because we have a different set of dependent variables and a more extensive set of labor
market institutions than in their paper, as well as a considerably different focus.

28

older individuals.18 These age-related results for unemployment are consistent with our
theoretical analysis if these groups have good alternative uses of their time when disemployed:
younger individuals may pursue educational options,19 while older workers may retire.
Interestingly, while union wage-setting institutions were found to have small and
insignificant effects on male-female employment differentials, they are found to lower the male
unemployment rate relative to the female unemployment rate by 4.4 to 6.2 percentage points, and
these effects are significant at the 0.02%-0.05% level. These are sizable effects, since on
average the male-female unemployment rate differential is –1.4 percentage points. The results
are consistent with women being drawn into the labor force by the prospect of landing a highpaying union job in countries where strong wage centralization tends to price them out of work.
Although the relative-employment effects that would be implied by this mechanism are not
apparent in the data, it may be that some women are able to find work in unregulated sectors, or
that public employment absorbs the women who would otherwise be disemployed by high union
wage floors (Blau and Kahn 1999; 2002).
We now turn to a brief consideration of some of the other variables in the model. Lagged
birth rates appear highly relevant to youth relative unemployment, confirming the results of
Jimeno and Palenzuela (2001) and their references. With respect to policy variables, UI
indicators are not a significant determinant of youth relative unemployment. This is not
surprising since in many countries young labor market entrants are not entitled to unemployment
benefits. The most interesting results are for the employment protection index which is found to
lower unemployment rates of the prime aged compared to younger workers—the coefficient on
employment protection is significant at the 5.6% level for men and the 0.7% level for women
18

The exceptions are two cases (Northern Europe vs. North America and Southern Europe vs. North America) in
which greater unionization raises the unemployment of prime age women vs. older women.
19
This reasoning is consistent with Kahn’s (2000) finding for a cross section of 15 OECD countries that collective
bargaining coverage had a negative effect on youth relative employment but was positively associated with school
attendance among young adults. However, he found that enrollment did not fully account for the negative effect of
union coverage on the relative employment of youth. Taking Kahn’s findings in conjunction with those reported
above suggests that unions may increase the share of out-of the-labor force youth who are neither at work nor at
school.

29

(two-tailed tests). There is no evidence that employment protection raises unemployment of
older individuals relative to the prime aged. If downsized older workers flow out of the labor
market (into retirement) rather than into unemployment, this finding is consistent with our
finding above that EPL tends to lower the relative employment of older men. Further, for both
men and women, labor taxes appear to lower the unemployment of the prime aged relative to
older individuals, to also lower the unemployment of young vs. prime age women and to raise
male unemployment rates compared to women’s. As was the case for relative employment,
taxes may be correlated with the composition of spending which may affect participation rates
and thus unemployment rate. 20 Finally, we again obtained mixed results for the retirement
variables. Higher overall retirement replacement rates lower older workers’ relative
unemployment rates. In conjunction with the negative (women) to roughly zero (men) effect of
this variable on older workers’ relative employment (Table 2), these unemployment effects
suggest that retirement benefits reduce older workers’ labor force participation. A higher 10 year
accrual rate raises older workers’ relative unemployment as do higher disability and UI
replacement rates for older workers. The accrual rate result may reflect greater incentives for
older workers to look for work, while the UI effect likely reflects the job search requirement of
this program. While the disability results are counterintuitive (i.e. disability benefits raise older
workers’ relative unemployment rates), Blöndal and Scarpetta (1999) suggest that the OECDbased measure of disability scheme generosity may not accurately capture the extent to which
countries in practice use the disability system as a way of reducing the labor supply of older
workers.

6.3 Interactions
The results so far suggest an important role for labor market institutions in explaining
international differences in the relative employment of youth and older individuals and the
unemployment of women compared to men. The models in Tables 2 and 3 had a simple linear
20

Adding the public employment share to the regressions did not have a major impact on the tax effects.

30

structure in which, for reasons of parsimony, only main effects of each variable appear.
However, we might expect recessionary overall macroeconomic conditions or cohort crowding
to have more severe negative relative employment effects on youth, for example, the more rigid
relative wages are with respect to economic conditions. And employment institutions such as
seniority-based layoffs will produce larger prime age vs. youth employment differentials when
there is a recession than when there is an expansion. Hence, we ran all of our models with
interactions between overall unemployment and the other variables in the equation and between
the prior births variable and each institution. We do not present full results of these models,
which feature many interaction coefficients of limited individual interest. However, as we now
show, these interaction models do help explain changes in relative employment from the 1970s
to the 1990s.21

6.4 Institutions and relative employment trends
In Figures 4-6 we consider the extent to which institutions can help us explain relative
employment trends and the relative unemployment of women (we omit other unemployment
comparisons, for which wage-setting institutions had insignificant effects). We focus on a
comparison of changes in outcomes between 1975 and 1995 because we have a fairly large set of
countries—14 in total—with data for each of these two years.22 Each figure plots the predicted
changes in relative employment (unemployment) against the actual changes. The predicted
changes are based on three models: a) a model including only controls for economic and
demographic conditions, and country and period effects; b) a model with these controls plus the
institutional variables (i.e., indicators of wage setting institutions, employment protection,
unemployment insurance generosity, retirement variables and labor taxation) as reported in
21

An additional possible set of interactions concerns those between the various indicators of labor market
institutions, as emphasized by Belot and van Ours (2000). We were unable to find any clear pattern of results when
we tried interacting various institutions with each other, and we concluded that the data are not rich enough to
support such models.
22
The countries are Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and United States.

31

Tables 2 and 3; and c) the same model with unemployment-institutions, unemployment-prior
births, and prior births-institution interactions. We then fit OLS regression lines to each set of
predicted changes. We have also added a 45° line along which the predicted changes exactly
equal the actual changes. The closeness with which each regression line tracks the actual
changes line indicates how well the model fits the data on actual changes. By comparing the fit
of the model with institutions included to that with institutions excluded, we can get an idea of
the contribution of the institutional variables to an understanding of the observed trends within
countries.
Figures 4 a and b summarize our results for the employment of young men and women
relative to the prime aged. In both cases, the models with institutions perform extremely well
and considerably better than the models with institutions excluded. Moreover, the interaction
model does even better than the main effects model for women and about the same as the main
effects model for men. The results for the employment of older men and women relative to the
prime aged are shown in Figure 5 a and b. The results are qualitatively similar to the findings for
the young. Again, institutional main effect models improve our explanatory power for both men
and women, and allowing interactions substantially improves the fit for older women.
The results for the employment of prime-aged women compared to prime-aged men are
shown in Figure 6a, while Figure 6b gives comparable results for the relative unemployment of
this group. The findings for relative employment of prime-aged women are similar to those for
older individuals. The model with institutions included tracks the changes to some extent and
performs better than a model that does not include institutions, and adding interactions leads us
to do even better. Finally, the main effects results for the changes in the relative unemployment
of prime-age women are very strong: the trend line fitted to the main effects model including
institutions is much closer to the actual changes than the model excluding these variables. And,
the model with interactions does even better and tracks the actual changes quite closely.
Overall, Figures 4-6 show that institutional change is an important component of the
explanation for changes in relative employment from the 1970s to the 1990s. The interaction
32

between institutions and overall unemployment and demographic factors is also often an
important factor, but usually no more important quantitatively than adding institutional main
effects. In earlier work on the overall unemployment rate, Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) and
Bertola, Blau and Kahn (2002), found that interactions between institutions and macro shocks
were the single most important factor explaining unemployment rate changes, although Nickell,
Nunziata, Ochel and Quintini (2001) dispute whether it is necessary to appeal to such
interactions. The results in Figures 4-6 show noticeable but less important effects for
interactions between institutions and the economic environment for explaining relative
employment changes than Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) and Bertola, Blau and Kahn (2002)
find for explaining overall unemployment. Part of this discrepancy is likely to be due to the fact
that we are controlling for overall unemployment here, which itself already contains the effects
of institution-macro shock interactions.23

6.5 Omitting aggregate unemployment
So far, all of the results we have discussed have come from equations that controll for the overall
unemployment rate. This implies that the positive effects of, for example, collective bargaining
institutions on prime age-youth employment differentials are not simply due to high overall
unemployment levels. The union effects estimated here mean that, at a given overall level of
labor market tightness, more unionized economies with more centralized wage setting have
lower employment of youth and older individuals relative to the prime aged. Roughly speaking,
for the same size queue of job seekers (the unemployed), the young and the old are less likely to
be employed relative to the prime aged in more unionized and coordinated regimes. However,
by controlling for overall unemployment, we may be understating the full effects of labor market
institutions on employment differentials, since institutions can also affect overall unemployment.
23

The interaction models in Figures 4-6 include an unemployment rate-births interaction, in addition to the
institution-unemployment and institution-births interactions. When we re-estimated the models excluding the
unemployment rate-births interaction, the results were virtually identical to those in the Figures. We therefore
conclude that the additional explanatory power we derive from the interaction models comes from interactions
involving institutions.

33

We examined this issue by re-estimating the models of Tables 2-3, excluding the overall
unemployment rate. This modification computes the full effects of institutions. Selected results
from this exercise are shown in Appendix Tables A1-A2.
The results not controlling for unemployment are qualitatively very similar to those
controlling for unemployment. As would be expected, the effects of collective bargaining
institutions on prime aged vs. youth employment are larger in magnitude when we do not control
for unemployment. This can be seen by comparing Table 2 with Table A1. The difference in
magnitude suggests that these institutions raise overall unemployment which then in turn raises
the employment gap between the prime-aged and the young. We caution the reader, however,
that the differences in union effects across the two specifications are not statistically significant,
except for the Scandinavia-North American comparison for young men vs. prime age men, in
which the impact of unionization is significantly larger (at roughly the 6% level, two-tailed test)
not controlling for unemployment than controlling for unemployment.

7. Conclusion
In this paper we have investigated the impact of labor market institutions on the relative
employment of labor market subgroups. We pointed out that the effects of institutions on
different groups’ employment may be taken into account by unions and policymakers and finetuned so as to concentrate reduced employment opportunities on individuals who can find good
uses of their time outside of employment. Our empirical approach controls for country-specific
fixed effects and macroeconomic and demographic conditions. The results suggest that countries
where union wage-setting institutions exert a more pervasive influence on labor market outcomes
tend to feature relatively low employment levels among the young and the elderly, and relatively
high unemployment rates among women, while preserving high employment rates for prime age
men.
The emphasis of our theoretical perspective on distributional features could be motivated
from first principles invoking financial market imperfections, or other departures from the
34

standard representative-agent paradigm underlying competitive equilibrium (along the lines of
e.g. Bertola’s, forthcoming, analysis of EPL’s motivation and effects). Similar assumptions could
rationalize reasons for wage compression beyond simple monopoly union models. For example,
union members may advocate wage compression for purposes of ex post insurance (Agell and
Lommerud, 1992), whereby risk averse workers agree to wage equalization ex ante, before
knowing how their laissez faire wage will be affected by labor demand shocks. Wage
compression may also serve the purpose of enhancing union solidarity - a public good from the
union’s point of view - among employed members (Kahn 1993).
From these points of view, the non-employment of low-productivity workers brought
about by higher wage floors may be something the union has to accept, in order to achieve
insurance and maintain solidarity through wage compression. While employment of women,
youth, and older individuals may be reduced, it is still possible that these institutional
interventions raise the expected income or utility of families. These mechanisms, however, focus
on employed workers and are more easily applicable to unions representing homogeneous pools
of workers than to the phenomena we focus on. Considerable evidence suggests that labor
market institutions such as collective bargaining compress wages across as well as within age
and gender groups (Blau and Kahn 2002). This paper’s results suggest that loss of employment
is the price of relatively high wages for low-productivity individuals who are ex ante
identifiable.24 And, if the price of high wages is no employment, even ex post wage compression
in the face of less predictable product-market or health shocks may not be as attractive to (ex
post) low-productivity workers as insurance and solidarity views would make it - at least in the
absence of conceptually independent subsidies to workers who fail to obtain a job because of the
union’s wage structure.

24

Acemoglu et al (2001) suggest that unions may redistribute income across workers with different skills in a model
where ex post wage compression offers insurance and commitment benefits. Variables correlated with skills, such as
age and gender, are observable and persistent in reality, and it may be less than fully realistic to suppose that they
only become known after employment is obtained.

35

Observed employment and wage patterns, however, are fully consistent with the model
we have proposed here, where rent-extracting unions purposely negotiate the largest wage
premiums for groups with the most elastic labor supply because employment losses are less
costly for those with alternatives that are nearly as good as paid employment. Without denying
the validity of alternative views of unions’ role and objectives, our model contributes by
highlighting the relatively high value of non-employment for some groups of low-wage workers,
to imply that demographically biased negative employment effects of union policies that price
out low-wage labor are more socially acceptable.

36

Appendix A: Further Theoretical Results
A.1 Effect of Demand Elasticity on the Union Impact on Employment
Equation (7) shows the ratio of the log of union to nonunion wages (referring to group i and suppressing
the subscript i):
Log(Wu/Wn) = {η/(ε+η)} log [1/(1-η+η/β)],
where η is the inverse labor demand elasticity (0 <η<1) and β is the union bargaining power parameter
(β>1). And equation (8) shows the ratio of the log of union to non-union employment:
log(Lu/Ln)=log(1-η+η/β)/(ε+η)
where ε is the inverse labor supply elasticity and is positive. Denote log(Lu/Ln) by r. Taking the
derivative of r with respect to η, we have:
dr/dη=(ε+η)-2{(ε+η)(-1+1/β)(1-η+η/β)-1-log(1-η+η/β)}.
(A1)
To simplify this expression, define:
z ≡ η-η/β
(A2)
where, 0<z<1, since 0<η<1 and β>1. Substituting (A2) into (A1), we have:
dr/dη = [ε+η]-2{(ε+η)(-1+1/β)(1-z)-1 – log(1-z)}
=[ε+η]-2 {ε(-1+1/β) +z(z-1)-1 – log(1-z)}
(A3)
From the concavity of the log function, we have 0>log(1-z)/z > (z-1)-1, and , since ε(-1+1/β) is negative it
follows that dr/dη is negative: the less elastic labor demand is, the higher the union wage markup is and
the lower is union employment relative to nonunion employment. Intuitively, with more monopoly
power, the gain to restricting labor supply is greater.
A.2 Relative employment effects of the tax wedge
Inserting a wedge τi>0 between the group’s marginal demand and participation schedules increases group
i’s log unit labor costs to
wi(τi) =(ηisi+εiai–ηiεi ni +ηiτi)/(ε i+ηi)= wi(0)+τi ηi/(ε i+ηi)
(A5)
and decreases its employment to
li(τi)=(ai–si+εini–τi)/(ε i +η i) = li(0)–τi/(εi +ηi).
(A6)
As noted in the main text, a smaller ε i magnifies the impact of a given wedge τi: taking differences of
expressions in the form (A5) and (A6) for groups i=1,2 with the same τi and ηi yields the text’s
expressions (9) and (10) for relative wage and employment effects. In this Appendix, we discuss the
implications of different wedges τi and different elasticities ηi, linking these parameters to each other and
to labor’s welfare weight (β) in the simple framework outlined above.
Optimizing for group i (or maximizing an additively separable objective function with similar terms for
this and other groups) implies that
τi =ηi(βi–1)/βi
(A7).
Hence:
(i.) The policy wedge is larger (and so are its wage and employment effects, for given elasticities) for
groups of workers with larger βi weight. In principle, variation of this parameter across
demographic groups could be measured by institutional information or by observed markups. In
practice, the relevant variables are not available on a cross-country comparable basis. To the extent
that this parameter indexes the group’s bargaining power, however, it seems unlikely to be

37

relatively large for the young, female, and elderly groups that bear the brunt of labor market
regulation’s employment impact.
(ii.) Keeping βi constant, the policy wedge is also larger for groups with larger ηi, since a larger wage
markup is optimal for worker groups with less elastic labor demand (see, for example, Farber 1986).
In addition, since the solution with tax wedge leads to the same union wage markup as the union
bargaining model, lower labor demand elasticity has the same implications as shown in Appendix
A.1: lower demand elasticity raises the union relative wage effect and makes for a larger reduction
in union employment.
A.3 Relative unemployment effects
As noted before, optimal wage floors and optimal taxes (from the point of view of the asymmetric wage
bargain) have the same implications for the wedge between the marginal revenue product of labor and the
marginal willingness to work. While the wage markup under the optimal tax and union bargaining
scheme is the same, the two models have different implications for unemployment. Unlike labor taxes,
collective wage setting influences unemployment levels, to an extent that also depends on participation
elasticities. In fact, denoting with Ld and Ls the quantities of labor demanded and supplied at the new
union wage, the unemployment rate of group i,
Ui=(Lsi-Ldi)/Lsi,
(A8)
is increased not only by the decline of log employment shown by equation (8), but also by the wage
increase ∆wi, shown in equation (7), which attracts ∆wi/εi additional workers into the labor market. Not
only the wage increase implied by a given degree of union bargaining power β and inverse labor demand
elasticity η, but also that increase’s impact on labor force participation are larger with groups with more
elastic participation schedule (smaller εi).
Of course, more complicated models of labor supply could imply that workers facing fewer jobs
will leave the labor force even if wages are high (Mincer 1976). But this Appendix shows that
unemployment effects of unions could be even larger than employment effects if high wage floors attract
people into the labor force.

38

Appendix B: Data sources and definitions
This paper’s data set is based on that constructed by Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), documented
at http://econ-wp.mit.edu/RePEc/2000/blanchar/harry_data/. The data set contains macroeconomic and
institutional data on 26 OECD-countries for 8 five-year periods covering the time span 1960-1999. We
have added data on labor force by age groups, population by age groups, and unemployment rates by age
groups for male and female workers separately.
The labor force and population data are taken directly from the ILO database “Economically
Active Population 1950-2010”. The name format of the labor force and population data is vv(v)gcccc
where
vvv = lf
for labor force,
vvv = pop
for population
g=
m for male, f for female
cccc=xxyy
for age group from xx to yy years of age (65_ refers to 65 and above)
The data on unemployment rates by age group have been constructed from data found in the
OECD-publication Labour Force Statistics (various issues). These are country-source data, and we did
not attempt to harmonize their definition. To compute the average unemployment rate for each 5 year
period we calculate the arithmetic mean of the yearly unemployment rates within the period. To obtain
similar data on as many countries as possible, we also aggregate the data to broad age groups by
computing the labor force weighted average of the time-averaged unemployment rate of the relevant age
groups. The labor force weights themselves are constructed as linearly interpolated weights from the labor
force data used above. The name format of the unemployment data is urgxxyy where g= m (male) or f
(female), and xxyy=age group from xx to yy years of age (55_ refers to 55 and above).
The measures for the labor market institutions are taken from several sources. We use Blanchard
and Wolfers’ (2000) measures of time-varying employment protection legislation, and we collected
additional institutional indicators.
We take union density, collective bargaining coverage and coordination, and labor tax rate data
from the data appendix to Nickell, Nunziata, Ochel and Quintini (2001). Collective bargaining coverage
was available for some countries from 1960 to 1999 and for other countries from 1980-94. We used
interpolation and assigned the authors’ earliest figure to all dates before its date.
The UI year 1 and year 5 replacement rates were taken from a OECD database and refer to the
entire 1960-96 period. Data on retirement system characteristics were taken from Blöndal and Scarpetta
(1999).

39

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Giovanni L Violante. 2001. “Deunionization, Technical
Change and Inequality.” CEPR discussion paper 2764, April.
Agell, Jonas, and Kjell Erik Lommerud. 1992. “Union Egalitarianism As Income Insurance.”
Economica 59(235): 295-310.
Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc, and André Zylberberg. 2002. “Public Employment and Labour
Market Performance.” Economic Policy 34, pp.9-65.
Ball, Laurence. “Aggregate Demand and Long-Term Unemployment.” 1999. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2: 189-236.
Ball, Laurence. 1997. “Disinflation and the NAIRU.” In Reducing Inflation: Motivation and
Strategy, edited by Christina Romer and David Romer. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 167-185.
Belot, Michèle, and Jan C. van Ours. 2000. “Does the Recent Success of Some OECD
Countries in Lowering their Unemployment Rates Lie in the Clever Design of their Labour
Market Reforms?” IZA Discussion Paper No. 147. Bonn: April.
Bertola, Giuseppe. 1999. “Microeconomic Perspectives on Aggregate Labor Markets.” In
Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3C, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 2985-3028.
Bertola, Giuseppe. Forthcoming. “A pure theory of Job Security and Labor Income Risk.”
Review of Economic Studies.
Bertola, Giuseppe, Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2002. “Comparative Analysis of
Labor Market Outcomes: Lessons for the U.S. from International Long-Run Evidence,” in
Alan Krueger and Robert Solow, eds., The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be
Sustained? New York: Russell Sage, pp. 159-218.
Björklund, Anders and Richard B. Freeman. 1997. "Generating Equality and Eliminating
Poverty, the Swedish Way." In The Welfare State in Transition: Reforming the Swedish
Model, eds. Richard B. Freeman, Robert Topel, and Birgitta Swedenborg. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 33-78.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Justin Wolfers. 2000. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the
Rise of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence.” The Economic Journal
110(462): C1-33.
Blanchflower, David G., and Richard B. Freeman. 2000. Youth Employment and Joblessness in
Advanced Countries. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber and Anne E. Winkler. 2002. The Economics of Women,
Men, and Work, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1981. “Causes and Consequences of Layoffs.”
Economic Inquiry 20, No.2 (April): 270-296.

40

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1996a. “International Differences in Male Wage
Inequality: Institutions Versus Market Forces.” Journal of Political Economy 104(4):
791-837.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1996b. “Wage Structure and Gender Earnings
Differentials: An International Comparison.” Economica, 63, No. 250(S) (May
Supplement): S29-S62.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1999. “Institutions and Laws in the Labor Market,”
In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1399-1461.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2000a. “Gender and Youth Employment Outcomes:
The U.S. and West Germany, 1984-91.” In Youth Employment and Joblessness in
Advanced Countries, edited by David G. Blanchflower and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 107-167.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2000b. “Gender Differences in Pay.” Journal of
Econonomic Perspectives, 14, No. 4 (Fall): 75-99.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2002. At Home and Abroad: U.S. Labor-Market
Performance in International Perspective (New York: Russell Sage, 2002).
Blöndal, Sveinbjörn and Stefano Scarpetta. 1999. “The Retirement Decision in OECD
Countries.” OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 202, February.
Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1559-1695.
Calmfors, Lars and John Driffill. 1988. “Centralization of Wage Bargaining.” Economic Policy,
no. 3 (April): 14-61.
Card, David, Francis Kramarz, and Thomas Lemieux. 1999. “Changes in the Relative Structure
of Wages and Employment: A Comparison of the United States, Canada, and France.”
Canadian Journal of Economics 32, no. 4 (August): 843-77.
Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
Minimum Wage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Casey, B. 1992. “Redundancy and Early Retirement: The Interaction of Public and Private
Policy in Britain, Germany and the United States.” British Journal of Industrial Relations
30 (September): 425-443.
Daveri, Francesco and Guido Tabellini. 2000. “Unemployment, Growth and Taxation in
Industrial Economies.” Economic Policy 30, pp.49-104.
Davis, Steven J. and Magnus Henrekson. 1997. “Explaining National Differences in the Size
and Industry Distribution of Employment.” Working Paper, University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business, August.
Disney, Richard. 1996. Can We Afford to Grow Older? A Perspective on the Economics of
Aging. Cambridge: MIT Press.

41

Edin, Per-Anders, and Robert Topel. 1997. “Wage Policy and Restructuring: The Swedish
Labor Market Since 1960.” In The Welfare State in Transition: Reforming the Swedish
Model, edited by Richard B. Freeman, Robert Topel, and Birgitta Swedenborg. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 155-201.
Farber, Henry S. 1986. “The Analysis of Union Behavior.” In Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol. II., edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.
1039-89.
Freeman, Richard B., and Ronald Schettkat. 2000. “The Role of Wage and Skill Differences in
U.S.-German Employment Differences.” Working Paper 7474. Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research, January.
Grant, James H. and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 1981. “Labor Market Competition among Youths,
White Women and Others.” Review of Economics and Statistics 63, n3 (August): 354-60.
Jimeno, Juan F., and Diego Rodriguez-Palenzuela (2001) “Youth Unemplpyment in the OECD:
Demographic shifts, labour market institutions, and macroeconomic shocks.” Unpublished
paper, European Central Bank.
Kahn, Lawrence M. 1993. “Unions and Cooperative Behavior: The Effect of Discounting.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 11, No. 4 (October): 680-703.
Kahn, Lawrence M. 1998. “Against the Wind: Bargaining Recentralisation and Wage
Inequality in Norway, 1987-1991.” The Economic Journal 108, No. 448 (May): 603-645.
Kahn, Lawrence M. 2000. “Wage Inequality, Collective Bargaining and Relative Employment
1985-94: Evidence from 15 OECD Countries.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 82,
no. 4 (November): 564-579.
Katz, Harry C. 1993. “The Decentralization of Collective Bargaining: A Literature Review and
Comparative Analysis.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 47(1): 3-22.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 1 (February): 3578.
Kessler, Daniel P. and Lawrence F. Katz. 2001. “Prevailing Wage Laws and Construction
Labor Markets.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 54, no. 2 (January): 259-274.
Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. 2000. “Cohort Crowding and Youth Labor Markets:
A Cross-National Analysis,” In Youth Employment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries,
edited by David G. Blanchflower and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 57-105.
Krueger, Alan B., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1998. “Observations and Conjectures on the U.S.
Employment Miracle.” In Third Public German-American Academic Council Symposium:
Labor Markets in the USA and Germany, edited by German-American Academic Council.
Bonn: German-American Academic Council, pp. 99-126.
Lazear, Edward P. 1983. “A Competitive Theory of Monopoly Unionism.” American
Economic Review 73, no. 4 (September): 631-643.

42

MacKinnon, James G. 1994. “Approximate Asymptotic Functions for Unit-Root and
Cointegration Tests.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 12 (April): 167-176.
Maddala, G.S., and Shaowen Wu. 1999. “A Comparative Study of Unit Root Tests with Panel
Data and a New Simple Test.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 61 (November,
Special Issue): 631-652.
Mincer, Jacob. 1976. “Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wage Laws.” Journal of Political
Economy 84 (August, Part 2): S87-S104.
Neumark, David. 2001. “Living Wages: Protection For or Protection From Low-Wage
Workers.” NBER Working Paper No. 8393, July.
Nickell, Stephen. 1997. “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North
America.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3): 55-74.
Nickell, Stephen, and Brian Bell. 1995. “The Collapse in Demand for the Unskilled and
Unemployment Across the OECD.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 11: 40-62.
Nickell, Stephen, and Richard Layard. 1999. “Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3C, edited by Orley Ashenfelter
and David Card. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3029-3084.
Nickell, Stephen, Luca Nunziata, Wolfgang Ochel, and Glenda Quintini. 2001. “The Beveridge
Curve, Unemployment and Wages in the OECD from the 1960s to the 1990s.” Centre for
Economic Performance, LSE, Discussion Paper No. 0502, July.
OECD. 1983. Employment Outlook September. Paris: OECD.
OECD. 1994. The OECD Jobs Study: Evidence and Explanations. Paris: OECD.
OECD. 1995. “The Transition From Work to Retirement,” Social Policy Studies No. 16. Paris:
OECD.
OECD. 2000. Employment Outlook June 2000. Paris: OECD.
OECD. Various Issues. Labour Force Statistics. Paris: OECD.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1970. “Unionism and the Occupation Wage Structure in the United States.”
International Economic Review 11, no.2 (June): 269-286.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 1998. “The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates:
Lessons from Europe.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (February): 285-317.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. “Parental Leave and Child Health.” Journal of Health Economics
19, no. 6 (November): 931-960.
Scarpetta, Stefano. 1996. “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional
Settings on Unemployment: A Cross-Country Study.” OECD Economic Studies No. 26.
Siebert, Horst. 1997. “Labor Market Rigidities: At the Root of Unemployment in Europe.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3): 37-54.
Spilimbergo, Antonio. 1999. “Labor Market Integration, Unemployment, and Transfers.” Review
of International Economics, 7, no. 4 (November): 641-50.

43

Summers, Lawrence. 1989. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits.” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 79, no. 2 (May): 177-183.

44

Figure 1: Employment-to-Population Ratios By Gender and Age, Early 1970s and Mid-1990s
Men 15-24

Men 25-54

0.70

Men 55+
0.60

1.00

JAP

JAP
US

0.90

UK
AUS
SWE
FRA
CAN ITA
FIN

CAN
US
1995-96

0.80

1995-96

0.50

SWE

JAP
FIN

0.40

0.40

US
SWE

0.30

0.70

ITA

SPA
0.20

0.60

FRA

0.50

0.60

1970-740.70

0.80

0.90

0.50
0.50

0.70

1970-74 0.80

CAN
1995-96

0.75

CAN
AUS

0.65

US

1.00

0.30

0.40

0.50

1970-740.60

SWE
JAP

FIN

US

0.40

UK
FRA

JAP

0.30

JAP
SWE

0.20

FIN

ITA

UK
AUS

0.45

0.30

0.10

ITA
SPA
0.20
0.30

0.40

ITA
1970-740.60

US

CAN
FIN
FRA

SPA

SPA

FRA
0.50

0.80

Women 55+

0.55

0.40

0.70

0.50

SWE

1995-96

0.50

0.90

Women 25-54
0.85

AUS
UK

SPA

0.10
0.60

Women 15-24
0.70

0.60

CAN AUS

FIN

1995-96

0.20
0.40

UK

ITA

FRA

0.30

SPA

0.50

1995-96

AUS
UK

0.60

0.70

0.80

0.35
0.20

0.30

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

0.40

1970-740.50

0.60

0.70

0.00
0.00

0.10

0.20

1970-740.30

0.40

0.50

w

w

Inelastic
participation

(U)
(U)

∆w

∆w

Elastic
participation

Markup (or tax)

Markup (or tax)

Labor
demand

∆l

Labor
demand

l

∆l

l

Figure 2: The different effects of similar institutional wedges for groups with differently sloped market participation
schedules. Arrows indicate wage and employment effects relative to laissez faire; thick lines denote
unemployment, if the wedge is implemented by minimum wage.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

Figure 3: Changes Over Time in Relative Employment-to-Population Ratios Across Age Groups

Men, 1970-1995

Women, 1970-1995

1.00

1.00

0.80

0.80

SPA
FRA

CAN
FRA

0.60

SPA
AUS

CAN

UK

0.40

SWE

US

FIN

25-54 vs. 55+

25-54 vs. 55+

FIN

0.60

AUS

ITA

US
UK

0.40

ITA

JAP
SWE

0.20

-0.10

0.00
0.00

0.20

JAP

0.10

0.20

0.30
0.40
25-54 vs 15-24

0.50

0.60

0.70

0.00
0.20

0.40

0.60
0.80
25-54 vs 15-24

1.00

Country-specific changes, across the 1970-74 and 1995-96 periods, in the difference in the log of employment rates across the indicated age groups.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

1.20

Figure 4a: Actual and Predicted Changes in Relative Employment (1975-95), 14 Countries: Men 25-54 vs. Men
15-24
0.6
0.55
actual changes

0.5

predicted: interactns

0.45
predicted: insts main

Predicted Changes

0.4
0.35

insts out
instns: main
instns: interactns

0.3
0.25
0.2

predicted: insts out

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

Actual Changes

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

Figure 4b: Actual and Predicted Changes in Relative Employment (1975-95), 14 Countries: Women 25-54 vs.
Women 15-24
0.8
actual changes

0.75
0.7
0.65

predicted:insts main

Predicted Changes

0.6
0.55

instns out

0.5

instns: main
0.45

instns: interactns

predicted:insts out

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
predicted::interactns

0.2
0.15
0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Actual Changes

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

Figure 5a: Actual and Predicted Changes in Relative Employment (1975-95), 14 Countries: Men 25-54 vs. Men
55+
0.6
0.55

predicted: instns main

0.5
predicted: interactns

Predicted Changes

0.45
0.4
predicted: insts out

instns out
instns: main
instns: interactns

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

actual changes

0.15
0.1
0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35
Actual Changes

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

Figure 5b: Actual and Predicted Changes in Relative Employment (1975-95), 14 Countries: Women 25-54 vs.
Women 55+
1

0.9

0.8

Predicted Changes

0.7
predicted: instns main
0.6

0.5

instns out
instns: main
instns: interactns

predicted: insts out

0.4
actual changes

0.3

predicted: interactns
0.2

0.1
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
Actual Changes

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 6a: Actual and Predicted Changes in Relative Employment (1975-95), 14 Countries: Men 25-54 vs.
Women 25-54
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
Predicted Changes

predicted:insts main
-0.3
instns out
instns: main
instns: interactns

-0.35
-0.4

predicted: insts out

-0.45
-0.5
-0.55

predicted: interactns
actual changes

-0.6
-0.65
-0.7
-0.7

-0.65

-0.6

-0.55

-0.5

-0.45

-0.4

-0.35

Actual Changes

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

Figure 6b: Actual and Predicted Changes in Relative Unemployment (1975-95), 14 Countries: Men 25-54 vs.
Women 25-54
0.04
0.02
0

Predicted Changes

-0.02
-0.04
predicted: insts out

instns out
instns: main
instns: interactns

-0.06
predicted: insts main

-0.08
-0.1

predicted: interactns
-0.12
actual changes
-0.14
-0.16
-0.16

-0.14

-0.12

-0.1

-0.08

-0.06
Actual Changes

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

-0.04

-0.02

0

0.02

0.04

Table 1: Relative Employment and Institutional Patterns in Selected Countries, 1970-1995

Relative
employment: (1)

AUSTRALIA
CANADA
FINLAND
FRANCE
ITALY
JAPAN
SPAIN
SWEDEN
UK
USA
NON-US
AVERAGE

Men,
25-54 vs. 15-24

Women,
25-54 vs. 15-24

Women,
25-54 vs. 55+

15-24,
Men vs. Women

25-54,
Men vs. Women

55+,
Men vs. Women

1970
0.20
0.46
0.36
0.40
0.37
0.48
0.23
0.36
0.21
0.46

change
70-95
0.13
-0.05
0.29
0.66
0.45
0.27
0.54
0.24
0.18
0.03

1970
0.54
0.58
0.72
0.86
0.84
0.29
0.59
0.64
0.60
0.56

change
70-95
0.53
0.41
0.70
0.67
0.35
0.20
0.57
0.37
0.43
0.35

1970
-0.41
-0.10
0.34
0.08
-0.18
0.02
-0.37
-0.01
-0.20
0.17

change
70-95
0.53
0.37
0.39
1.03
0.78
0.37
0.87
0.58
0.38
0.22

1970
1.08
0.82
1.09
1.04
1.28
0.46
0.79
1.06
1.09
0.70

change
70-95
0.70
0.76
0.67
0.79
0.70
0.39
0.85
0.26
0.46
0.57

1970
0.29
0.28
0.25
0.33
0.49
0.12
0.71
0.21
0.21
0.38

change
70-95
-0.23
-0.25
-0.10
-0.01
-0.16
-0.10
-0.24
-0.22
-0.18
-0.30

1970
0.89
0.84
0.27
0.65
1.04
0.58
1.32
0.59
0.62
0.67

change
70-95
-0.63
-0.67
-0.20
-0.39
-0.49
-0.20
-0.56
-0.56
-0.39
-0.49

1970
1.43
1.08
0.63
0.83
1.48
0.74
1.52
1.00
1.12
0.81

change
70-95
-0.46
-0.32
-0.24
-0.27
-0.14
-0.01
-0.28
-0.67
-0.36
-0.27

0.34

0.30

0.63

0.47

-0.09

0.59

0.97

0.62

0.32

-0.17

0.76

-0.46

1.09

-0.31

Labor market
Collective
institutions: Bargaining Coverage

AUSTRALIA
CANADA
FINLAND
FRANCE
ITALY
JAPAN
SPAIN
(2)
SWEDEN
UK
USA
NON-US
AVERAGE

Men,
25-54 vs. 55+

Coordination

Union Density

Labor Tax Rate

Employment
Protection Index

UI Replacement
Rate: First Year

UI Replacement
Rate: Fifth Year

1970
85.0
40.0
95.0
85.0
85.0
28.0
68.0
86.0
70.0
21.0

change
70-95
-5.00
-3.00
0.00
8.50
-2.50
-6.00
9.00
1.50
-23.00
-3.50

1970
2.25
1.00
2.25
1.75
1.50
3.00
2.00
2.50
1.50
1.00

change
70-95
-0.75
0.00
0.00
0.25
1.00
0.00
0.00
-0.50
-0.50
0.00

1970
43.37
30.62
51.30
21.70
37.00
31.74
9.00
66.76
49.80
27.24

change
70-95
-8.17
6.78
28.30
-11.80
1.70
-7.94
9.20
23.22
-13.10
-12.34

1970
32.18
42.44
51.69
57.91
55.71
25.88
25.91
59.47
43.19
40.06

change
70-95
7.82
9.56
12.31
10.09
15.29
-1.88
20.09
14.53
3.81
5.94

1970
1.00
0.60
2.40
1.97
4.00
2.80
4.00
1.20
0.58
0.20

change
70-95
0.00
0.00
-0.30
1.13
-0.60
0.00
-0.90
1.20
0.12
0.00

1970
0.12
0.49
0.29
0.47
0.04
0.41
0.38
0.24
0.31
0.20

change
70-95
0.09
0.09
0.35
0.08
0.11
-0.12
0.27
0.49
-0.13
0.07

1970
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.16
0.04

change
70-95
0.10
0.00
0.06
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.03
0.00

71.33

-2.28

1.97

-0.06

37.92

3.13

43.82

10.18

2.06

0.07

0.30

0.14

0.06

0.02

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

Table 1: Relative Employment and Institutional Patterns in Selected Countries, 1970-1995 (ctd)

Labor market
institutions:

AUSTRALIA
CANADA
FINLAND
FRANCE
ITALY
JAPAN
SPAIN
(2)
SWEDEN
UK
USA
NON-US
AVERAGE

Retirement Benefits
Wage Replacement
Ratio

Wage Replacement
Ratio for Older
Workers, Disability
Schemes

Wage Replacement
Ratio for Older
Workers,
Unemployment
Schemes

10-Year Retirement
Benefit Accrual
Rate, Males Age 55(3)

1970
0.30
0.42
0.54
0.60
0.62
0.48
0.50
0.72
0.34
0.47

change
70-95
0.11
0.09
0.06
0.05
0.18
0.04
0.50
0.02
0.16
0.09

1970
0.20
0.22
0.46
0.50
0.48
0.16
0.55
0.74
0.33
0.38

change
70-95
0.08
0.11
0.14
-0.25
0.12
0.09
0.16
0.00
-0.05
0.07

1970
0.21
0.16
0.30
0.38
0.25
0.04
0.42
0.12
0.19
0.06

change
70-95
0.06
0.01
0.34
-0.15
0.49
-0.01
-0.05
0.03
-0.02
0.00

1970
0.00
0.19
0.09
0.24
0.22
0.05
0.00
0.17
0.02
0.00

change
70-95
0.00
-0.19
-0.05
-0.07
-0.12
-0.02
0.00
-0.17
0.08
0.00

0.50

0.14

0.41

0.04

0.23

0.08

0.11

-0.06

(1)

Country-specific levels and changes, for the 1970-74 and 1995-96 periods, of the difference in the logarithms
of employment rates across the age and gender groups indicated.

(2)

Note that for Sweden, due to data availability, the following collective bargaining infomation is shown above:
1990 data for 1970 and the average of 1990 and 1994 data for 1990.

(3)

Increase in Retirement Benefit Replacement Rate for a 55-year old male who works 10 more years. Data
shown are for 1967 and 1995.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

Table 2: Selected Generalized Least Squares Regression Results for Relative Employment

Explanatory Variables
overall unemployment rate
prior births/population
coll barg coverage
coordination
union density
employment protection
UI rep rate: year 1
UI rep rate: year 5
labor tax rate
public pension replacement rate
accrual rate, 10 yrs, age 55
UI rep rate: older workers
Disability rep rate: older workers
female retirement age
male retirement age
country dummies
period effects
sample size

log(epop
men2554/epop
men1524)
Coeff
Std Err
1.5942
0.2387
2.0193
4.9472
0.0028
0.0008
0.0789
0.0447
-0.0021
0.0009
-0.0103
0.0160
-0.0494
0.0605
-0.0751
0.1077
0.3389
0.2107
0.0016
0.0017
-0.0009
0.0034
0.1650
0.0963
0.0021
0.3485
-0.0229
0.0119
-0.0348
0.0190
yes
yes
101

log(epop
men2554/epop
men55+)
Coeff
Std Err
0.4033
0.2215
-2.9796
3.1092
0.0036
0.0006
0.0340
0.0276
0.0041
0.0008
0.0554
0.0145
-0.0821
0.0333
-0.1833
0.0564
-0.2946
0.1357
-0.0004
0.0011
0.0153
0.0019
0.2953
0.0639
0.2147
0.2222
-0.0311
0.0058
-0.0297
0.0084
yes
yes
101

log(epop women
2554/epop
women1524)
Coeff
Std Err
1.9120
0.3794
12.1457
3.8803
0.0055
0.0017
0.0526
0.0423
-0.0047
0.0014
0.0857
0.0185
-0.2034
0.0729
-0.1517
0.1816
0.0137
0.2053
0.0049
0.0018
-0.0025
0.0037
0.4475
0.1236
-0.1256
0.3574
-0.0171
0.0118
-0.0242
0.0190
yes
yes
101

log(epop
women2554/epop
women55+)
Coeff
Std Err
-0.0494
0.3623
-17.1193
4.6425
0.0061
0.0008
0.0834
0.0452
0.0026
0.0013
0.0133
0.0218
-0.0870
0.0690
-0.3449
0.1014
-0.2395
0.2491
0.0050
0.0021
0.0015
0.0026
0.0756
0.1000
-0.5769
0.3332
0.0017
0.0065
0.0081
0.0129
yes
yes
101

log(epop
men2554/epop
women2554)
Coeff
Std Err
0.3507
0.3936
-0.8606
5.2685
-0.0016
0.0012
0.0158
0.0455
0.0035
0.0016
-0.0142
0.0198
-0.2110
0.0696
0.1243
0.1261
0.0919
0.2185
-0.0037
0.0020
0.0069
0.0035
0.0495
0.1480
-0.3038
0.3524
0.0031
0.0103
-0.0010
0.0195
yes
yes
101

Net effect of collective bargaining coverage, union density and coordination:
Scandinavia vs. North America
Northern Europe vs. North America
Southern Europe vs. North America
Total Sample other than US vs US

0.1647
0.2493
0.1868
0.1760

p=.0334
p=.0002
p=.0002
p=.0033

0.3988
0.2729
0.2258
0.3087

p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001

0.1624
0.3610
0.2740
0.2283

p=.1110
p=.0003
p=.0005
p=.0091

0.5285
0.4661
0.3723
0.4481

p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001

0.0813
-0.0554
-0.0384
0.0128

Note: standard errors are corrected for country-specific heteroskedasticity and country-specific first order autocorrelation.
Accrual rate is the change in the retirement replacement rate if a 55 year old works an additional ten years. Joint effect of collective bargaining
coverage, union density and coordination is evaluated at sample differences between the two groups (e.g. Scandinavia vs. North America) for these
variables. Scandinavia includes Denmark, Sweden, Finland and Norway; North America includes Canada and the US; Northern Europe includes
Germany, France, the Netherlands and Belgium; Southern Europe includes Italy, Portugal and Spain.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

p=.3573
p=.4034
p=.4602
p=.8411

Table 3: Selected Generalized Least Squares Regression Results for Relative Unemployment

Explanatory Variables
overall unemployment rate
prior births/population
coll barg coverage
coordination
union density
employment protection
UI rep rate: year 1
UI rep rate: year 5
labor tax rate
public pension replacement rate
accrual rate, 10 yrs, age 55
UI rep rate: older workers
Disability rep rate: older workers
female retirement age
male retirement age
country dummies
period effects
sample size

(urate men2554 - urate (urate men2554 - urate
men1524)
men55+)
Coeff
Std Err
Coeff
Std Err
-1.0047
0.0911
0.0449
0.0589
-3.8631
1.0275
1.6949
0.5831
0.0003
0.0003
-0.0004
0.0001
-0.0136
0.0096
0.0081
0.0063
0.0007
0.0003
-0.0002
0.0002
-0.0112
0.0059
-0.0026
0.0028
0.0192
0.0175
0.0159
0.0087
-0.0114
0.0317
-0.0324
0.0166
0.0468
0.0515
-0.1107
0.0254
0.0014
0.0005
0.0013
0.0003
0.0008
0.0009
-0.0028
0.0004
0.0069
0.0267
-0.0317
0.0142
-0.1825
0.0907
-0.1510
0.0466
0.0063
0.0025
0.0008
0.0011
-0.0012
0.0042
0.0060
0.0020
yes
yes
101

yes
yes
101

(urate women2554 urate women1524)
Coeff
Std Err
-1.4358
0.1220
-3.1016
1.6560
0.0008
0.0004
-0.0131
0.0143
0.0005
0.0004
-0.0176
0.0065
0.0240
0.0236
-0.0341
0.0361
0.2265
0.0631
0.0009
0.0008
0.0029
0.0013
-0.0448
0.0344
-0.1847
0.1281
0.0091
0.0035
-0.0028
0.0070
yes
yes
101

(urate women2554 urate women55+)
Coeff
Std Err
0.1985
0.0708
3.4742
0.6161
0.0002
0.0002
0.0210
0.0069
-0.0006
0.0002
0.0034
0.0045
0.0076
0.0119
-0.0095
0.0255
-0.1425
0.0329
0.0036
0.0003
-0.0027
0.0006
-0.0084
0.0207
-0.1066
0.0563
0.0015
0.0017
0.0047
0.0032
yes
yes
101

(urate men2554 - urate
women2554)
Coeff
Std Err
-0.0397
0.0660
-2.5510
0.6913
-0.0008
0.0003
-0.0066
0.0078
-0.0003
0.0002
-0.0044
0.0032
0.0255
0.0121
0.0660
0.0225
0.1430
0.0378
-0.0029
0.0004
0.0008
0.0005
-0.0606
0.0190
0.0369
0.0572
-0.0036
0.0016
0.0055
0.0025
yes
yes
101

Net effect of collective bargaining coverage, union density and coordination:
Scandinavia vs. North America
Northern Europe vs. North America
Southern Europe vs. North America
Total Sample other than US vs US

0.0224
0.0016
0.0045
0.0140

p=.2285
p=.9347
p=.7631
p=.3814

-0.0161
-0.0132
-0.0120
-0.0151

p=.1941
p=.1741
p=.1044
p=.1005

0.0448
0.0329
0.0293
0.0385

p=.1324
p=.2372
p=.1696
p=.1135

0.0122
0.0317
0.0217
0.0162

p=.3965
p=.0135
p=.0297
p=.1622

-0.0617
-0.0540
-0.0436
-0.0527

Note: standard errors are corrected for country-specific heteroskedasticity and country-specific first order autocorrelation.
Accrual rate is the change in the retirement replacement rate if a 55 year old works an additional ten years. Joint effect of collective bargaining
coverage, union density and coordination is evaluated at sample differences between the two groups (e.g. Scandinavia vs. North America) for these
variables. Scandinavia includes Denmark, Sweden, Finland and Norway; North America includes Canada and the US; Northern Europe includes
Germany, France, the Netherlands and Belgium; Southern Europe includes Italy, Portugal and Spain.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

p=.0005
p=.0004
p=.0004
p=.0002

Table A1: Selected GLS Regression Results for Relative Employment, Unemployment Rate Excluded

Explanatory Variables
overall unemployment rate
prior births/population
coll barg coverage
coordination
union density
employment protection
UI rep rate: year 1
UI rep rate: year 5
labor tax rate
public pension replacement rate
accrual rate, 10 yrs, age 55
UI rep rate: older workers
Disability rep rate: older workers
female retirement age
male retirement age
country dummies
period effects
sample size

log(epop
men2554/epop
men1524)
Coeff
Std Err
------8.8967
5.3054
0.0040
0.0011
0.1111
0.0496
0.0007
0.0010
-0.0240
0.0184
-0.0665
0.0750
-0.2177
0.1282
0.5002
0.2233
0.0035
0.0022
0.0036
0.0039
0.1880
0.1030
-0.1842
0.4015
-0.0119
0.0125
-0.0374
0.0214
yes
yes
101

log(epop
men2554/epop
men55+)
Coeff
Std Err
-------1.9542
3.0090
0.0037
0.0006
0.0290
0.0279
0.0047
0.0008
0.0472
0.0142
-0.0724
0.0327
-0.1999
0.0535
-0.2268
0.1365
0.0004
0.0010
0.0155
0.0019
0.2896
0.0635
0.1257
0.2205
-0.0310
0.0059
-0.0298
0.0084
yes
yes
101

log(epop women
2554/epop
women1524)
Coeff
Std Err
------17.1633
3.6909
0.0061
0.0020
0.0418
0.0518
-0.0018
0.0014
0.0410
0.0203
-0.1389
0.0782
-0.2462
0.1801
0.2041
0.2008
0.0089
0.0020
-0.0021
0.0039
0.4258
0.1294
-0.6258
0.3789
-0.0154
0.0127
-0.0180
0.0191
yes
yes
101

log(epop
women2554/epop
women55+)
Coeff
Std Err
-------11.6889
4.3496
0.0051
0.0007
0.0132
0.0493
0.0041
0.0011
0.0072
0.0148
-0.0631
0.0562
-0.3298
0.0817
-0.0326
0.2487
0.0050
0.0018
-0.0039
0.0030
0.0804
0.0936
-1.0448
0.2737
0.0095
0.0072
0.0246
0.0120
yes
yes
101

log(epop
men2554/epop
women2554)
Coeff
Std Err
-------0.6167
5.2024
-0.0014
0.0012
0.0167
0.0457
0.0039
0.0015
-0.0259
0.0171
-0.1912
0.0677
0.1069
0.1274
0.1166
0.2145
-0.0027
0.0016
0.0068
0.0035
0.0533
0.1474
-0.4290
0.3256
0.0041
0.0104
-0.0007
0.0194
yes
yes
101

Net effect of collective bargaining coverage, union density and coordination:
Scandinavia vs. North America
Northern Europe vs. North America
Southern Europe vs. North America
Total Sample other than US vs US

0.3807
0.3700
0.2870
0.3289

p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001

0.4177
0.2726
0.2275
0.3187

p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001

0.2984
0.3984
0.3123
0.3131

p=.0093
p=.0008
p=.0009
p=.0022

0.4426
0.3306
0.2748
0.3590

p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001

0.1071
-0.0430
-0.0276
0.0307

Note: standard errors are corrected for country-specific heteroskedasticity and country-specific first order autocorrelation.
Accrual rate is the change in the retirement replacement rate if a 55 year old works an additional ten years. Joint effect of collective bargaining
coverage, union density and coordination is evaluated at sample differences between the two groups (e.g. Scandinavia vs. North America) for these
variables. Scandinavia includes Denmark, Sweden, Finland and Norway; North America includes Canada and the US; Northern Europe includes
Germany, France, the Netherlands and Belgium; Southern Europe includes Italy, Portugal and Spain.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

p=.1840
p=.4916
p=.5695
p=.5952

Table A2: Selected GLS Regression Results for Relative Unemployment, Unemployment Rate Excluded

Explanatory Variables
overall unemployment rate
prior births/population
coll barg coverage
coordination
union density
employment protection
UI rep rate: year 1
UI rep rate: year 5
labor tax rate
public pension replacement rate
accrual rate, 10 yrs, age 55
UI rep rate: older workers
Disability rep rate: older workers
female retirement age
male retirement age
country dummies
period effects
sample size

(urate men2554 - urate (urate men2554 - urate
men1524)
men55+)
Coeff
Std Err
Coeff
Std Err
-------------6.7270
1.1743
1.8892
0.5724
-0.0003
0.0004
-0.0004
0.0001
-0.0061
0.0134
0.0086
0.0063
-0.0011
0.0004
-0.0002
0.0002
0.0019
0.0066
-0.0033
0.0025
0.0314
0.0232
0.0174
0.0084
0.0577
0.0456
-0.0346
0.0161
0.0316
0.0624
-0.1114
0.0249
-0.0017
0.0007
0.0014
0.0002
0.0000
0.0011
-0.0028
0.0004
-0.0458
0.0341
-0.0339
0.0136
0.0830
0.1035
-0.1559
0.0450
0.0058
0.0029
0.0006
0.0011
-0.0019
0.0052
0.0062
0.0020
yes
yes
101

yes
yes
101

(urate women2554 urate women1524)
Coeff
Std Err
-------6.9801
1.7053
0.0003
0.0005
-0.0100
0.0202
-0.0017
0.0006
-0.0028
0.0097
0.0179
0.0348
0.0351
0.0560
0.1108
0.0794
-0.0024
0.0011
0.0027
0.0017
-0.0665
0.0519
0.0724
0.1561
0.0039
0.0050
-0.0032
0.0089
yes
yes
101

(urate women2554 urate women55+)
Coeff
Std Err
------4.1169
0.4952
0.0003
0.0002
0.0176
0.0067
-0.0003
0.0002
-0.0014
0.0040
0.0035
0.0114
-0.0188
0.0233
-0.1186
0.0291
0.0038
0.0003
-0.0023
0.0006
0.0071
0.0200
-0.1461
0.0534
0.0013
0.0015
0.0038
0.0030
yes
yes
101

(urate men2554 - urate
women2554)
Coeff
Std Err
-------2.5826
0.6899
-0.0008
0.0003
-0.0069
0.0075
-0.0004
0.0002
-0.0034
0.0028
0.0245
0.0120
0.0691
0.0218
0.1406
0.0376
-0.0030
0.0003
0.0007
0.0004
-0.0626
0.0189
0.0470
0.0541
-0.0037
0.0016
0.0057
0.0026
yes
yes
101

Net effect of collective bargaining coverage, union density and coordination:
Scandinavia vs. North America
Northern Europe vs. North America
Southern Europe vs. North America
Total Sample other than US vs US

-0.0680
-0.0304
-0.0263
-0.0455

p=.0228
p=.2887
p=.2365
p=.0708

-0.0136
-0.0116
-0.0107
-0.0132

p=.2473
p=.2260
p=.1391
p=.1314

-0.0640
-0.0004
-0.0031
-0.0298

p=.1176
p=.9916
p=.9140
p=.3647

0.0247
0.0350
0.0254
0.0243

p=.0927
p=.0163
p=.0247
p=.0521

-0.0658
-0.0557
-0.0451
-0.0554

Note: standard errors are corrected for country-specific heteroskedasticity and country-specific first order autocorrelation.
Accrual rate is the change in the retirement replacement rate if a 55 year old works an additional ten years. Joint effect of collective bargaining
coverage, union density and coordination is evaluated at sample differences between the two groups (e.g. Scandinavia vs. North America) for these
variables. Scandinavia includes Denmark, Sweden, Finland and Norway; North America includes Canada and the US; Northern Europe includes
Germany, France, the Netherlands and Belgium; Southern Europe includes Italy, Portugal and Spain.

labor_market_institutions_demographic_employment_nber.doc 6/17/2002 11:59 AM

p<.0001
p=.0002
p=.0001
p<.0001

