NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CLOSING THE GAP OR WIDENING THE DIVIDE: THE EFFECTS OF THE G.I. BILL AND
WORLD WAR II ON THE EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES OF BLACK AMERICANS

Sarah Turner
John Bound

Working Paper 9044
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9044

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

We would like to thank Sue Dynarski and participants at the NBER Higher Education Seminar for comments.
We are grateful to Michelle Reininger and Michelle Bales for research assistance. Two anonymous referees
have provided thoughtful comments and constructive suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Sarah Turner and John Bound. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Closing the Gap or Widening the Divide: The Effects of the G.I. Bill and
World War II on the Educational Outcomes of Black Americans
Sarah Turner and John Bound
NBER Working Paper No. 9044
July 2002
JEL No. I2

ABSTRACT
The effects of the G.I. Bill on collegiate attainment may have differed for black and white
Americans owing to differential returns to education and differences in opportunities at colleges and
universities, with men in the South facing explicitly segregated colleges. The empirical evidence suggests
that World War II and the availability of G.I. benefits had a substantial and positive impact on the
educational attainment of white men and black men born outside the South. However, for those black
veterans likely to be limited to the South in their educational choices, the G.I. Bill had little effect on
collegiate outcomes, resulting in the exacerbation of the educational differences between black and white
men from southern states.

Sarah E. Turner
Curry School of Education &
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
and NBER
sturner@virginia.edu

John Bound
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jbound@umich.edu

Recent empirical evidence points to a substantial positive effect of the G.I. Bill and
World War II service on the educational attainment of white men (Bound and Turner,
forthcoming; Stanley, 2001). Left unanswered is the question of whether the G.I. Bill and World
War II had a similar effect on black Americans. There are good reasons to believe that the
program effects of the G.I. Bill may have differed for black Americans, who had fewer
opportunities in the labor market and in higher education. In particular, black men in the South
faced explicitly segregated colleges and much more limited opportunities within the historically
black institutions.
The related question of whether black veterans from states with de jure segregation
demonstrated educational gains similar to black veterans in other states is significant for both the
overall evaluation of the G.I. Bill and the lessons we draw from it for contemporary policy. In
general, portable grant aid programs such as the G.I. Bill are expected to have large effects on
collegiate investments when the supply of education is relatively elastic. Yet, limited state
investment in colleges and universities open to blacks may have restricted the extent to which
black veterans in the South were able to make use of G.I. benefits to attend college.
More generally, comparing the effects of the G.I. Bill on the educational outcomes of
black and white Americans raises classic questions of the role of education in reproducing
inequality. In principle, the portable aid available to all veterans through the G.I. Bill held the
promise of significantly reducing black-white gaps in educational opportunity and long-run
economic outcomes. Given the absence of other national financial aid programs in the 1940s, one
might expect the G.I. Bill to have the largest behavioral effects on men for whom financial
constraints were most likely to impede college enrollment. In practice, it is less clear that
economically disadvantaged and minority veterans exhibited the largest changes in college

Page 1

participation as a result of the financial aid provided by the G.I. Bill. These groups may have
lacked the academic readiness for college programs and supply constraints in higher education
may have limited their enrollment.
Our research questions are twofold. First, we explore the extent to which World War II
service and the availability of G.I. benefits had similar behavioral effects on the collegiate
attainment of black and white men. Then, among blacks, we look at the extent to which state of
birth, and particularly location in a southern state, leads to differential collegiate outcomes. The
analytic strategy in this paper uses variation over time in the fraction of men serving from each
birth cohort to identify the effects of military service and the availability of G.I. benefits on
educational attainment. The first section of the paper presents institutional detail on military
service and educational opportunities for blacks in relation to whites during the World War II era.
The next section summarizes the relevant theoretical questions and outlines the empirical
strategy. The empirical section of this analysis points to a significantly positive impact of World
War II and the availability of G.I. benefits on the educational attainment of white men and black
men born outside the segregated southern states. However, for black veterans likely to be limited
to the South in their educational choices, the G.I. Bill had little effect on collegiate outcomes.
The concluding section presents a discussion of the empirical findings and considers the policy
implications of these results.

I. Black Americans, World War II Military Service, and the G.I. Bill
A. Race and Military Service in World War II
The politics and practice of minority participation in the military were contentious issues
as World War II approached. Before the start of the war, the black press and the NAACP

Page 2

launched the “Double V” campaign, urging black Americans to work toward victories over Jim
Crow at home and fascism abroad. In late September 1940, President Roosevelt met with a
delegation of black leaders to discuss the administration’s defense policy and the utilization of
blacks in the military, as well as minority group support for the administration’s policies. Shortly
after that meeting, on October 9, the Roosevelt administration released a statement reaffirming its
support for the inclusion of blacks in the military in proportion to their representation in the
population while continuing the segregation of black and white troops in organized military
activities (Smith, 1987).1
As the war approached, the capacity of the military to employ black servicemen was quite
limited. For example, in 1940 there were only 6 black units in the military, which accounted for
only 4,450 soldiers (Flynn, 1993). To maintain segregation, the military branches were required
to build additional housing, mess halls, and other facilities for black servicemen. Because of
initial placement barriers, few black men were accepted to the military through voluntary
enlistment in the early years of the war.
When manpower demand intensified as the war progressed, voluntary enlistment was
largely eliminated and date of birth became a primary determinant of induction. All men were
required to register with local draft boards at age 18, after which they were classified as “service
eligible” or deferred from service. It is this classification by local draft boards that introduces the
significant problem of selection in measuring the effects of World War II and the availability of
G.I. benefits on the educational attainment of veterans. Reasons for deferment included mental
and physical deficiencies, illiteracy, and employment in industries vital to the war effort.
1

Although black leaders were unsuccessful in obtaining the changes necessary to achieve official
endorsement of integration in the military in World War II, they did see passage of an amendment to the Selective
Service Act of 1940 stating that “there shall be no discrimination against any person on account of race or color” in

Page 3

Differences by race in these classification rates suggest potential differences in the nature of the
selection effects associated with military service. For instance, whites were much more likely to
receive occupational deferments and blacks more likely to be deferred for reasons of illiteracy or
“mental deficiency.” Table 1 shows selective service classification rates for black and white
registrants by age in 1945. Among registrants ages 19-25, black men were 2.25 more likely that
white men to receive deferments under section IV-F for physical or mental unfitness. Of those
deferred for service in 1944, 33.5 percent of blacks and 8.0 percent of whites were rejected for
low scores on the reading and writing examination (Selective Service System, 1948, Table 191,
p. 664).
Figure 1 shows the share of white and black veterans of World War II and all other U.S.
conflicts by birth cohort for the first half of the 20th century, measured at quarterly intervals.
Among men designated service eligible, date of birth was significantly related to the probability
of induction as the selective service drafted “oldest eligible” men first. For men turning 18 during
the war, those born in the interval 1923-25 faced a relatively high risk of induction relative to
those born in later years. For black men, absolute levels of military participation were somewhat
lower than for whites, with a peak share of 66 percent reached among men born in the third
quarter of 1922. Among blacks and whites, the proportion of each cohort serving in the military
slid rapidly after the 1926 birth cohort. Ultimately, more than 1 million black men served in the
military during World War II.2

the selection of troops and the execution of the law (MacGregor, 1981).
2
The majority of these men served in the Army and the 885,945 black men inducted to this branch
accounted for 10.9% of the men inducted in the Army during the war. The Navy inducted 153,224 black men, which
accounted for about 10% of the inductions in this branch, while the Marine Corp did not admit blacks until June of
1942 (Selective Service System, 1948).

Page 4

B. G.I. Benefits and Educational Opportunities for World War II Veterans
The unprecedented support for the education of returning World War II veterans provided
by the Serviceman’s Readjustment Act (Public Law 346, 1944), known more generally as the
G.I. Bill, was notably race-neutral in its statutory terms. Educational benefits extended from a
minimum of one year to four years, depending on length of service and age, and men serving
between September 1940 and July 1947 were eligible. In addition to providing annual tuition
payments of up to $500, the bill also provided a monthly cash allowance.3 A notable feature of
the program was that benefits were awarded to individuals rather than institutions, allowing
veterans to use them for any educational or training programs to which they were accepted. G.I.
benefits not only covered enrollment at colleges and universities, but also provided opportunities
for vocational, technical, and apprenticeship training. In fact, the majority of veterans who
received training under the World War II G.I. Bill participated in non-collegiate and on-the-job
programs (U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973).4

3

The provisions of the G.I. Bill as signed into law by President Roosevelt on June 22, 1944 provided for a
monthly stipend of $50 for single veterans and $75 for married veterans, as well as the payment of tuition, books and
supplies up to $500. All veterans serving 90 days with a record of honorable discharge were eligible for one year of
educational benefits, with veterans receiving educational benefits matching years of service 1:1 up to a maximum of
four years of benefit eligibility. In December of 1945, the G.I. Bill was amended to increase the length of the period
over which a veteran could initiate and complete education, eliminate restrictions on educational benefits for older
veterans, and increase the level of monthly stipend to $65 for single veterans and to $90 for veterans with
dependents. The nominal stipend levels were raised again in April of 1948 to $75 for single veterans, $105 for
married veterans, and $120 for veterans with children.
4
Men chose a wide array of programs beyond collegiate-level training. Overall, black men were less likely
to enroll in college-level programs than whites. Data from the Survey of Veterans show more than 28 percent of
whites in the 1923-28 birth cohorts enrolled in collegiate level training, while less than 12 percent of returning black
veterans chose this option. Black men were, in turn, relatively over-represented in the range of programs comprising
the “other” training and schooling category as well as high school-level training.
However, there is some evidence that black men in the south had a particularly difficult time gaining access
to vocational and on-the-job training programs with G.I. benefits. Southern Veterans Administration centers
employed few black counselors and were generally unforthcoming in providing services to black veterans (Onkst,
1998). For example, Onkst cites evidence noting that in March of 1946 only 6 of the 246 on-the-job training
programs in Atlanta for veterans had black participation. Another report of the period (Bolte and Harris, 1947) notes
that of 102,200 veterans receiving on-the-job training in 12 southern states, only 7,700 were black, despite the fact
that about 1 in 3 veterans in the area were black.

Page 5

Very little information is available providing direct evidence on the comparative
utilization rate of G.I. benefits among black and white veterans. Limited data from the Survey of
Veterans presented in Table 2 suggest that black veterans turning 18 during World War II were at
least as likely as white men to use G.I. benefits, although the number of months of G.I.
educational benefits appears to be smaller for blacks than whites. One study conducted by the
Information and Education Division of the Army in 1944 just after the announcement of the G.I.
Bill showed the remarkable power of the benefits in changing educational aspirations. Prior to
the announcement of benefits, only 7 percent of enlisted men indicated that they planned further
training or education after the war. After the announcement, 29 percent of white enlisted men and
43 percent of black enlisted men expressed a definite interest in education and training after the
war (Brown, 1946).
It is likely that educational opportunities for veterans returning from World War II varied
with race and geography. Southern states maintained explicitly segregated systems of education
in the 1940s and this affected the tertiary system of education, as well as the primary and
secondary levels. Moreover, access to information about veterans’ benefits and advising services
may have differed with racial groups. A statutory provision of the G.I. Bill was the availability of
employment and education counseling services through the Veterans Administration, designed to
help veterans obtain education and training. To meet the high post-war demand, the VA not only
maintained regional counseling centers but also contracted with educational institutions to
operate an additional 300 sites (Brown, 1946). It is probable that the availability of counseling
services differed by race, especially in the South. Onkst (1998) notes that the lack of black
counselors was particularly marked in the deep South, with only about a dozen black counselors
for all of Georgia and Alabama and none in Mississippi.

Page 6

At the conclusion of World War II, blacks wanting to attend college in the South were
restricted in their choices to about 100 public and private institutions delineated in the Office of
Education publications as “Colleges for Negroes,”5 as segregation in public higher education
remained a legal mandate in many southern states. The public institutions for blacks were
founded largely under the Second Morrill Act in 1890, which specifically prohibited the
distribution of federal funds to states that did not provide separate accommodation for blacks if
the primary state institution denied admission to blacks.6
Few of the post-secondary institutions for blacks offered education beyond the
baccalaureate and 28 of the institutions reporting in academic year 1949-50 were classified as
sub-baccalaureate teachers colleges or junior colleges (U.S. Government Printing Office, 1954).
Among the historically black colleges, those in only seven states offered post-baccalaureate
training and no institution offered an accredited engineering or doctoral program. A survey of
historically black colleges in 1945 found that 45 percent of institutions enrolled fewer than 250
students and 92 percent of the institutions had enrollment of less than 1000 students (Jenkins,
1946). Under-funded and small, these institutions were largely excluded from the “university
revolution” that swept through much of public higher education in the first part of the century—a
development described by Goldin and Katz (1999).
The small scale of the historically black institutions relative to other colleges and
universities merits emphasis. While average enrollment at white or nonsegregated schools was
5

With the exception of Wilberforce University in Ohio and Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, these
institutions were located in southern states with legalized educational segregation. The data collected by the Office
of Education during the 1940s and 1950s does not record the attendance or degree completion of students by race at
integrated colleges and universities.
6
The Second Morrill Act led to the founding of 17 Negro land-grant colleges in the southern and border
states, with these institutions including Alabama A&M, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Southern University
A&M (Louisiana), and Alcorn State (Mississippi). Many of these institutions emphasized training in crafts and
trades following the “industrial education” philosophy of Booker T. Washington, rather than providing general

Page 7

nearly 1,500 in 1949-50, the average resident college enrollment at the black colleges was 729
(U.S. Government Printing Office, 1954). Beyond their much smaller size, colleges for blacks
also had significantly fewer resources per student than their counterparts. Across all private and
public institutions in the South, white institutions accounted for 92 percent of total expenditures
in 1943-44; among public institutions alone, colleges and universities for whites accounted for
more than 94 percent of expenditures (Jenkins, 1947, Table I). In 1949-50, 56 percent of black
men enrolled in black colleges were at public institutions, while 66 percent of all men attending
college in southern states were at public institutions.7 Because private schools were likely to be
more limited than public institutions in their ability to expand capacity in response to demand
shocks, the reliance of blacks in the South on private institutions for collegiate opportunities may
have differentially affected their capacity to use G.I. benefits.
Excess demand for higher education was particularly high among black veterans in the
South. Olson (1974) found that an estimated 20,000 black veterans were turned away from the
Negro colleges, and a survey of 21 of the southern black colleges indicated that 55 percent of all
veteran applicants were turned away for lack of space, compared to about 28 percent for all
colleges and universities. Part of the problem was housing (Bolte and Harris, 1947). For
example, the lack of family housing units at the Tuskegee Institute in 1945 constituted a
substantial barrier to black veteran enrollment as about a quarter of the school’s veteran
population were married and few were able to find alternative lodging (Onkst, 1998).

education on the model of liberal arts colleges (Pifer, 1973).
7
Data for enrollment at all southern institutions are from the Biennial Survey of Education 1948-50 (U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1954) and the data for enrollment at colleges for blacks are from Bowles and DeCosta
(1971). While the level of enrollment expanded markedly at both public and private colleges for blacks between
1939-40 and 1949-50, the growth at the public colleges was particularly marked. In 1939-40, enrollment of men at
the private black colleges exceeded enrollment of men at the public black colleges, with enrollment levels of 6,724
and 6,528, respectively.

Page 8

The historically black colleges were more limited than white colleges in their ability to
accommodate returning servicemen because institutional resources were more scarce and
deficiencies in physical space were often more serious than at the white institutions.8 While
flagship universities like the University of Wisconsin and the University of Michigan in the
North and the University of Texas and the University of Alabama in the South were able to
expand rapidly to meet the needs of returning veterans under the G.I. Bill, limited facilities at the
segregated institutions effectively constrained the supply of places for blacks in the South.
Institutions expanding most rapidly at the end of the war were the public institutions with the
economies of scale, scope, and funding of research universities (Stanley, 2001). With very few of
the historically black schools maintaining graduate or professional programs, they were illequipped to expand to meet the needs of returning veterans. Although the portability of aid under
the G.I. Bill would have theoretically allowed southern blacks to attend schools in the North, the
barriers to enrollment— including limited information about collegiate alternatives, the
disruption of living far from home, and the potential persistence of discrimination at northern
institutions—would likely have been significant.
A particularly important question concerns the extent to which urban universities in the
North and West enrolled black students. Institutional enrollment counts by race were not
collected at the collegiate level in the years preceding and following World War II and there is
little direct evidence of the level of integration at these schools. The available empirical
evidence provides a hint that colleges in the North may have provided substantial opportunities

8

Recognizing the extraordinary conditions at the colleges for blacks in the South, the Federal Works
Agency awarded the black colleges a disproportionate share of the institutional aid available under the Veterans’
Educational Facilities Program, passed in 1946. One source suggests that the surplus war buildings and materials
increased the physical plant of these institutions by 25 percent. Yet, it is less clear that this expansion in capacity
benefited the black veterans returning in the mid-1940s.

Page 9

for minorities after World War II, if not before. The concentration of northern-born blacks in
urban areas may well have made it relatively easy for World War II veterans from this group to
participate in higher education given the relative concentration of colleges and universities in
urban centers. In addition to changes in the racial composition of colleges in the North, southern
institutions of higher education were increasingly integrated in the post-War years and, by 1952,
all of the state universities in the South except those in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi
and South Carolina allowed some black enrollment (Johnson, 1954). In this regard, the decade
following World War II included significant changes in the range of colleges and universities
attended by black Americans, as well as the level of collegiate attainment.

II. Estimation Framework
Our research questions focus on how World War II service, combined with the
availability of G.I. benefits, changed collegiate outcomes and whether such effects differed for
blacks and whites. First, even without the availability of educational benefits, veterans’ post-war
collegiate outcomes may have exceeded the attainment of non-veterans because veterans have
had higher levels of college-preparedness in the absence of the war. Also, veterans may have
acquired skills during military service that increased measured post-war educational attainment
and civilian productivity. Moreover, the G.I. benefits reduced the direct cost of college through
tuition payments and living stipends, thereby increasing the likelihood of college participation.
A central question of this analysis is whether the effect on collegiate attainment of
military participation and the availability of educational benefits varied with race and geographic
location. In fact, there is good reason to suspect that the return to education differs by race owing
to discrimination in the labor market or differences in the quality of educational opportunities

Page 10

available to blacks and whites. Pressing in the other direction, if blacks were more likely to face
credit constraints than whites, the addition of G.I. benefits might have somewhat larger effects on
the enrollment behavior of blacks.
Still, this formulation presupposes the presence of elastic supply of enrollment places in the
college market. The evidence discussed above suggests that black men residing in the South may
have faced quite limited college enrollment options. The combination of de jure segregation at
public institutions and limited capacity at private colleges may have limited the collegiate options
for the large waive of returning black veterans in southern states.
As with a wide array of efforts to measure how a public policy initiative – in this case
World War II and the G.I. Bill – affect educational attainment, the key challenge is to measure a
causal effect rather than to record the association between eligibility and educational outcomes.
Because veterans of both race groups are likely to differ systematically from non-veterans owing
to the screening employed by the Armed Forces, simple comparisons of the educational
attainment of veterans and non-veterans are likely to overstate the effects of military service and
the availability of G.I. benefits on educational attainment. This is particularly true for black men,
since a principal reason for rejection in this group was illiteracy. Thus, finding exogenous
determinants of veteran status is of paramount concern.
Our strategy for estimating the effects of World War II service and the availability of G.I.
benefits for black Americans is parallel to the regression discontinuity approach employed by
Bound and Turner (2001). Consider a measure of collegiate attainment as a function of veteran
status,
(1)

Ed ij = α j + β ijVij + ε ij

Page 11

where Edij represents the educational attainment (years of college or college completion) of
individual i in cohort j. Vij is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the individual served in World
War II, and εij is an error term. Conceptually, αj represents the mean educational attainment for
randomly selected individuals from cohort j under the assumption that the individual did not
serve in the military, while βij represents the effect of military service for individual i in cohort j.
Note that the coefficient on Vij is allowed to vary across individuals – there is no reason to
believe that service during the war would affect all of those that served in the same way. Some
individuals would have attended college regardless of service; others would not have attended
regardless of service. For both of these populations βij=0. On the other hand, some men would
not have otherwise attended college except for the G.I. benefits available. For this population, the
effect is positive and βij>0. Stated in this way it should be clear that βij represents the impact on
educational attainment of switching the ith individual’s veteran status, while holding the veteran
status of other individuals constant. To understand the (partial equilibrium) impact of the war on
educational attainment, we are interested in estimating β ≡ E ( β ij | Vij = 1) , which in the program
evaluation literature has been referred to as the effect of treatment on the treated. Such a measure
is, by definition, an average treatment effect and a question of this analysis is to consider the
extent to which the treatment effect varies by race and place of birth.
One can imagine various strategies to estimate β. The simplest approach is to compare
mean educational attainment between veterans and non-veterans for a cohort of individuals:

β cj = [ Ed ij | Vij = 1] − [ Ed ij | Vij = 0] , where the overlines are used to represent sample means. It is
clear that:
(2)

E ( β$ cj ) = E ( βij |Vij = 1) + [ E (ε ij |Vij = 1) − E (ε ij |Vij = 0)] .

Page 12

The term in the square brackets represents the difference in the propensity to go to college of
those that did and did not serve in the military. As long as selection into the military is
nonrandom, this term is unlikely to be 0. However, given the nature of the exemptions from the
draft that existed during World War II, we would expect that for the cohorts that served in World
War II, the term in brackets would be positive. As a result, the simple comparison between those
who did serve and those who did not serve will exaggerate the causal effect of service on
educational attainment ( E ( β$ cj ) > β ).
The primary strategy we use to try to estimate β is to compare educational attainment
across cohorts employing the methodology known in the evaluation literature as a regression
discontinuity design. Starting with a time-homogeneous environment, that is, the α‘s and the
distribution of the β‘s are constant across cohorts, consider the comparison of cohorts across
time. Define d Ed as Ed ij − Ed ij ' , where the overlines represent averages across individuals
within a specific cohort. Then:
(3)

E(d Ed ) = [E( β ij | V ij = 1)Pr( V ij = 1) - E( β ij ' | V ij ' = 1)Pr( V ij ' = 1)]
+ [( α j - α j ' ) + E( ε ij - ε ij ' )].

.

The assumptions imply that the term in the second set of square brackets is 0. Comparing
educational attainment for birth cohorts with significant service during World War II to birth
cohorts that were born too late to serve [ Pr(Vij ' = 1) = 0 ] yields

d Ed
as a consistent estimate of
dV

E( β ij | V ij = 1) , where Pr(Vij ' = 1) indicates the probability that an individual is a veteran in the
indicated birth cohort. More generally, suppose that Pr(Vij ' = 1) > 0 , but that anyone who served

Page 13

in the later period would have served during the earlier period and that no one who did not serve
in the earlier period would have served during the later period. Formally we are assuming that:

Vij ' = 1 ⇒ Vij = 1

(4)

Vij = 0 ⇒ Vij ' = 0

.

Under this assumption, cross-cohort changes in educational attainment divided by cross-cohort
changes in the fraction of the cohort serving identify the average effect of service for the
population that would have served in one regime but not in the other – what Imbens and Angrist
(1994) have referred to as the local average treatment effect (LATE).9
Prior to the start of the war, collegiate attainment followed an upward trajectory for
blacks and whites. In this regard, it seems natural to assume that the αj’s increased over time. The
inclusion of a linear time trend, which is allowed to vary by race, accounts for such secular
change. Therefore, it is deviations from a trend that identify the effects of veteran status for both
blacks and whites, with the model allowing different trends by race. It is also plausible that the
distribution of β‘s might change over time. For example, individuals from cohorts that had, for
the most part, started careers before being inducted would probably be less motivated to attend
college on the G.I. Bill than would individuals drawn from cohorts that were inducted
immediately out of high school. We address this issue by focusing, when possible, on
comparisons between closely adjacent cohorts. In particular, we focus on cohorts that likely
entered military service shortly after turning 18 (or shortly before, if they volunteered).

9

In this regard, condition (4) is exactly analogous to the monotonicity condition discussed by Imbens and
Angrist (1994). This empirical strategy closely follows much recent discussion of the estimation of causal effects. It
has long been understood that under suitable assumptions comparisons over time could be used to eliminate selection
bias (Heckman and Robb, 1985). In effect, we are using cohort dummies to form an instrument for veterans’ status.
The connection between instrumental variables and time aggregation has been noted by various authors (e.g. Angrist,
1991; Moffitt, 1995).

Page 14

Estimates based on the population of white men may be very different than those for the
population of black men for several reasons including different opportunity costs, returns to
education in the labor market, and effects of military service.10 Distinguishing the data by place
of birth allows for the examination of the hypothesis that segregated educational institutions
attenuated the impact of access to G.I. benefits for blacks from the South.11 Yet, because there
was a large migration of blacks from South to North in young adulthood during this period, a
better test would be to identify outcomes of men born and residing in the South after
demobilization in relation to men born and residing in the North after demobilization. While we
do not observe this classification, we do observe state of residence in 1970 as well as state of
birth. Comparing outcomes among men born and residing in the South in 1970 in relation to
men born and residing in the North after 1970 produces similar outcomes to those reported in the
subsequent section. However, the further stratification of the data for southern-born men,
combined with the reduction in the Census sample size by 1/3 when place of birth and place of
residence are considered, leads to large increases in estimated standard errors.

III. Empirical Results
As a starting point, it is useful to examine within-cohort differences in the educational
attainment of veterans and non-veterans by race and birthplace. Tables 3 and 4 compare the

10

Collins (2001), as well as Margo (1995), demonstrates that black economic progress during the war years
was striking and blacks made particular employment gains in the manufacturing sector, leading to a substantial
narrowing in the black-white wage gap in the decade between 1940 and 1950 (Maloney, 1994).
11
The 1970 Census data indicate state of birth and state of current residence, either of which may obviously
differ from state of residence at the time of induction or demobilization. Using data from the 1940-1960 Census
surveys, we estimates nearly 40 percent of men born in the South from the 1923-28 birth cohorts had migrated to the
North by 1960. Yet, comparisons of state of residence in 1940 (when most southern born men were still in the
South) to state of residence in 1950, 1960, and 1970 makes it clear that much of the South to North migration for this
cohort occurred in young adulthood, with roughly half occurring in the 1940s and most of the remaining migration
occurring during the 1950s.

Page 15

educational attainment of World War II veterans to non-veterans. Using data from the 1970
Census representing 3% of the population, we present estimates of the relationship between
service in World War II and educational attainment (see Data Appendix for additional detail).
These measures of educational attainment by birth year indicate substantial differences between
World War II veterans and men who did not serve in the military, particularly at the collegiate
level. The tables also show large educational attainment differences by veteran status between
blacks and whites (Table 3). For example, among white men who turned 18 during the war (those
born between 1923-1928), veterans received about .45 years more college education than nonveterans. For blacks, the differences in educational attainment between veterans and non-veterans
are somewhat lower (.29 more years of college and 4 percentage points in college completion),
while the percentage differences are appreciably larger owing to the low baseline levels of
educational attainment among blacks born in the 1920s. It is likely that these simple differences
in education exaggerate the causal effects of World War II service and the availability of G.I.
benefits on collegiate attainment. To the extent that blacks were more likely to be rejected from
the military for illiteracy and other attributes associated with college readiness, blacks were more
likely than whites to be rejected from the military for illiteracy, it is likely that this exaggeration
is larger for blacks than for whites
Table 4 presents the mean level of educational attainment by World War II veteran status
for blacks born in the South (here defined as: AL, FL, GA, MS, NC, SC, and VA) and blacks
born outside this area.12 While the level of educational attainment for men born outside the

12

As discussed in the Data Appendix, the definition of southern states that is the focus of the analysis
includes Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia. A broader
classification of the southern states is considered in the Data Appendix, with regression results included as Appendix
Tables 1-3. Classifying more states as part of the South does not change the qualitative results of our analysis. In the
text, we use the comparisons South/non-South and South/North interchangeably.

Page 16

South is uniformly greater than for men born in the South, the difference between veterans and
non-veterans is slightly larger among black men born in the South. It is also noteworthy that
blacks born in the South have much lower levels of secondary achievement than those born in
other states. Among non-veterans born in the 1923-28 interval, non-southern black men were
about twice as likely to have graduated from high school as those born in the South. It is well
established that the public education systems in the South lagged those in other states and,
combined with literacy requirements for military service, it is plausible that southern- and
northern-born blacks faced different likelihoods of service by educational attainment. In this
regard, while the observed differences in educational attainment between veteran and nonveteran blacks born in different geographical areas are nearly identical (.27 to .28 more years of
college and 4 percentage points in college completion), it need not follow that the causal effects
of military service and the availability of G.I. benefits were identical for blacks from the different
regions.
To reduce the potential upward bias attributable to the greater selectivity of veterans
relative to non-veterans, we employ a between-cohort estimation strategy that relies on the
markedly different probabilities of induction faced by men from adjacent birth cohorts. The
graphical presentation of this strategy (Figure 2) shows the trend in military participation and
educational attainment over a long horizon of 50 years using data from the 1970 census for black
men.
Limiting the comparisons to those turning 18 during the war (born 1923-1928) mitigates
the effect of potential differences in the educational response to the G.I. Bill among veterans
reaching college age before and after the start of the war. Among this group of men, those with
earlier birth dates stood much higher probabilities of induction in World War II. It is the variation

Page 17

in service participation that identifies the effect of military service and benefits for World War II
participants. Essentially, we compare the educational attainment of men born during the first half
of the 1920s, who would have typically been inducted into the military after finishing high school
in the early 1940s, to men born in the later half of the 1920s, who would have finished high
school at the conclusion of the war.
Between-cohort estimates for the educational outcomes of years of college and college
completion are shown in Table 5, for blacks and whites overall and then distinguished by birth
for the 1923-28 birth cohorts.13 Estimates in Table 5 reflect aggregate regressions (with each
observation reflecting a quarter of birth average), although the exact instrumental variables
analog is a micro-level regression using quarter-of-birth dummy variables to instrument for the
endogeneity of veteran status. The overall estimates are strikingly smaller than the within-birth
cohort estimates for both blacks and whites. For whites, the point estimates suggest an effect of
World War II and the availability of G.I. benefits of about 0.14 years of college and about 3.5
percentage points in college completions. For blacks, the estimated average effects are similar in
magnitude, though the confidence intervals are quite sizable.
Turning to the question of whether the effects on educational attainment of World War II
service and the G.I. Bill were similar by region of birth, Figure 3 presents educational attainment
by region for blacks and for whites. Within race groups, northern-born men have greater
educational attainment at both the secondary and college levels. Turning to the regression
estimates presented in columns (2) and (4) of Table 5, it is evident that, among white veterans,
those from the South gained at least as much in collegiate attainment as those from outside the

13

Specification tests did not reveal evidence of serial correlation. For this reason, our standard errors are
calculated under the assumption of independence of errors over time. Standard errors are also corrected for
heteroskedasticity in accordance with an estimate of the variance matrix suggested by Huber -White.

Page 18

South; the point estimates for white men born in the South are modestly larger though not in a
statistically significant sense. For black veterans, however, those born outside the South
experienced sizable gains at the collegiate level, while those from the South made no significant
gains in educational attainment.
Expanding the range of birth cohorts used in the estimates helps to sharpen the analysis.
As shown in Table 6, the point estimates of the effect of World War II participation and the
availability of G.I. benefits on years of collegiate attainment do not change much with the
addition of more years of observation. For non-southern blacks, these estimates range from .30
to .41 years of college and 6 to 8 percentage points for college completion. Moreover, the
educational gains associated with World War II service and the availability of G.I. benefits are
consistently indistinguishable from zero for southern-born black veterans. We are limited by the
structure of the education question in the Census data to using years of completed educational
attainment as our outcome variable, with this measure explicitly excluding non-degree credit
enrollment. To the extent that much of the G.I. Bill training took alternative forms, it is
conceivable that there are other interesting and important changes in skills brought about by the
G.I. Bill not captured in this analysis.
To answer the question of whether the combination of World War II service and G.I.
benefits increased educational attainment, we need to compare the veterans to a “no service/no
benefits” control group. Because men who did not serve in World War II were at risk for service
in the Korean War and those who served in this later conflict were also eligible for educational
benefits, the simple comparison of World War II veterans to non-World War II veterans will not
accomplish this objective. The interval between the conclusion of World War II and the start of
the Korean conflict is short and men from birth cohorts in the 1920s who did not serve in World

Page 19

War II were at increased risk of induction for service in Korea. For both black and white men, the
manpower demands of the Korean conflict intersect the right tail of World War II service, as the
youngest cohorts serving in World War II also participated in the Korean conflict (see Figure 1).14
To help control for the confounding effects of service in Korea on our estimates of the
effect of World War II service on educational attainment, we first attempted to estimate the
effects of Korean War service directly, but we find that the limitations in sample size preclude
the estimation of our model with two endogenous variables. Instead, we considered a range of
alternatives generated as the assumed magnitude of the Korean War effect changes. Table 7
presents results from estimates in which we have varied the Korean War service effect up to 0.5
in the case of years of college completed to 0.1 in the case of college completion. We also
consider panels of alternative length, ranging from the 1923-28 interval of birth cohorts to the
1923-32 interval of birth cohorts. Plainly, the longer series yields more precise estimates, though
the tradeoff is that the additional cohorts may have faced other appreciably different
circumstances when making their educational investments.
Assuming positive effects of the Korean War on educational attainment pushes up the
estimated effect of World War II service on educational attainment in a necessarily mechanical
way. Yet, even at the high end of the range of predictions, the effects of World War II and the
G.I. Bill on educational attainment remain more than twice as large for those born outside the
South. Alternative estimates of the effect of the Korean War and the associated benefit program
provide some guidance.

14

The service participation in the Korean War peaked at the last quarter of the 1931 birth cohort, as about
48% of black men and 65% of white men were veterans of this conflict. It is also the case that among men serviceeligible for both conflicts, blacks were somewhat more likely to serve in Korea than whites. For example, only 8
percent of white men born in early 1927 served in the Korean conflict but not World War II, whereas about 15
percent of black men in this cohort participated in the Korean conflict but not World War II.

Page 20

In suggesting a preferred estimate among the ranges presented in Table 7, one strategy is
to look to alternative sources to pin down the magnitude of the Korean War effect for blacks.
Although the Survey of Veterans records only a small number of black veterans from the Korean
War, it nevertheless provides one of the few gauges of the Korean War effect. This source points
to an effect of the Korean War on educational attainment of about .23 years of college (see
Appendix Table 4), which would correspond to point estimates of .42 (.14) and .04 (.16) for
black men born in the North and South, respectively, using data from the 1923-28 interval. A
disadvantage of the Survey of Veterans is that it is not possible to disaggregate by location. There
is no reason to assume that the effects of the Korean War and associated G.I. benefits were
identical for men born in and outside the South. On the one hand, the evidence from World War
II points to more limited higher education opportunities for blacks from the South relative to
outside the South; on the other, the wave of litigation emphasizing equal opportunities for blacks
combined with the addition to facilities at the historically black colleges after World War II may
have markedly widened opportunities for southern-born blacks in the 1950s. Within cohort
estimates of the educational attainment of Koran War veterans relative to non-veterans provide
an alternative set of Korean War estimates with distinction by region. These estimates, which
place the Korean War effect at .47 years of college in the South and .35 years of college outside
the South, effectively define an upper limit. Still, when the effect of the Korean War on
educational attainment is restricted to these values, the estimated gain in collegiate attainment
attributable to World War II service and the G.I. Bill is more than .3 years larger for black men
from non-southern states relative to those born in the South.15

15

An additional strategy for identifying the effect G.I. benefits available to Korean veterans on the
education of blacks and whites and by region follows the approach identified by Stanley (2000), which compares
men commencing service before January 31, 1955 who are benefit-eligible to those who begin service thereafter and

Page 21

It is important to emphasize that the nature of our estimation strategy of using variation
over time in military participation to identify deviations from a trend in collegiate attainment
makes it difficult to distinguish the importance of competing interpretations. First, it is well
documented that resources per student at the elementary and secondary levels were particularly
low in segregated schools in southern states. As such, the low quality of schooling received by
black veterans at the primary and secondary levels may have impeded opportunities to benefit
from collegiate training through the G.I. Bill.16
Moreover, supply-side constraints in higher education are likely to have restricted
collegiate choices among blacks in the South, also decreasing the effect of G.I. benefits. Within
the South, institutions open to blacks were too few and too small to accommodate the population
of black veterans with G.I. benefits.17 If college education opportunities for southern-born blacks
were limited by their preparedness to attend college or by a limited market supply, it might be
expected that blacks would have pursued vocational training or other skill development with G.I.
benefits. Still, regardless of the level or type of training, we find little evidence that military

are not benefit eligible. Data from the 1980 Census identifies veterans by birth cohort, race, place of birth, and the
conflict in which they participated, though these data do not have the date of service commencement or rich
covariates which are available in the OCG data employed by Stanley. Nevertheless, estimates using the sharp break
in benefit eligibility in 1955 to identify the effect of the Korean War G.I. Bill on educational attainment of those men
turning 18 near the start of service participation (the 1934-1939 birth cohorts) suggests that this program had a
somewhat larger effect on the collegiate attainment of black men from the South than those born outside the South.
However, these results are not estimated precisely enough to introduce in the text.
16
Card and Krueger (1992) provide substantial evidence on the narrowing in resource differences (e.g., the
pupil teacher ratio) between schools for blacks and whites in the segregated states which started early in the 20th
Century and continued through the years when the World War II cohorts were enrolled in school. Differences
between black and white students from the South in the change in school resources are captured in the race-specific
time trends. Card and Krueger (1992) also present evidence on the differential return to education for blacks and
whites, with blacks from states with particularly large differences in educational resources by race also experiencing
lower returns to education. Differences in elementary and secondary school quality combined with discrimination in
the labor market may well have lowered the expected return to college for black veterans from the South.
17
In addition to the limitations in physical capacity, the inability to expand the faculty may have severely
affected the supply response of colleges for blacks in the South. Thompson (1946) highlights this problem noting
that, not only did the war itself limit the supply of prospective young faculty, but able men were often taking
advantage of the G.I. Bill to obtain advanced degrees and salaries at the black colleges were quite low and these
institutions were unable to compete in the faculty labor market with colleges and universities in the North and West.

Page 22

service and the availability of education benefits changed skill acquisition of black veterans from
the South. Ideally, we would be able to do more to distinguish the hypothesis that low
elementary and secondary school quality reduced the expected return to college for black
veterans from the South from the hypothesis that limitations in collegiate supply restricted
attainment of black veterans from the South. We have stratified the southern sample along the
lines of school quality and included veteran status interacted with state-level school quality
measures in our estimation. There is not evidence that states with poor elementary-secondary
schools have smaller educational gains associated with the G.I. Bill, but the standard errors are
large enough that we are unable to put much weight on these results. While it is hard to pin
down whether the low quality of the segregated southern schools directly reduced educational
gains made available by the G.I. Bill, there is ample evidence from the historical record that the
limited supply response of colleges and universities in the segregated states reduced the
educational gains of black veterans from the South.

IV. Discussion
How the G.I. Bill affected the level of education among men from different races and
backgrounds is an important question in both educational history and public policy analysis.
Models of educational investment suggest that the benefit provisions associated with the G.I. Bill
might well be expected to have a larger effect on the average educational outcomes of blacks
than whites, owing to lower opportunity costs and the potentially larger relative reduction in
credit constraints.18 For white men, the combination of World War II service and the availability

18

Measures of the median income for white and black men in 1948 provide an indicator of relative
opportunity costs, with the median income for black men $1,363 and the median income for white men $2,510 (U.S.
Census Bureau, 2000).

Page 23

of G.I. benefits had substantial positive effects on collegiate attainment, and these effects were
similar in magnitude for men born in different geographic regions. For black men, we find that
the effect of military service and the availability of the G.I. Bill differs markedly between men
born in the southern states and those born elsewhere, with former experiencing appreciably little
gain in educational attainment in comparison to the latter. Beyond collegiate attainment, noncollegiate vocational and technical training was a major component of the World War II G.I. Bill,
with more veterans receiving training in these institutions than in colleges. Yet, available
evidence does not suggest that this avenue was a substitute for collegiate participation among
black men born in the South. Rather, black men in the South also had a particularly difficult time
gaining access to vocational and on-the-job training programs with G.I. benefits (Onkst, 1998).
The absence of behavioral effects of World War II and the G.I. Bill on black veterans
from the South parallels results obtained by Collins (2001) in association with the Fair
Employment Practice Commission during World War II. Collins finds that efforts to enforce
complaints associated with Executive Order 8802, which barred discrimination in war-related
industries, led to wage gains for black workers in the North, while political opposition to the
goals of the program contributed to its ineffectiveness in the South.
The results of this analysis illustrate some of the potential pitfalls associated with
decentralized federal initiatives. Contemporary advocates for choice-based reform in education
have often trumpeted the success of the G.I. Bill, using its favorable effects as a motivation for
vouchers (Hauptman, 1999). Yet, this analysis indicates that state-level policies and conditions
may undermine the equal distribution of such programs. The structure of the G.I. Bill ceded the
responsibility for overseeing and administering many of the educational benefits to the states
(Onkst, 1998). Congress did not create a set of uniform standards for implementation nor was

Page 24

there a regulatory mechanism to ensure equal access to program benefits. As a result, the
intersection of federal programs such as the G.I. Bill with significantly different state policies
yielded substantial interstate differences in outcomes.
The availability of benefits to black veterans had a substantial and positive impact on the
educational attainment of those likely to have access to colleges and universities outside the
South. Unfortunately, for those more likely to be limited to the South in their collegiate choices,
the G.I. Bill exacerbated rather than narrowed the economic and educational differences between
blacks and whites.

Page 25

References
Angrist, J. D. (1991). “Grouped-data estimation and testing in simple labor-supply
models.” Journal of Econometrics, 47, 243-266.
Bolte, C. & Harris, L. (1947) Our Negro Veteran. Public Affairs Pamphlet No. 128.
Bound, J. & Turner, S. (forthcoming). “Going to war and going to college: Did World
War II and the G.I. Bill increase educational attainment for returning veterans?” Journal
of Labor Economics.
Bowles, F. & DeCosta, F. (1971). Between Two Worlds: A Profile of Negro Higher
Education. New York: McGrawHill.
Brown, F. (1946) Educational Opportunities for Veterans. American Council on
Education.
Card, D. & Krueger, A. (1992). “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A
Direct Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February): 151-200.
Collins, W. (2001) “Race, Roosevelt, and Wartime Production: Fair Employment in
World War II Labor Markets.” American Economic Review.
Flynn, G. (1993). The Draft, 1940-1973. Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press.
Goldin, C. & Katz, L. (1999). “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative Years
in the United States, 1890 to 1940.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 13 (1), 37-62.
Hauptman, A. (1999). “Vouchers and American higher education.” In Vouchers and
related delivery mechanisms: consumer provision of public services. Washington, DC:
Council for Aid to Education.
Heckman, J., & Robb, R. (1985). “Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of
interventions.” In Heckman & Singer (eds.), Longitudinal analysis of labor market data.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Imbens, G. & Angrist, J. (1994). “Identification and estimation of local average treatment
effects.” Econometrica, 62, 467-75.
Jenkins, M. (1946). “Enrollment in Institutions of Higher Education for Negroes, 19451946.” Journal of Negro Education, 15(2), 231-239.
Jenkins, M. (1947). “The availability of higher education for Negroes in southern states.”
Journal of Negro Education, 16(3), 459-473.

Page 26

Johnson, G. (1954). “Racial Integration in Public Higher Education in the South.”
Journal of Negro Education. 23(3), 317-329.
MacGregor, J. (1981). Integration of the Armed Forces 1940-1965. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Margo, R. (1995). “Explaining Black-White Wage Convergence, 1940-1950.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 48 (3) (April), 470-481.
Maloney, T. (1994). “Wage Compression and Wage Inequality Between Black and
White Males in the United States, 1940-1960.” Journal of Economic History 54 (June)
Moffit, R. (1995). “Selection bias adjustments in a treatment-effect model as a method of
aggregation.” NBER Technical Working Paper 187.
Olson, K.W. (1974). The G.I. Bill, the veterans, and the colleges. Lexington: The
University of Kentucky Press.
Onkst, D. (1998). “First a Negro … incidentally a veteran: Black World War II Veterans
and the G.I. Bill of Rights in the Deep South, 1944-1948.” Journal of Social History v.
31. n 3.
Pifer, A. (1973). The Higher Education of Blacks in the United States. New York:
Carnegie Corporation.
Selective Service System (1948). Selective Service and victory. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Selective Service System (1948). Quotas, calls and inductions. Special Monograph, 12,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Smith, G. (1987). When Jim Crow Met John Bull: Black American Soldiers in World War
II Britain. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press, Inc.
Stanley, M. (2000). “College education and the mid-century G.I. Bills.” Mimeo,
(January).
Stanley, M. (2001). “The World War II G.I. Bill and Higher Education.” Mimeo.
Thompson, C. (1946). “The Critical Situation in Negro Higher and Professional
Education.” Journal of Negro Education. v. XV. n. 4 (Fall): 579-584.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2000). “Table P-2. Age--People by median income and gender:
1947 to 1997” http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/histinc/p02.html

Page 27

U.S. Government Printing Office, Office of Education. (1954). Biennial Survey of
Education in the United States, 1948-50. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Government Printing Office. (1955). Annual report of the director of the Selective
Service for the fiscal year of 1954. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Government Printing Office. (1973). Report of Educational Testing Service,
Princeton University, on Educational Assistance Programs for Veterans. House
Committee Print No. 1, 93rd Congress, 1st Session.

Page 28

Data Appendix

The 1970 Decennial Census is the primary source for the empirical work in this
analysis. Micro data files for the 1970 Census use the long-form questionnaire distributed
to 15% of the population, with data available in three 1/100 samples.19 (The 1/100
samples identify either state, county group, or neighborhood characteristics.) Individuals
included in this analysis are those born in the continental United States. Observations for
which information was allocated for sex, age, race, veteran status, place of birth or
educational attainment are not included in the analysis. The classification of educational
attainment uses information and highest grade attended as follows. “College graduate” is
equal to one for all individuals completing at least 16 years of education and is zero for
all other cases. “Years of college completed” is equal to the maximum of 0 and years of
college completed (up to 4).
In classifying states geographically into “non-South” and “South” in this analysis,
our aim is to distinguish those states with legislatively enforced segregation. While 17
states maintained some form of segregation in higher education at the start of World War
II, such a broad classification misses substantial variation within these states in the degree
to which race limited higher educational opportunities across states. In terms of empirical
analysis, the capacity to make finely grained distinctions about the outcomes of blacks at

19

A somewhat different set of questions is available on the 5% and the 15% questionnaires, with
the 15% questionnaire including the items on veteran status.
The use of data from the 1970 Census in this analysis rather than data from the 1980 Census is
motivated by the observation that for cohorts born during the 1920s and 1930s the 1980 census shows
substantially higher levels of educational attainment than does the 1970 census. These differences
presumably have more to do with differential mortality, education inflation, and adult participation in
college than the lingering effects of war service.

Page 29

the state level or several groups of states is constrained by the relatively small number of
blacks observed and their geographical concentration in the southern states.
Following important judicial decisions including Missouri ex real Gaines v
Canada (1938) and McLaurin v Oklahoma State Regents (1950), many southern
universities quietly opened their universities to blacks. By 1952, only five states –
Alabama, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, and Mississippi -- still barred blacks from
their publicly supported universities. For this reason, the primary definition of “southern”
states employed in this analysis focuses on these five states plus Virginia and North
Carolina, representing the states in which segregation had long historical roots and was
generally supported though the local judicial process. Appendix Tables 1-3 present
regression results with a broader classification of southern states that includes AL, AR,
FL, GA, KY, LA, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA. Using this classification the number of
blacks in the southern states increases from 7,051 to 10,357 and the number elsewhere
decreases from 6,883 to 3,577.
While the large samples of the Decennial Census provide a particular advantage in
the cross-cohort estimation strategy, the 1979 Survey of Veterans provides supplemental
information on the utilization of veterans benefits and the duration of military service,
and more specific data on veterans serving in conflicts from World War II through the
Vietnam conflict. The Survey of Veterans draws its pool of veterans from the March 1978
CPS question on military service. The primary questions of interest for this study cover
information on the use of educational benefits and educational attainment before and after
military service.

Page 30

Table 1: Distribution of selective service registrants by classification and race in 1945
Number of

Distribution by classification

Registrants

II-C,
Share

II-A

III-D,

I-C

I-C D

I-A

Deferred

IV-F

& II-B

Other

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Age 18

114,890

0.222

0.011

0.449

0.318

0.216

0.027

0.075

Ages 19-25

911,222

0.508

0.070

0.038

0.384

0.265

0.059

0.060

Ages 26-29

496,495

0.367

0.071

0.076

0.486

0.292

0.107

0.087

Ages 30-33

475,568

0.241

0.054

0.057

0.648

0.295

0.236

0.117

Ages 34-37

440,656

0.179

0.047

0.055

0.719

0.317

0.271

0.131

637,272

0.404

0.022

0.243

0.331

0.185

0.067

0.079

Ages 19-25

6,848,970

0.687

0.065

0.018

0.230

0.118

0.060

0.052

Ages 26-29

4,107,552

0.539

0.073

0.038

0.350

0.127

0.154

0.069

Ages 30-33

4,084,599

0.316

0.051

0.018

0.615

0.133

0.385

0.097

Ages 34-37

3,911,548

0.212

0.043

0.015

0.730

0.147

0.473

0.110

A. Black Men

B. White Men
Age 18

Source: Tables 89-93, 171-175, Selective Service and Victory (1948).
Notes: Column (2), Classification I-C indicates currently enlisted or deceased; Column (3); Classification IC D indicates discharged; Column (4) I-A indicates available for service; Column (6) IV-F indicates
deferred for mental or physical unfitness; Column (7) II-A and II-B deferment for nonagricultural
employment; and Column (8) II-C captures agricultural employment as well as other miscellaneous
deferment categories.

Page 31

Table 2: Educational attainment and use of G.I. benefits among World War II veterans
White Men
Year of
Birth
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929

Age at Education

Used

Military at end of

GI

Black Men

Months Rec’d BA Yrs Coll
of GI

with G.I. with G.I.

N= Discharge Service Benefits Benefits Benefits Benefits
268
324
315
295
275
280
261
256
97
31

26.8
25.5
24.6
23.9
23.8
22.3
21.7
21.8
22.4
24.8

11.4
11.1
11.4
11.5
11.4
11.4
11.2
11.4
11.3
11.1

0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.4

6.0
6.3
7.6
8.4
8.4
9.3
11.1
11.9
9.0
3.9

0.06
0.06
0.10
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.12
0.12
0.15
0.03

0.32
0.32
0.55
0.69
0.73
0.78
0.86
0.99
0.89
0.29

Age at Education

Used

Military at end of

GI

Months Rec’d BA Yrs Coll
of GI

with G.I. with G.I.

N= Discharge Service Benefits Benefits Benefits Benefits
14
22
22
20
29
19
17
14
5
3

25.2
24.9
23.2
22.6
23.9
21.1
20.9
22.6
24.4
25.8

7.5
9.8
8.1
9.4
9.6
9.3
10.1
10.4
9.8
10.0

0.5
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.8
0.3

6.1
8.9
11.1
8.3
7.4
10.1
7.9
7.3
8.2
1.7

0.00
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.29
0.45
0.18
0.30
0.34
0.42
0.29
0.14
0.80
0.00

Source: The 1979 Survey of Veterans.
Notes: Data limited to observations for men born with valid educational attainment measures.

Page 32

Table 3: Educational attainment of World War II veterans and non-veterans, black-white comparison
World War II Veterans

Non-Veterans

Absolute Difference

Fraction Average Fraction

Fraction Average Fraction

Fraction Average Fraction

Year of

High Sch Years of College

High Sch Years of College

High Sch Years of College

Birth

Graduate College Graduate

Graduate College Graduate

Graduate College Graduate

White
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928

0.64
0.64
0.63
0.63
0.65
0.63

0.93
0.99
1.01
1.04
1.07
0.96

0.18
0.19
0.20
0.20
0.21
0.18

0.45
0.43
0.43
0.44
0.47
0.55

0.48
0.46
0.49
0.59
0.61
0.73

0.09
0.09
0.09
0.12
0.12
0.14

0.19
0.22
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.08

0.45
0.54
0.52
0.46
0.45
0.22

0.09
0.11
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.04

1923-28

0.64

1.00

0.19

0.46

0.55

0.10

0.18

0.45

0.09

Black
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928

0.35
0.38
0.38
0.41
0.42
0.46

0.35
0.42
0.44
0.47
0.47
0.37

0.05
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.03

0.15
0.17
0.18
0.16
0.17
0.22

0.13
0.13
0.13
0.11
0.12
0.20

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03

0.20
0.21
0.21
0.25
0.25
0.24

0.22
0.29
0.30
0.37
0.35
0.17

0.03
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.00

1923-28

0.40

0.42

0.06

0.17

0.14

0.02

0.23

0.29

0.04

Source: A 3% sample of the 1970 Decennial Census.
Notes: This tabulation includes observations for white and black men born between 1923 and 1928 who served in World War II and who did not serve in the
military (any conflict). Annual levels represent fixed-weight averages across quarter of birth cohorts.

Page 33

Table 4: Educational attainment of World War II veterans and non-veterans, by region of birth, blacks only

Year of
Birth
Black, Non-South
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
23-28
Black, South
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
23-28

World War II Veterans
Fraction Average Fraction
High Sch Years of
College
Graduate College Graduate

Fraction
High Sch
Graduate

Non-Veterans
Average Fraction
Years of
College
College Graduate

Absolute Difference
Fraction Average Fraction
High Sch Years of
College
Graduate College Graduate

0.39
0.42
0.45
0.47
0.46
0.51

0.35
0.49
0.50
0.57
0.49
0.43

0.05
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.04

0.21
0.25
0.22
0.21
0.25
0.30

0.21
0.21
0.16
0.13
0.16
0.28

0.04
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.05

0.18
0.18
0.23
0.26
0.21
0.21

0.15
0.28
0.34
0.44
0.33
0.14

0.01
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.06
-0.01

0.45

0.47

0.07

0.24

0.19

0.03

0.21

0.28

0.04

0.31
0.32
0.29
0.33
0.37
0.37

0.35
0.33
0.35
0.35
0.46
0.30

0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.08
0.03

0.10
0.11
0.14
0.11
0.12
0.15

0.07
0.07
0.11
0.08
0.10
0.13

0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.02

0.22
0.21
0.15
0.22
0.25
0.22

0.28
0.26
0.24
0.27
0.36
0.17

0.04
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.00

0.33

0.36

0.06

0.12

0.09

0.02

0.21

0.27

0.04

Source: A 3% sample of the 1970 Decennial Census.
Notes: This tabulation includes observations for black men born between 1923 and 1928 who served in World War II and who did not serve in the military (any
conflict). “Non-veteran” includes men who did not serve in any military conflict. Annual levels represent fixed-weight averages across quarter of birth cohorts.
“South” is defined to include the states: AL, FL, GA, MS, NC, SC, and VA.

Page 34

Table 5: Between cohort estimates of the effect of World War II service on collegiate attainment, blacks and whites, 1923-28
Years of College
(1)
(2)
0.135
(0.036)

White

Non-South

0.135
(0.035)

0.032
(0.009)

South

0.172
(0.097)

0.065
(0.025)

0.72

0.21

p N-S
Black

0.093
(0.102)

0.027
(0.026)

Non-South

0.300
(0.147)

0.058
(0.026)

South

-0.058
(0.158)

0.004
(0.033)

0.10

0.21

p N-S
p W-B

College Completion
(3)
(4)
0.035
(0.009)

0.70

0.76

Source: A 3% sample from the 1970 Decennial Census; see Data Appendix for information on other sample restrictions.
Notes: Estimates are based on aggregates for men at the quarter of birth level for the indicated years. Regressions also include a constant and a linear time trend
defined by year and quarter of birth, with the constant and time trend defined separately by region where applicable. p-values correspond to the test of the null
hypothesis that the indicated coefficients are equal. “South” is defined to include the states: AL, FL, GA, MS, NC, SC, and VA.

Page 35

Table 6: Between cohort estimates of the effect of World War II service on collegiate attainment by region of birth, blacks only
1923-28
(1)
Years of College
Non-South

South
p N-S
College Completion
Non-South

South
p N-S

1923-29
(2)

1923-30
(3)

1923-31
(4)

1923-32
(5)

0.300
(0.147)

0.348
(0.120)

0.343
(0.114)

0.354
(0.108)

0.410
(0.104)

-0.058
(0.158)
0.10

-0.088
(0.150)
0.03

-0.062
(0.152)
0.04

-0.002
(0.162)
0.07

0.013
(0.138)
0.02

0.058
(0.026)

0.077
(0.022)

0.070
(0.021)

0.070
(0.021)

0.081
(0.021)

0.004
(0.033)
0.21

-0.008
(0.031)
0.03

-0.001
(0.031)
0.06

0.006
(0.037)
0.13

0.004
(0.029)
0.03

Source: 3% sample from the 1970 Decennial Census; see Data Appendix for information on other sample restrictions.
Notes: Estimates are based on aggregates for black men at the quarter of birth level for the indicated years. Regressions also include a constant and a linear time
trend defined by year and quarter of birth for each region. p-values correspond to the test of the null hypothesis that the indicated coefficients are equal. “South” is
defined to include the states: AL, FL, GA, MS, NC, SC, and VA.

Page 36

Table 7: Between cohort estimates of the effect of World War II & Korean service on collegiate attainment, 1923-32 restricted estimates
Korean
War

Korean

World War II

1923-32
Non-South
0.10
0.47
(0.10)
0.20
0.53
(0.10)
0.30
0.59
(0.10)
0.40
0.65
(0.10)
0.50
0.71
(0.10)
South
0.10
0.06
(0.14)
0.20
0.11
(0.13)
0.30
0.16
(0.13)
0.40
0.21
(0.13)
0.50
0.26

1923-30

1923-28

War

0.40
(0.11)
0.46
(0.11)
0.51
(0.11)
0.57
(0.11)
0.63
(0.11)

0.35
(0.14)
0.40
(0.14)
0.46
(0.13)
0.51
(0.13)
0.56
(0.13)

0.02

-0.02
(0.15)
0.03
(0.15)
0.08
(0.15)
0.13
(0.15)
0.17

-0.02
(0.16)
0.03
(0.16)
0.07
(0.16)
0.11
(0.16)
0.16

0.02

0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10

0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10

World War II
1923-32

1923-30

1923-28

0.09
(0.02)
0.10
(0.02)
0.12
(0.02)
0.13
(0.02)
0.14
(0.02)

0.08
(0.02)
0.09
(0.02)
0.10
(0.02)
0.12
(0.02)
0.13
(0.02)

0.07
(0.03)
0.08
(0.03)
0.09
(0.03)
0.10
(0.02)
0.11
(0.02)

0.01
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
0.05

0.01
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
0.05

0.01
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
0.05

(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.16)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
Source: 3% sample from the 1970 Decennial Census; see Data Appendix for information on other sample restrictions.
Notes: Estimates are based on aggregates for black men at the quarter of birth level for the years in the column headings with the Korean War effect restricted to
the indicated magnitude. Regressions also include a constant and a linear time trend defined by year and quarter of birth for each region. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

Page 37

Appendix Table 1: Educational attainment of World War II veterans and non-veterans, by region of birth, blacks only
World War II Veterans

Non-Veterans

Absolute Difference

Fraction Average Fraction

Fraction Average Fraction

Fraction Average Fraction

Year of

High Sch Years of College

High Sch Years of College

High Sch Years of College

Birth

Graduate College Graduate

Graduate College Graduate

Graduate College Graduate

Black, Non-South
1923
0.45
1924
0.49
1925
0.51
1926
0.52
1927
0.48
1928
0.53
23-28
Black, All South
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
23-28

0.36
0.56
0.56
0.61
0.48
0.46

0.04
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.03

0.30
0.30
0.33
0.31
0.34
0.41

0.27
0.27
0.28
0.19
0.25
0.35

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.06

0.14
0.19
0.18
0.21
0.14
0.13

0.09
0.29
0.27
0.42
0.24
0.12

0.00
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.04
-0.03

0.50

0.51

0.07

0.33

0.26

0.04

0.17

0.25

0.03

0.32
0.33
0.32
0.36
0.39
0.40

0.35
0.36
0.38
0.41
0.47
0.31

0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.04

0.11
0.14
0.14
0.11
0.14
0.17

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.16

0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03

0.21
0.19
0.18
0.25
0.25
0.24

0.25
0.26
0.28
0.33
0.38
0.15

0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.01

0.35

0.38

0.06

0.13

0.10

0.02

0.22

0.28

0.04

Notes: “All South” includes AL, AR, FL, GA, KY, LA, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA.

Page 38

Appendix Table 2: Between cohort estimates of the effect of World War II service on collegiate
attainment, 1923-28
Years of College
(1)
(2)
0.135
(0.036)

White

North

0.159
(0.046)

0.037
(0.012)

All South

0.117
(0.108)

0.039
(0.027)

0.72

0.96

p N-S
Black

0.093
(0.102)

0.027
(0.026)

North

0.464
(0.271)

0.079
(0.054)

All South

-0.039
(0.119)

0.007
(0.028)

0.10

0.24

p N-S
p W-B

College Completion
(3)
(4)
0.035
(0.009)

0.70

0.76

Notes: “All South” includes AL, AR, FL, GA, KY, LA, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA.

Page 39

Appendix Table 3: Between cohort estimates of the effect of World War II service on collegiate
attainment by region of birth, Blacks Only
1923-28
Years of College
Non-South

All South

College Completion
Non-South

All South

1923-29

1923-30

1923-31

1923-32

0.46
(0.27)

0.40
(0.23)

0.39
(0.22)

0.37
(0.21)

0.43
(0.18)

-0.04
(0.12)

-0.01
(0.11)

0.01
(0.11)

0.09
(0.12)

0.12
(0.10)

0.079
(0.054)

0.086
(0.046)

0.076
(0.046)

0.075
(0.043)

0.086
(0.037)

0.007
(0.028)

0.008
(0.024)

0.013
(0.024)

0.021
(0.026)

0.024
(0.021)

Notes: 1970 Census, 3% Sample. Each regression includes a linear time trend and constant for each region.
“All South” includes AL, AR, FL, GA, KY, LA, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA.

Page 40

Appendix Table 4: Educational attainment and use of G.I. benefits among Korean War veterans
(not including World War II veterans), blacks only
Year of
Birth
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937

N=
4
11
9
14
16
17
13
5
6
6
4

Age at
Military
Discharge
29.6
26.6
25.6
23.6
25.4
24.9
24.3
22.8
26.8
23.8
20.5

Ed. Attain.
at End
Used GI
of Service Benefits
10.5
0.50
10.0
0.45
11.3
0.44
9.3
0.43
11.4
0.44
12.2
0.61
12.0
0.57
11.4
0.80
10.5
0.83
11.8
0.50
10.5
0.50

Months
of G.I.
Benefits
9.25
6.18
6.00
8.36
6.75
11.22
12.21
18.40
13.00
2.00
1.50

Rec’d BA
with G.I.
Benefits
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.14
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.25

Yrs Coll
with G.I.
Benefits
0.00
0.45
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.50
0.79
1.20
0.33
0.17
1.75

Source: The 1979 Survey of Veterans.
Universe: Data limited to observations for black men born between 1927 and 1937 with valid educational
attainment measures.
Notes: The measure “Years of College with G.I Benefits” is an average and takes on non-zero values for
men who attended college after service and received G.I. benefits.

Page 41

Figure 1: Share of veterans among men, 1900-1950 birth cohorts, 1970 Census data

0.90
Any Conflict, White
World War II, White

0.80

Korea not WWII, White
Any Conflict, Black

0.70

World War II, Black
Korea not WWII, Black

Share Veterans

0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1900

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

Year and Quarter of Birth

Page 42

Figure 2: Educational attainment and veteran status
0.7

0.80
High School Graduate, Men
High School Graduate, Women

0.70

Veteran, Any Conflict, Black

0.6

Veteran, World War II, Black

0.5
0.50
0.4
0.40
0.3
0.30

Share Veterans

Share with High School Degree

0.60

0.2
0.20
0.1

0.10

0.00
1900

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

0.0
1945

Year and Quarter of Birth

0.60

0.7
Highest Grade College, Men
Highest Grade College, Women
Veteran, Any Conflict, Black

0.50

0.6

Veteran, World War II, Black

0.5

0.4
0.30
0.3

Share Veterans

Years of College

0.40

0.20
0.2

0.10

0.00
1900

0.1

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

0.0
1945

Year and Quarter of Birth

0.7

0.09
College Degree, Men

0.08

College Degree, Women
Veteran, Any Conflict, Black

0.6

Veteran, World War II, Black

0.5
0.06
0.05

0.4

0.04

0.3

Share Veterans

Share with College Degree

0.07

0.03
0.2
0.02
0.1

0.01
0.00
1900

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

0.0
1945

Year and Quarter of Birth

Page 43

Figure 3: Regional differences in educational attainment and veteran status by race

0.90

0.90

0.80

0.80
HS Graduates, North

HS Graduates, North

White men
0.80

WW II Vets, North

0.70

WW II Vets, North

0.60

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

High School Graduates

0.70

0.60

0.00
1900

0.70

WW II Vets, South

WW II Vets, South

Share Worl War II Veterans

High School Graduates

0.70

Black Men

HS Graduates, South

HS Graduates, South

0.00
1940

0.60

0.60

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00
1900

1905

1910

1915

Year and Quarter of Birth

0.90

1930

0.00
1940

1935

0.12

0.80

College Grad, North

0.25

1925

Year and Quarter of Birth

0.30

White Men

College Grad, South

1920

Share Worl War II Veterans

0.80

College Grad, North
College Grad, South
WW II Vets, North

0.80

WW II Vets, North

0.10

WW II Vets, South

Black Men
0.70

WW II Vets, South

0.70

0.40

0.30

0.10

0.08
0.50

0.06

0.40

0.30
0.04
0.20

0.20
0.05

0.02
0.10

0.10

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

0.00
1940

0.00
1900

1905

1910

Year and Quarter of Birth

0.90
White Men

Grades Coll, South

1.20

1925

1930

0.00
1940

1935

0.70

0.80
Grades Coll, North

Black Men

Grades Coll, South

0.80

0.60

WW II Vets, North

0.70

WW II Vets, North
WW II Vets, South

WW II Vets, South

0.70

0.80

0.50
0.40

0.60

0.30
0.40

0.60
0.50
Highest Grade of College

0.60

Share World War II Veterans

1.00
Highest Grade of College

1920

Year and Quarter of Birth

1.40
Grades Coll, North

1915

0.50
0.40
0.40
0.30
0.30
0.20
0.20

0.20
0.20

0.00
1900

0.10

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

Year and Quarter of Birth

1930

1935

0.00
1940

0.10

0.00
1900

0.10

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

0.00
1940

Year and Quarter of Birth

Page 44

Share World War II Veterans

0.00
1900

Share of World War II Veterans

0.15

Share College Graduates

0.50

Share Worl War II Veterans

Share College Graduates

0.60
0.60

0.20

