                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PRICING CURRENCY RISK:
                     FACTS AND PUZZLES FROM CURRENCY BOARDS


                                          Sergio L. Schmukler
                                              Luis Servén


                                          Working Paper 9047
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9047


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002

We are grateful to Gustavo Cañonero, Stijn Claessens, James Conklin, Sebastian Edwards, Chang Hsieh,
Marcio Garcia, Michael Kumhof, Eduardo Levy Yeyati, John Merrick, Maury Obstfeld, Roberto Rigobon,
and David Sekiguchi for their valuable comments and suggestions. We also benefited from feedback received
at presentations held at the NBER Inter-American Seminar on Economics in Cambridge, the Latin American
meetings of the Econometric Society in Buenos Aires, the LACEA meetings in Montevideo, and the World
Bank/IMF Joint Research Seminar. For excellent research assistance, we are particularly grateful to Leonor
Coutinho Gouveia. We also thank Andrea Bubula, Tatiana Didier, Marina Halac, Penny Lermanometee, and
Yaye Sakho, who helped us at different stages of the project. For help in obtaining data we thank Alberto
Ades, Gustavo Cañonero, Starla Cohen, Kevin Fan, Ricardo Martinez, Daniel Oks, and Daniel Tenengauzer.
For financial support we thank the World Bank Latin American Regional Studies Program, PREM anchor
unit, and the Research Support Budget. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or The World Bank.


© 2002 by Sergio L. Schmukler and Luis Servén. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Pricing Currency Risk: Facts and Puzzles from Currency Boards
Sergio L. Schmukler and Luis Servén
NBER Working Paper No. 9047
July 2002
JEL No. F31, F36, G12, G15



                                             ABSTRACT

        Hard pegs, such as currency boards, intend to reduce or even eliminate currency risk. This paper
investigates the patterns and determinants of the currency risk premium in two currency boards –
Argentina and Hong Kong. Despite the presumed rigidity of currency boards, the currency premium is
almost always positive and at times very large. Its term structure is usually upward sloping, but flattens
out or even becomes inverted at times of turbulence. Currency premia differ across markets. The forward
discount typically exceeds the currency premium derived from interbank rates, particularly during crisis
times. The large magnitude of these cross-market differences can be the consequence of unexploited
arbitrage opportunities, market segmentation, or other risks embedded in typical measures of currency
risk. The premium and its term structure depend on domestic and global factors, related to devaluation
expectations and risk perceptions.




Sergio L. Schmukler                                              Luis Servén
World Bank                                                       World Bank
1818 H Street NW                                                 1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433                                             Washington, DC 20433
Tel: 202-458-4167                                                Tel: 202-473-7451
Fax: 202-522-3518                                                Fax: 202-522-3518
sschmukler@worldbank.org                                         lserven@worldbank.org
http://www.worldbank.org/research/                               http://www.worldbank.org/research/
bios/schmukler.htm                                               bios/lserven.htm
I. Introduction

       The differential between local and international interest rates is a key variable for

emerging countries. These countries typically face positive interest rate differentials (or

spreads) – i.e., a higher cost of capital than developed economies. Moreover, interest rate

differentials for emerging markets vary substantially over time. In particular, they often

rise abruptly during periods of local and foreign financial turmoil. Lower spreads

typically translate into lower borrowing costs for both the public and private sector and,

other things equal, result in higher growth. For this reason, the fluctuations in interest rate

differentials have been recently at the center of academic debate and have been a major

concern for policy makers.

       Conceptually, the total differential between interest rates on domestic-currency

loans issued by local borrowers and those on foreign-currency loans issued by foreign

borrowers reflects both country and currency premia. The former refers to the gap

between the borrowing costs of domestic and foreign (sovereign) borrowers in a common

currency. The latter, on which this paper focuses, refers to the gap between the domestic-

currency and foreign-currency interest rates faced by a given borrower; it is often called

“currency risk premium” and, less precisely but more popularly, currency risk.

       Of the two components of interest rate differentials, the country risk premium has

been intensively studied, perhaps due to the availability of daily cross-country data.

Indexes of secondary-market yield spreads on emerging market bonds (EMBIs) are

compiled by JP Morgan. Data on primary issues also exist. The literature has studied the

behavior of yield spreads including their time pattern, determinants, and cross-country




                                              1
comovement.1 Some papers also study the country risk premium in relation to the

currency premium.2

           The other component of interest rate differentials, the currency premium, has

received less direct empirical attention in the context of emerging economies. The present

study relates directly to at least four different strands of the international finance

literature: the debate on the choice of exchange rate regime, the assessment of economic

performance under currency boards, the term structure of currency premia, and covered

interest parity.

           First, the debate on the choice of exchange rate regime pays particular attention to

the currency premium. Participants in this debate, which intensified during the currency

crises of the 1990s, have claimed that countries should opt for either hard pegs or floating

regimes. Proponents of hard pegs argue that, other things equal, the adoption of a rigid

parity – such as a currency board – should reduce the currency premium, even

eliminating it entirely if the peg is viewed as irrevocable. As a consequence, hard pegs

would reduce the level of domestic interest rates.3 Credible hard pegs would also reduce

the probability of currency attacks and contagion effects. But as Edwards (2000)

suggests, the currency premium can still be significantly positive even in hard pegs, if

they are not fully credible.



1
    See, for example, Edwards (1984, 1986), Favero, Giavazzi, and Spaventa (1997), Eichengreen and Mody
       (1998), Kamin and von Kleist (1999), Mauro, Sussman, and Yafeh (2002), Kaminsky and Schmukler
       (2001), Merrick (2001), and Rigobon (2002).
2
    See Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (1998), Sturzenegger and Powell (2000), Garcia and Didier (2001),
       and Druck, Moron, and Stein (2001).
3
    Note, however, that even if the currency premium declines, the country premium could rise if adopting a
       rigid peg is perceived to weaken the country’s solvency. In such case, the net effect on the level of
       borrowing costs would be ambiguous.



                                                      2
       Second, the debate on exchange rate regimes has generated a related literature on

economic performance under currency boards. Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2000) find that

currency boards are associated with better inflation performance and higher output

growth. Kwan and Lui (1996) argue that currency boards tend to slow down output

growth but reduce inflation. Rivera Batiz and Sy (2000) argue that currency boards yield

more credibility and better economic performance than simple pegs. Hausmann (2001)

discusses the conditions that might help alleviate potential problems due to the rigidity of

currency boards. Calomiris and Powell (2001) describe how the Argentine currency

board helped in the development of the financial system.

       Third, the present paper also relates to the literature on the term structure of

currency premia. The term structure reflects markets’ perception of depreciation and

exchange risk at different horizons, and has been studied mostly in the literature on target

zones. For example, Svenson (1991) shows that under a credible target zone the absolute

value of the interest rate differential is decreasing in the time to maturity, since the

expected depreciation until maturity is bounded by the exchange rate band. Bartolini and

Bodnar (1992) study the term structure of forward premia to assess the implied credibility

of the French/German target zone under the European Monetary System. Domowitz,

Glen, and Madhavan (1998) examine the term structure of the currency premium in the

case of Mexico up to the Tequila crisis.

       The fourth strand of the literature directly relevant to this paper is the one that

studies covered interest parity. This literature shows that, in the absence of country

barriers or other risks, interest rate differentials are equal to the discount implied by the

forward and spot exchange rates. This fact is generally supported by the empirical




                                             3
literature on industrial economies. The evidence for emerging markets is much more

limited and concentrated on few countries.4

          The present paper sheds new light on these strands of the international finance

literature by providing a comprehensive characterization of the currency premium in two

currency boards, Argentina and Hong Kong. Focusing on these two economies has two

major advantages. First, these two currency boards have a rich history, which permits

analyzing how domestic and international events impact on the currency premium.

Second, these two cases offer a wide range of data not available for other economies.

          This paper explores five major dimensions of the currency premium. First, we

provide an analytical characterization of the various components of the total interest

differential and, in particular, of the currency premium. We also draw a distinction

between “strict” and “broad” versions of covered interest parity, what has been

overlooked in much of the empirical literature. Second, we assess the extent to which

hard pegs have in fact resulted in low and/or stable currency premia, an aspect of

currency boards that has so far received little attention in the debate on exchange rate

regimes. We document the time pattern of the currency premium and its response to

major domestic and foreign events. Third, we study the term structure of the currency

premium in different markets – the money market and the foreign exchange market. We

characterize its behavior during tranquil and turbulent times to gauge investors’

expectations about the future of rigid currency pegs. This is possible because in the two

economies we study the most important financial contracts are denominated in both local


4
    See, for example, Branson (1969), Frenkel and Levich (1977), Deardorff (1979), Dooley and Isaard
       (1980), Giavazzi and Pagano (1985), Artis and Taylor (1990), Frankel (1992), Chinn and Frankel
       (1994), Obstfeld (1995), and Kumhof (2000).



                                                  4
currency and U.S. dollars. Fourth, we show how different financial instruments embody

diverging assessments of the currency premium, particularly at times of financial stress.

These discrepancies pose a puzzle that might reflect market segmentation, unexploited

arbitrage opportunities, or the presence of other risks embedded in the commonly used

measures of currency risk. Fifth, we study the determinants of the currency premium and

its term structure, using detailed daily domestic and international financial data as well as

political and economic events.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a simple

analytical framework for the non-specialists in the subject. Section III documents the

empirical regularities of the currency premium and its term structure in Argentina and

Hong Kong over time and across instruments and maturities, and presents information on

the institutional features of forward markets. Section IV studies the empirical

determinants of the premium and its term structure. Section V concludes. The appendix

assesses the extent of cross-market differences in currency premia.



II. A simple analytical framework

       Consider the interest differential between assets that may differ in terms of issuer,

currency of denomination, and jurisdiction of issue – but are identical in other respects.

Formally, let Rt ,k denote the annualized gross yield (i.e., one plus the interest rate) at

time t on local-currency debt issued in the home country with k-period maturity; let Rt*,k

denote the gross yield on foreign-currency debt of the same maturity issued at home by

the same debtor (or, more precisely, posing identical default risk as the local-currency

debt); and let Rt*,kf denote the gross yield paid abroad on foreign-currency debt with the



                                             5
same maturity, issued by some benchmark foreign debtor (in the context of sovereign

debt, typically taken to be the U.S. government). To break down the total yield

differential into its two components we start from the identity

                                          Rt ,k            Rt ,k Rt*,k
                                                    =                     .          (1)
                                          Rt*,kf           Rt*,k Rt*,kf


Taking logs, letting it.k = ln (Rt,k), and similarly with the other yields, we can write

               (i
                t ,k         )
                       − it*,kf =        (1i42− 4
                                          t ,k  i )
                                                 3
                                                    *
                                                    t ,k              +          (1i42
                                                                                     −i )
                                                                                     *
                                                                                      43
                                                                                     t ,k
                                                                                            *f
                                                                                            t ,k         .   (2)
                                    currency premiumt,k                   country premiumt,k

II.a The currency premium

       Let’s ignore for the moment the country premium and focus on the currency

premium. The latter refers to the difference between the returns on two securities

identical in all respects except for their currency denomination – i.e., they are issued in

the same jurisdiction and involve identical (or are free from) default risk.

       Speculation across these two assets by risk-neutral investors would result in the

well-known uncovered interest parity condition:

                                                                              1/ k
                                                       E S 
                                          Rt ,k    = R  t t +k 
                                                           *
                                                           t ,k                      ,             (3)
                                                        St 

where Et St + k is the expectation at time t of the exchange rate at time t+k, and the

exchange rate is defined as local currency per unit of foreign currency. Letting

∆s te,k denote the (per period) anticipated percentage change in the spot exchange rate


1  Et S t + k 
 ln            , we can rewrite (3) as
k  St 

                                          (it ,k             )
                                                   − it*,k = ∆s te,k ,               (4)


                                                                  6
so that the currency premium equals the anticipated rate of change of the exchange rate.

A considerable empirical literature has investigated the consistency of the data with (3) or

its equivalent (4). The frequent failure of uncovered interest parity to hold in practice has

been traced to two main sources (Lewis 1995): persistent expectation errors – due to

irrationality, agent heterogeneity, or peso problems – and risk aversion, which is more

important for our purposes.

       If investors are risk-averse, they will demand a compensation for the risk of

exchange rate changes, and in such case the interest differential (4) has to be expanded to

include also an exchange rate risk premium. Thus, in the general case the currency

premium consists of two components:

         (i − i3)
          t ,k
         1424
                 *
                 t ,k      =              ∆s et ,k
                                          {
                                                          +        errpt ,k
                                                                   123
                                                                                     .   (5)
   currency premium t ,k       anticipated devaluation t,k exchange risk premium t,k

where errp denotes the exchange risk premium. There is a literature that attempts to

break down empirically the currency premium into these two components, using survey

data on exchange rate forecasts (Frankel 1991) or Kalman filter techniques (Wolf 1987,

Cheung 1993).



II.b The country premium

       The country premium can also be broken down into two terms: the pure default

premium and what we shall label the “onshore premium.” These two premia are

associated with default and transaction risks related to cross-country transactions. The

pure default premium refers to the return differential between identical assets issued in

the same jurisdiction by two different borrowers posing different default risk. Hence it

reflects the possibility that borrowers may not honor their debts. In turn, the onshore


                                                 7
premium refers to the return differential between assets issued in two different

jurisdictions (onshore and offshore) by the same borrower, and reflects the cost and risk

derived from shifting assets across jurisdictions (Aliber 1973). Hence, it relates to

ingredients such as capital controls, differential taxation, commissions, and fees, as well

as the risk of changes in regulations (e.g., changes in the status of capital controls) or in

the market conditions that affect the transaction cost. Further, it may also reflect the

differential legal treatment of default in the home and foreign jurisdictions – which can

make a given borrower more likely to default in one jurisdiction (typically onshore) than

in the other (offshore).5 Formally:

                                              Rt*,k             Rt*,k          offshore
                                                                                          Rt*,k
                                                       =                                          ,   (6)
                                              Rt*,kf        offshore
                                                                       Rt*,k       Rt*,kf

          offshore *
where            R      t,,k   denotes the gross yield on foreign-currency instruments issued abroad

by domestic debtors with the same characteristics as those issued at home (which yield

R*t,k). Taking logs and using the same notation as before, we have

               (1i42
                 *
                   −i )
                    4
                 t ,k
                     3
                               *f
                               t ,k    =     (1i 42
                                               *
                                                 −  i )
                                                 4 43
                                               t ,k
                                                    4
                                                       offshore *
                                                                t ,k           +            (144i24− 4
                                                                                                     i )
                                                                                            offshore *
                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                     t ,k
                                                                                                            *f
                                                                                                            t ,k
                                                                                                                   .   (7)
         country premiumt,k                onshore premiumt,k                      pure default premiumt,k



II.c Strict and broad covered interest parity

          If a forward exchange market exists, and in absence of a country premium,

standard arguments imply that risk-free arbitrage between domestic- and foreign-




5
    Default regulations in major financial centers such as New York and London are stricter than those in
       many emerging markets, making the costs of default on offshore instruments much larger than those
       on onshore instruments. This issue has recently become prominent in the context of external payments
       difficulties, such as the Ecuador default and Argentina’s “debt swap.”



                                                                       8
currency securities yields what we shall label the “broad” version of the covered interest

parity condition:
                                                                                   1/ k
                                                                    Ft ,t + k 
                                           Rt ,k = R        *f
                                                            t ,k                        , (8)
                                                                    St 

where Ft ,t + k is the k-period forward exchange rate at time t. This is a broad version of

covered interest parity because the assets involved may differ in currency of

denomination, issuer (domestic versus foreign) and jurisdiction of issue (onshore versus

offshore). As before, equation (8) can be rewritten to show that the interest rate

differential equals the forward discount

                                          (it ,k              )
                                                    − it*,kf = fd t ,k ,                   (9)

                  1  Ft +k 
where fd t ,k =    ln       . Thus, under broad covered interest parity there are in principle
                  k  St 

two identical measures of the currency premium, it ,k − it*,kf and fd t ,k .   (                  )
         A considerable empirical literature tests the broad version of covered interest

                        (
parity, comparing it , k − it*, kf   )   with the forward discount. It is clear from (2) and (7),

however, that nonzero onshore premia (due for example to existing or anticipated capital

controls) and/or pure default premia (due to the differential default risk of local and

foreign borrowers) will lead to the failure of broad covered interest parity, a result

commonly found in studies using emerging market data.

         In contrast, the “strict” version of the covered interest parity condition states that

                                                   (i
                                                    t ,k   − it*, k ) = fd t , k .                (10)

In this version, the assets involved differ only in their currency of denomination but not

in their issuer or jurisdiction of issue.


                                                                     9
          Although empirical tests of the “strict” version of covered interest parity are hard

to find in the literature, in principle one would expect it to hold up more generally than

the broad version. But in practice several factors can cause even the strict parity condition

to fail. First, default risk may differ across instruments issued in alternative currencies,

even when issued by the same borrower in the same jurisdiction. This might reflect, for

example, a threat of mandatory re-denomination of foreign-currency assets into local

currency assets (akin to partial confiscation in the case of a devaluation), or also the fact

that the government can print only local currency, so that it can redeem its local-currency

obligations more easily than its foreign currency ones (or those of any debtor in need of

bailout). In these circumstances, observed asset yields do not equal anticipated ones, and

strict covered interest parity can fail to hold.

          A second factor that can potentially affect the strict version of covered interest

parity is the existence of transaction costs. Aside from default risk, arbitrage across

onshore instruments in different currencies might involve potentially large costs resulting

from various market imperfections – such as the impossibility of shorting certain assets,

or the presence of large bid-ask spreads reflecting market illiquidity. These costs can also

lead to a failure of the strict version of covered interest parity.6 In such case, deviations

from strict covered interest parity would be bounded by the magnitude of transaction

costs. In the appendix we provide a more detailed analytical and empirical discussion of

these issues.

          We conclude this discussion with a few remarks on the exchange rate risk

premium. Ignoring for the moment default risk and transaction costs – so that strict

6
    A considerable literature has explored how various forms of transaction costs may lead to market
      segmentation and impact on covered interest arbitrage; see for example Blenman (1991).


                                                 10
covered parity holds – equations (7) and (10) together imply that the exchange risk

premium equals the difference between the forward premium and anticipated

depreciation

                                                (               )
                                    errpt ,k = fd t ,k − ∆s te, k .     (11)

The patterns and determinants of the exchange risk premium have received considerable

attention in the literature (e.g., Engel 1992, 1996; Lewis 1995). In a context of

intertemporally optimizing investors, it can be shown that the risk premium arises from

the covariance between exchange rates and real consumption when investors are risk

averse.7 The premium can be positive or negative, which roughly speaking can be viewed

as reflecting whether the domestic currency is perceived as more or less risky than the

foreign currency, respectively. Several papers have explored how the magnitude of the

risk premium is affected by investors’ preferences towards risk. On analytical grounds

the result is ambiguous, and depends on the specifics of the model at hand (see Engel

1999). Numerical simulations find more often than not that higher degrees of risk

aversion lead to larger (in absolute terms) risk premia.8




7
    See for example Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998) and Engel (1999). More precisely, the exchange risk
       premium, typically measured as Et[St+1 – Ft+1]/ St (the “nominal premium”) or as Et[(St+1 – Ft+1)/Pt+1] /
       St (the “real premium”, see e.g., Hakkio and Siebert 1995) generally involves two terms: one that
       depends on the degree of investors’ risk aversion and the covariance mentioned in the text (which can
       be interpreted as the risk premium proper), plus another term reflecting nonlinearity of the premium in
       its defining variables. The latter term is independent of risk preferences and is generally presumed to
       be small in magnitude.
8
    See for example Hakkio and Siebert (1995), Siebert (1996), and Evans and Kenc (2001). The latter
       authors also find that the risk premium is relatively insensitive to changes in the pattern of
       correlations among the forcing variables in their model.



                                                        11
II.d The term structure of currency premia

             Finally, we consider briefly the term structure of currency premia (obviously,

similar considerations can be made for country premia, but we will not pursue them

here). For two different maturities k and k’ we can write from (10) and (11) above

        (i   t ,k          ) (                 )                               (                    )
                    − it*, k − it , k ' − it*, k ' = fd t , k − fd t , k ' = ∆ste, k − ∆s te, k ' + (errpt , k − errpt , k ' ) . (12)

             This equation characterizes the term structure of currency premia. It reflects both

the time path of anticipated depreciation and the term structure of the exchange risk

premium. The literature has focused mostly on the former. Expected depreciation can be

further decomposed into the perceived probability of devaluation and the magnitude of

the devaluation, conditional on devaluation taking place. The time paths of these two

factors shape the term structure of anticipated depreciation and thereby the term structure

of currency premia.

             Alternative trajectories of the subjective probability and the conditional

magnitude of devaluation can result in very different term structures. In particular, the

term structure can become inverted if the bulk of anticipated depreciation is concentrated

in the near rather than the distant future.9 This may happen, for example, when there is a


9
    As an example, consider a fixed exchange rate regime where at time t the (log) exchange rate is s0, and
       devaluation can happen at some uncertain future time τ. Let st+k>s0 denote the exchange rate holding
       at time t+k if devaluation has already happened (otherwise the exchange rate stays unchanged at s0).
       Let P[τ >u] denote the subjective probability that devaluation will not happen prior to time u. The
       term structure of anticipated depreciation between t+k and t+k+j is:
           1                        1                    1                                    1
               Et [st +k+ j − s0 ] − Et [st +k − s0 ] =      P[τ ≤ t + k + j][st+k+ j − s0 ] − P[τ ≤ t + k][st +k − s0 ] .
          k+ j                      k                   k+ j                                  k
       After some manipulation, this can be rewritten as:
                                                                                                   st + k + j − st + k st + k − s 0 
                      1
                     k+ j
                                                     (
                          P[t + k < τ ≤ t + k + j ] st + k + j − s0   )   +
                                                                                j
                                                                               k+ j
                                                                                    P[τ ≤ t + k ]                     −             .
                                                                                                             j               k      
       The first part of this expression reflects the possibility of devaluation happening after t+k – i.e.,
       beyond the “short run.” It is non-negative and contributes to an upward-sloping ’yield curve’of


                                                                              12
perceived probability of collapse of a fixed exchange rate regime, and the exchange rate

after the collapse is expected to overshoot – so that the magnitude of the conditional

depreciation is larger in the short than in the long run. Overshooting aside, term structure

inversion is also more likely if agents expect devaluation to take place in the near future

rather than the long term – e.g., they expect either an immediate devaluation or no

devaluation at all.

          Along these lines, there is some literature that attempts to identify the likely term

structure of expected depreciation under alternative currency regimes. For example,

Favero, Giavazzi, and Spaventa (1997) argue that under floating exchange rates the term

structure of anticipated depreciation tends to be flatter (even inverted) than under pegged

rates, as in the former regime the bulk of depreciation may be projected to occur in the

near future, while in the latter a plausible scenario may be an eventual abandonment of

the peg, along with a cumulative devaluation.



III. Institutional features and empirical regularities

          We next document the empirical regularities of the currency premium under two

currency boards, Argentina and Hong Kong. Our data set allows us to construct different

measures of the premium for each of the two currency boards.10 However, since we will


       anticipated depreciation. The second part of the expression reflects the possibility of devaluation
       happening in the short term –i.e, prior to t+k. It is proportional to the difference in the rates of
       depreciation between t and t+k and between t+k and t+k+j. Its sign is ambiguous and depends on the
       anticipated path of the exchange rate when devaluation has happened. If the path involves a constant
       rate of depreciation, then the expression equals zero (the same happens if no devaluation can occur
       prior to t+k). If a step devaluation is anticipated (i.e., st+k = st+k+j) or, more generally, if a decelerating
       rate of depreciation is expected (such as in the case of exchange rate overshooting), the expression is
       negative and therefore contributes to a downward-sloping yield curve, as stated in the text.
10
     We use daily data obtained from Bloomberg, the Central Bank of Argentina, Deutsche Bank, and the
      Hong Kong Monetary Authority. The data set contains rates from different markets and instruments
      (money market rates, interbank rates, and non-deliverable forwards), different currencies (Argentine


                                                         13
be working mainly with premia embedded in forward contracts, we begin by describing

the institutional characteristics of forward markets, which are not widely known. Next,

we present an overview of the evolution of the currency risk premium under the two

currency boards, going as far into the past as the data permit, and relating the observed

developments in the premium with major local and global events. To do this, for each of

the two countries we use the measure of the currency premium offering the longest time

coverage. We then discuss the different measures of the currency premium available from

the data and compare their behavior. Finally, we characterize the term structure of the

currency premium.



III.a The forward exchange market 11

          Forward contracts are derivatives designed to hedge foreign currency exposure.

There are two types of forward contracts. Foreign exchange forwards (outright forwards)

are currency trades to be settled at an agreed time in the future. These contracts are also

called deliverable forwards. Non-deliverable forwards (NDFs) are forward transactions

whose settlement is made by a cash payment in U.S. dollars reflecting the market value

of the contract, so that no local currency changes hands. NDF contracts are mostly used

for emerging market currencies. The main participants in this market are large

international banks. The most important NDF currencies are the Argentinean peso, the

Brazilian real, the major currencies in Asia, and the Hungarian forint.



       pesos, Hong Kong dollars, and U.S. dollars), and different maturities (typically 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-
       month). See Appendix Table 3 for a thorough description.
11
     For more information on these markets, see Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2001), Schmukler and
       Servén (2002), and the Trade Association for Emerging Markets at www.emta.org. We especially
       thank Starla Cohen from EMTA for sharing data with us.



                                                    14
           Volume information on NDF transactions is limited, because the corresponding

data are not publicly available and because market participants do not necessarily mark

their deliverable and NDF transactions separately. The Federal Reserve Bank of New

York (2001) shows that forward markets are large when compared with spot markets. In

the overall U.S. market, forward contracts represent about one third of the spot foreign

exchange market. When looking beyond the major six world currencies against the U.S.

dollar, forward markets become even more important. They are almost as large as spot

markets.



III.b The currency premium: evolution over time

           The case of Argentina12

           The currency board in Argentina offers a fruitful ground to study the behavior of

the currency premium. On April 1, 1991, the Convertibility Law established the

unrestricted convertibility of the peso into U.S. dollars at a fixed rate of 1 to 1 for both

current and capital account transactions. The convertibility of the peso and its parity were

defined by law; any modifications needed to be approved by Congress.13




12
     We collected the events from Ganapolsky and Schmukler (2001), who provide a detailed description of
      the 1995 crisis management in Argentina. We also collected news from two local newspapers, Clarín
      and La Nación, available online at www.clarin.com and www.lanacion.com. A much more detailed
      account of the impact of all these events on the currency premium is given in Schmukler and Servén
      (2002).
13
     The law required the central bank to hold an amount of dollars equal to the entire monetary base at all
       times, although a limited proportion of this backing could be held in domestic government bonds. For
       this reason, some argue that the Argentine scheme was not a currency board in a strict sense. The
       currency board lasted until January 2002, when the financial crises prompted the devaluation and
       floating of the peso.



                                                     15
           Figure 1 displays the time pattern of the currency premium, measured by the

difference between the 1-month peso and dollar local deposit rates (in annual terms).14

The currency premium remained positive throughout the period for which data are

available, although in general its magnitude was modest – the sample mean equals 189

basis points. However, as Table 1 shows, the premium varied significantly over time,

reflecting major domestic and international events that impacted on actual and anticipated

monetary and financial conditions in Argentina. During these “crisis” episodes the

average currency premium was 383 basis points, while during the “tranquil” periods after

the Mexican crisis the average currency premium was 126.

           There were many specific events that affected the Argentine currency premium.

These events include external episodes like the Mexican crisis of 1995, the 1997 Asian

crisis (in particular by the attack on the Hong Kong currency board), the Russian crisis of

1998, and the Brazilian crisis of 1999. Internal political and economic events also

generated spikes in the currency premium. These events include former minister

Cavallo’s statement in the Financial Times that the peso would eventually float, the

political uncertainty surrounding the 1999 presidential election, the resignation of vice

president Carlos Alvarez in October 2000, the resignation of two economy ministers

(Machinea and Lopez Murphy), and the cut of international credit in July 2001.

           To give a rough measure of the economic dimension of these premia, assume that

investors are risk neutral. The currency premium then measures the anticipated rate of

depreciation, and we can compute the magnitude of the anticipated depreciation

consistent with the data for various subjective probabilities of devaluation, as shown in

14
     Note that deposit rates are generally less sensitive than other rates to the different political and economic
       events.


                                                        16
Table 2. During tranquil periods a premium of 812 basis points on a 1-month deposit

annualized rate corresponds to an expected devaluation of 8,122 (902) basis points for a

10 (90) percent probability of devaluation. At the other extreme, when Argentina suffered

the cut of international credit, the expected devaluation jumped to 19,861 (2,207) basis

points under an expected probability of devaluation of 10 (90) percent. Though these

magnitudes based on deposit interest rate differentials are already large, similar

calculations applied to the NDF currency premium would yield a much larger anticipated

devaluation.

          The case of Hong Kong15

          The currency board in Hong Kong also offers an interesting case study of the

currency premium. The Hong Kong currency board was established in October 1983, and

the Hong Kong dollar was pegged to the U.S. dollar 7.80 to 1. However, in September

1998 the rate changed to 7.75 to 1. Between April 1999 and August 2000 the exchange

rate moved gradually from 7.75 back to 7.80. Since 1983 the Hong Kong dollar has been

freely convertible. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority is responsible for keeping the

peg.

          Figure 1 and Table 1 show that in Hong Kong, unlike in Argentina, the currency

premium implied by 1-month deliverable forwards was at times negative (although of

small magnitude). Its sample mean is close to zero in tranquil times, and equal to 301

basis points in turbulent times. Another difference with Argentina is that there are fewer

identifiable events, and instead there is a prolonged period of turbulence surrounding the



15
     We collected the events in Hong Kong from Bloomberg, the Financial Times, and Nouriel Roubini’s
      website, www.stern.nyu.edu/globalmacro/AsiaChronology1.html, and Cheng, Kwan, and Lui (1999a).



                                                 17
East Asian crisis. The most noticeable events that kept the currency premium high are the

second, third, and fourth attack on the Hong Kong dollar, which took place during 1998.



III.c Alternative measures of the currency premium

       We next compare alternative measures of the currency premium that can be

constructed from our data. In Argentina, interest rates on different types of loans and

deposits are quoted both in pesos and U.S. dollars. The differentials between dollar and

peso interest rates on these instruments provide measures of the currency premium

derived from the money market. In addition, the forward discount implied by NDFs

provides another measure of currency premium. In the case of Hong Kong, deliverable

forward contracts are also available. But to construct the currency premium from

intebank rates, we have to resort to the total interest rate differential, namely the

difference between the Hong Kong interbank offer rate (HIBOR) and the London

interbank offer rate (LIBOR). This is the same measure used by Cheng, Kwan, and Lui,

(1999b). As noted in Section II, this measure contains not only the currency premium but

also the country premium, which is commonly assumed to be very small in the case of

Hong Kong.

       The different measures of the currency premium implied by the various assets are

displayed in Figure 2, while Table 3 presents their summary statistics for the 1-month

maturity over the sample for which all measures are available. Figure 2 shows that the

different premia move generally together. For example, Table 3 shows that the

correlation among the various Argentine instruments ranges between 0.78 and 0.91. In

the case of Hong Kong, the correlation between the two available rates is 0.94. However,




                                           18
even though the different measures of currency premia display strong comovement there

are visible differences across instruments and maturities. Table 3 shows that the currency

premium implied by the forward market tends to be higher than the various measures of

money market premia. In Argentina, for the whole sample, the (annualized) average

premium from the NDFs exceeds 800 basis points, while the average premia derived

from the money market are between 206 and 318 basis points. This reflects in part a few

large spikes in the forward discount, whose mean is considerably above the median.

Among the money market measures, only the currency premium implied by lending rates

shows spikes of comparable magnitude. In the case of Hong Kong, the average forward

discount is 58 basis points, while the average difference between local interbank rates and

LIBOR rates is 39, despite the fact that the latter should contain the country risk premium

in addition to the currency premium.



III.d Term structure of currency premia

          Comparison of the currency premium at different maturities can reveal

information on market perceptions regarding the likelihood, anticipated magnitude and

riskiness of exchange rate changes at different horizons, as well as show how those

perceptions are affected by domestic and external developments.

          We focus on the term premium between long and short maturities, defined as the

differential between the 12-month and the 1-month currency premia.16 Figure 3 portrays

the term premium for Argentina and Hong Kong, while Table 4 presents the



16
     This is the same approach used by Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (1998) to analyze the term structure
       of the country and currency premium in Mexico prior to the Tequila crisis.



                                                   19
corresponding descriptive statistics. We present two term premia, one derived from the

forward market, and another from the interbank market.17

           Figure 3 illustrates how the term premium reacts to relevant events to the

economies. In the case of Argentina, the “yield curve” of the currency premium appears

to have become steeper after the Brazilian crisis, up to the final portion of the sample

corresponding to the resignation of the economy ministers, when the yield curve became

sharply inverted. Thus, except for the final part of the sample, this suggests that

devaluation of the real raised expectations of eventual, more than immediate, devaluation

of the peso. A similar effect appears to have arisen from the 1999 Financial Times article

mentioned above, in which Cavallo first advanced the idea of modifying the currency

board. Figure 3 shows that the term premium increased; in fact, the 1-month currency

premium was flat, while it rose at longer maturities. In other words, markets perceived

that no change was likely in the immediate future, but there was increased uncertainty

about future changes after the upcoming presidential election. The term premium became

negative at times, in particular during the Asian crisis, Russia’s default, and most notably

during the 2001 crisis.

           In Hong Kong, the term premium was close to zero during most of the sample. It

turned slightly negative during the Mexican crisis and the early signs of distress in South

Korea, and became sharply negative at the peak of the different attacks on the Hong

Kong dollar. The term premium increased significantly right after the first attack, and

only converged towards zero in late 1999. This evidence suggests that investors revised

their expectations about the sustainability of the currency board during the crisis,

17
     As before, in the case of Hong Kong the latter measure is based on the difference between onshore Hong
       Kong dollar deposit rates and U.S. dollar deposits in the U.S., so it may include a country premium.


                                                     20
becoming somewhat pessimistic about the future of the peg in the long run after the Hong

Kong dollar was heavily attacked. In the midst of the financial stress they were more

concerned about the short-term prospects.

          Summary statistics displayed in Table 4 show that on average the term premium

was positive. It was also larger for Argentina than for Hong Kong, suggesting that

markets were more uncertain about the long-run viability of Argentina’s peg than that of

Hong Kong.

          The table also shows that the term premium was typically larger in tranquil than

in turbulent periods. Indeed, at times of extreme turbulence – such as those corresponding

to the economy minister resignations in 2001 in Argentina and the subsequent cut in

international financing – the term premium became negative, particularly in the case of

the Argentine NDF, for which the 1-month over 12-month differential reached a peak of

11,720 basis points. In the case of Hong Kong, the term premium reached large negative

numbers during each of the different crisis episodes, hitting 1,854 basis points during the

first attack on the Hong Kong dollar. The mean term premium was positive during the

subsequent attacks because the negative values only lasted for a few days.18



IV. Determinants of the currency premium and its term structure

          We turn to an empirical analysis of the determinants of the currency premium.

Our objective is to identify the impact of economic variables as well as local and global

events on the premium. Data constraints force us to limit the econometric analysis to

18
     Market participants follow closely these inversions in the term premium. Investment banks tend to
      recommend trades according to the slope of the yield curve and their assessments of risk at different
      horizons. This behavior of the term structure also echoes bond market evidence that the slope of the
      yield curve changes from positive to negative when markets perceive a higher default probability.



                                                     21
Argentina. The primary reason is the unavailability of daily domestic financial data for

Hong Kong with an adequate time coverage. Here we focus on the NDF-based premium

measure. In the appendix below we examine in depth the observed differential between

the NDF and the premium implied by interbank interest rates.

          The starting point for the econometric analysis is equation (11) above, rearranged

to read

                                                  (                   )
                                        fd t ,k = ∆s et ,k + errpt ,k .          (13)

We can further decompose anticipated depreciation ∆s et , k into the subjective probability

held at time t of a depreciation happening prior to t+k, that we denote Pt ,k , and the

magnitude of the depreciation, that we denote by (st ,k − st ). With probability (1 − Pt ,k ) the

exchange rate stays unchanged at its current level st through time t+k. Here st ,k is the

log of the spot exchange rate expected to prevail at time t+k if a devaluation should occur

between times t and t+k.19 Thus from (13) we have

                                   fd t ,k = Pt ,k (st ,k − st ) + errpt ,k . (14)

          The next step is to relate the anticipated magnitude of the depreciation, the

subjective devaluation probability, and the risk premium to observable counterparts.

Starting with the first of these, the most common approach in the literature is to relate the

anticipated devaluation to some measure of real misalignment of the currency, typically

summarized by the departure of the real exchange rate from some equilibrium value.

However, we will be working with daily data, and no information on prices or real


19
     More generally, the expected future rate conditional on devaluation taking place could also depend on
      the precise instant at which devaluation occurs. This complication could be easily incorporated in the
      notation, but here we choose to ignore it for simplicity.



                                                        22
variables exists at such frequency. Since we will be using a relatively short period, it

might be reasonable to assume that there is little variation in the magnitude of the peso’s

perceived real misalignment over the sample period, beyond what can be captured by a

time trend. Thus, we include a linear trend in our basic specification. Nevertheless, we

also experiment with a proxy for real exchange rate misalignment available from

Goldman Sachs, which is constructed on the basis of lower-frequency real and financial

data and then interpolated to yield daily observations.20 Finally, we also allow an impact

of the Brazilian devaluation of 1999 on the perceived degree of peso misalignment, by

adding a dummy variable (see below).

          As for the subjective probability of devaluation, we assume that it is inversely

related to the stock of international reserves relative to total bank deposits, which

provides a measure of the ability of the currency board to deter a run on the Argentine

peso or on the banking system. Thus, this variable is a proxy for the sustainability of the

convertibility system. Furthermore, we are interested in assessing the role of foreign

reserves taking the form of hard-currency assets vis-à-vis those in the form of public

sector debt. Argentina’s regulations permitted public bonds to be held as central bank

reserves, but, in light of the government default in 2002, they proved not to be equal to

hard-currency reserves. Hence, to study whether the composition of foreign reserves

affect market perceptions, we present regressions allowing these two components to carry

different coefficients.



20
     To construct a measure of the foreign exchange misalignment, Goldman Sachs uses deviations of an
       estimated equilibrium exchange rate (called GSDEEMER) from observed trade-weighted real
       exchange rates. To obtain the equilibrium exchange rate, Goldman Sachs uses various economic
       fundamentals such as terms of trade, government consumption, total factor productivity, and capital
       flows, among others. See Goldman Sachs (1999).



                                                    23
           To capture the risk premium component of (14), we use measures that reflect

markets’ perceptions about risk.21 The first one is the EMBI spread for Latin American

debt (excluding Argentina’s), which we take as a measure of the perceived riskiness of

Latin American assets in general. The second is the premium on U.S. high-yield assets,

which we take as a measure of international investors’ overall “appetite for risk.” In our

basic specification, these two variables capture the risk perceptions of international

investors. In addition, we also present some experiments adding in the regression the risk

rating of Argentine foreign currency debt as determined by major international risk-rating

agencies.22

           To these proxies for international investors’ risk perceptions, we also add in our

basic specification the liquidity position of Argentine banks, as reflected in the ratio of

their cash reserves to total deposits, that we take as a summary measure of banks’ attitude

towards risk. An increase in banks’ risk aversion, or in their perceived risk (i.e., the

degree of financial volatility) should lead them to maintain higher liquidity ratios.

           It is important to emphasize that, as already stated, the literature offers no definite

prediction regarding the sign of the impact of these risk preference proxies on the

exchange risk premium. However, simulation exercises tend to suggest that higher risk

aversion increases the absolute magnitude of the premium.23 Thus, one might expect that

if the peso is regarded as riskier than the U.S. dollar (so that the risk premium is positive)

then higher risk aversion would yield a larger risk premium and, other things equal, a

21
     This is in the spirit of Lewis (1995).
22
     Specifically, we use the average of the risk ratings of the three leading agencies: Moody’s, Standard and
       Poor’s, and Fitch-IBCA. We assign numerical values to the various risk categories considered by each
       agency, and average them over their respective ratings for Argentina’s sovereign foreign-currency
       debt.



                                                      24
larger currency premium, so that the risk aversion proxies just listed would carry positive

coefficients in the regression.

          This argument, however, is subject to two caveats in the case of the U.S. high-

yield spread, which may capture other forces at play, in addition to investors’ overall risk

appetite. The first caveat arises from the fact that the perceived riskiness of U.S. junk and

Argentine assets may move in different directions, reflecting investors’ substitution

among alternative assets. For example, a shift out of U.S. high-yield assets and into

emerging-market (including Argentine) assets could result in a higher premium for the

former but lower for the latter. The second caveat concerns the role of the high-yield

spread as a predictor of the U.S. business cycle. As has been amply documented, a higher

spread indicates the anticipation of a growth slowdown in the U.S., and conversely for a

lower spread. To the extent that the U.S. dollar tends to appreciate in booms and

depreciate in slowdowns, an increase in the U.S. high-yield spread could signal an

impending depreciation of the dollar vis-à-vis other currencies, and thereby an anticipated

reduction in the degree of overvaluation of the Argentina peso in trade-weighted terms,

which ceteris paribus would tend to reduce the forward discount on the peso. Conversely,

a reduction in the high-yield spread would imply larger peso overvaluation in the future

and thereby lead to a larger forward discount. Through this channel, changes in the high-

yield spread could cause changes in the forward discount in the opposite direction.

          Finally, we also estimate additional specifications including dummy variables to

control for the effects of the domestic and foreign political and economic events

summarized in Section III. To limit the number of dummy variables, we combine the two


23
     See for example Evans and Kenc (2001).



                                              25
external shocks in our sample (the periods of Russian crisis and the devaluation of the

Brazilian real identified in Table 1) into a single “external shock” dummy, and likewise

combine the various domestic crises episodes in Table 1 into a single “internal shock”

dummy.

           Some considerations regarding econometric technique are necessary. Regarding

the time-series properties of the data, preliminary augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) tests

of unit roots yielded mixed results. Forward premia were found to be I(0) – in agreement

with the results of, e.g., Clarida and Taylor (1993) – while for other variables the results

varied depending on sample size and lag length. This is unsurprising given the short-time

coverage of our sample, which surely results in very low power of the tests and makes

them rather uninformative. Since our regressors are basically interest rate spreads and

financial ratios, we follow the views expressed by Cochrane (1991) and proceed under

the assumption that they are all stationary.

           A second consideration regards the potential endogeneity of the right-hand side

variables. The domestic financial ratios (the central bank’s foreign assets and banks’ cash

reserves relative to deposits) are publicly announced with a three-day delay; hence we

take these variables as predetermined. Next, we take the high-yield spread to be

exogenous. Finally, the Latin American EMBI spread that we use refers to region-wide

assets excluding Argentina,24 and as a working hypothesis we shall assume it exogenous

as well.25


24
     Specifically, it is a weighted average of the EMBIs from individual Latin American countries excluding
       Argentina, with 1999 GDP weights.
25
     We are well aware that developments regarding the perceived solvency of Argentina might impact on
      that of other countries in the region. However, we presume this effect to be smaller than the one
      operating in the opposite direction, namely the impact of the region as a whole on Argentina.



                                                     26
        The third issue refers to dynamics. To allow for some degree of persistence, we

use a dynamic specification including lags of the dependent and independent variables.

Our starting point follows along the lines of Hendry’s GUM (general unrestricted model)

specification:

                                              k     q           p
                                yt = c0 + ∑∑ b jτ x j ,t −τ + ∑ ai yt −i + ut .      (15)
                                              j =1 τ =0        i =1



This is just an unrestricted autoregressive-distributed lag (ARDL) model of order (p, q).

With some straightforward manipulations, it can be rewritten as

              k   q −1                 p −1
                                                                     k              
      ∆y t = ∑∑ B jτ ∆x j ,t −τ + ∑ Ai ∆y t −i + c 0 + α 1 y t −1 + ∑ β j x j ,t −1  + u t .   (16)
             j =1 τ = 0           i =1                              j =1            

The term in square brackets in the right-hand side of (16) captures the “long-run” version

                     p                      q
of (15). Here α1 =  ∑ ai  − 1 and β j = ∑ b jτ are the sums of coefficients on the
                     i =1                 τ =0


dependent and independent variables, respectively. The long-run impact of regressor j on

                         βj
y can be found as −         .
                         α1

        In the empirical implementation, we estimate (16) by OLS setting p=q=4, i.e.,

including four lags of the dependent and independent variables (beginning with lag three

in the case of the domestic financial ratios). To save space in the tables below we only

report the long-run coefficients α1 and β j and omit the dynamics.

        To complement these OLS regressions, we also perform additional estimations

allowing for conditionally heteroskedastic disturbances, which are fairly common in

high-frequency financial data such as ours. Indeed, Tables 1 and 4 above clearly suggest

that volatility of the premium and its term structure change over time, becoming



                                                          27
noticeably higher at times of internal and external crises. While OLS estimates of

equation (16) remain consistent in the presence of heteroskedasticity, and our inferences

are based on robust covariance matrix estimates, efficiency gains are possible by

explicitly modeling heteroskedasticity. In particular, we use the exponential GARCH

(EGARCH) specification of Nelson (1991), which can be written as


                                                               {                }
                                N                     M                              M
             log σ t2 = π 0 + ∑ π 1, j log σ t2− j + ∑ π 2 , j vt − j − E vt − j + ∑ π 3, jν t − j   (17)
                                j =1                  j =1                           j =1



             ut
where vt =        . In the estimations reported below we use N=M=1. Compared with
             σt

standard GARCH, this specification offers the added flexibility of allowing asymmetric

effects on volatility of positive and negative disturbances (which arise when the π 3, j are

not zero), a feature that has proven useful in modeling financial asset prices (e.g., Pagan

and Schwert 1990). Moreover, the EGARCH model is computationally simpler than

standard GARCH, which is a major concern given our relatively short sample and our

specification with several regressors and multiple lags. Indeed, to achieve convergence of

the EGARCH estimates we were forced to employ a somewhat shorter lag specification

in order to preserve sample size. In particular, we omitted lags beyond the fourth one, so

that for the domestic financial ratios (foreign reserves and bank liquidity), available with

a three-day delay, we used only the third and fourth lag.

       Table 5 reports regression results with the 1-month NDF premium as dependent

variable. The first five columns report OLS estimates of equation (5), while the last two

columns present EGARCH(1,1) estimates of (5) and (6). As already noted, to save space

only the long-run coefficients of (5) appear in the table.




                                                      28
       The first column presents the basic specification. As expected, we find that

foreign reserves have a negative and significant effect on the premium. Among the risk

proxies, the Latin EMBI spread carries a positive and significant coefficient, and the

same applies to domestic banks’ liquidity ratio. In turn, the U.S. high-yield spread has no

significant effect, nor does the time trend intended to capture the peso misalignment. The

summary statistics at the bottom of the table show that the estimated equation has a high

explanatory power, as reflected by an R-squared of 0.40, which is rather satisfactory

given that we are working with daily data. Finally, the Q statistics reveal no symptoms of

autocorrelation.

       Column 2 in Table 5 replaces the time trend with the Goldman Sachs

misalignment proxy. This results in the loss of 20 observations for which the latter

variable is not available. Its coefficient estimate carries a positive sign, as expected, but

the precision of the estimate is very poor. The remaining estimates are qualitatively

similar to those in the first column. In turn, column 3 breaks down foreign reserves into

their hard-currency and public-debt components. We find that only hard-currency

reserves have a significant negative impact on the forward premium; bond reserves carry

a negative coefficient as well, but statistically not different from zero. The other

parameters are very similar to those in column 1.

       In column 4 we add to the regressors the risk rating of Argentine foreign currency

debt, averaged over the three major rating services. As constructed, a higher value of the

variable denotes a better rating (i.e., lower risk). Its coefficient estimate is negative and

significant, as expected. Now, however, the coefficient on the foreign reserve/deposit

ratio becomes much smaller and insignificant. This is very likely a reflection of the fact




                                             29
that rating agencies view foreign reserves as one (or the) key factor in their risk

assessment. The remaining estimates are similar to those in the basic specification of

column 1. Next, in column 5 we add the internal and external shock dummies. Both carry

positive and significant (at the 10 percent level in the case of the external shock dummy)

coefficients, which confirms the finding in Table 1 that the forward discount typically

rises at times of turmoil. Interestingly, the coefficients on the Latin EMBI spread and the

foreign reserve ratio show a considerable decline in magnitude relative to the basic

specification, and the former becomes insignificant. This is a clear reflection of the fact

that the Russia and Brazil shocks summarized in the “external shock” dummy were also

reflected in major swings in the EMBI, while both internal and external shocks typically

resulted in reserve losses. Hence the event dummies capture some of the explanatory

power of these two economic variables.

       In column 5 we are allowing for crises to affect the conditional mean of the

forward premium but not its conditional variance. From Table 1, however, we know that

the volatility of the premium is considerably larger at times of shocks. We allow for a

time-varying conditional variance by introducing EGARCH effects in columns 6 and 7 of

Table 5. As already noted, we had to use a somewhat reduced dynamic specification to

preserve sample size and achieve convergence of the estimation procedure. As a result,

the sample underlying these estimates is larger than those used in the OLS regressions. In

addition, we further simplified the specification in column 5 by combining the two shock

dummies into a single “crisis dummy.”

       Column 6 presents an EGARCH(1,1) specification allowing for the effect of

crises on the conditional mean of the premium. Qualitatively, the estimates are broadly




                                            30
similar to those in column 5, although their magnitudes change somewhat reflecting the

change in sample. We continue to find significant positive effects on the premium of

banks’ liquidity ratio and the crisis dummy, and negative and significant effects of the

foreign reserve ratio. The Latin EMBI spread remains insignificant like in column 5.

Now, however, we also find a significant positive impact of the high-yield spread and the

time trend that proxies for misalignment. The GARCH parameters are strongly

significant as well, and in particular they suggest an asymmetric effect of disturbances on

the conditional variance, with negative disturbances raising the conditional variance more

than positive ones. The Box-Pierce statistics, however, suggest some mild evidence of

residual autocorrelation.26

           In column 7 we expand the EGARCH specification to allow also for an

independent effect of crises on the conditional variance. We do this by adding the crisis

dummy in the variance equation.27 This causes some changes in the parameter estimates

relative to those in the preceding column. In particular, the EMBI spread is now positive

and significant, and the high-yield spread reverses sign – it now carries a negative and

significant coefficient. Foreign reserves and banks’ liquidity remain significant, although

their parameters become much smaller than in the preceding column. The crisis dummy

continues to have a significant positive impact on the premium and, in addition, now it is

found to have a significant positive impact on the conditional variance as well. There

continues to be strong evidence of EGARCH effects, but the estimates do not suggest any




26
     Note that the Q statistics in columns 6-7 refer to the “scaled” residuals denoted by v in equation (17).
27
     We thank Sebastian Edwards for suggesting this specification. See Edwards and Susmel (2001) for a
      more sophisticated application of GARCH models with regime switches.



                                                        31
asymmetric effects of disturbances anymore. Finally, the Q statistics do not reveal any

symptoms of autocorrelation.

       Table 6 turns to estimation of the determinants of the NDF term premium,

measured by the difference between the 12-month and 1-month premia. In addition to the

explanatory variables in the preceding table, we introduce also the term premium of U.S.

interest rates of similar maturity, to provide a benchmark for the term premium generally

demanded by investors.

       Like in the previous table, columns 1 to 5 report OLS regressions, while columns

6-7 report EGARCH estimates, using the same array of specifications as before. Column

1 presents the basic specification. We find that the foreign reserves to deposits ratio

exerts a significant positive effect on the term premium, suggesting that the

announcement of higher reserves reduces more the short-term NDF premium than the

longer-term one. This likely reflects the fact that higher reserves lower the perceived

probability of immediate devaluation relative to the probability of eventual devaluation.

On the other hand, the liquidity ratio of banks carries a negative sign, which suggests that

banks’ decision to hold larger cash reserves relates more to perceived short-term risks

than long-term ones. The remaining coefficient estimates are insignificant. The

explanatory power of the equation is quite high, as reflected by its R-squared of 0.46, and

the residuals show no signs of serial correlation.

       Column 2 uses the Goldman Sachs misalignment proxy. Like in the regressions of

the 1-month premium, its coefficient estimate is positive but highly imprecise. Column 3

disaggregates foreign reserves into hard-currency and public-debt assets. Both carry

significant positive coefficients, but that of bond reserves is much smaller and significant




                                             32
only at the 10 percent level. This suggests that the impact just described of foreign

reserves on perceived devaluation probabilities at different horizons is mostly due to

hard-currency reserves.

       Column 4 adds to the basic specification the risk rating of foreign-currency

Argentine debt. Like with the 1-month premium, the main consequence is to render

foreign reserves insignificant, confirming the interpretation given earlier that risk ratings

are strongly affected by foreign reserve holdings. Column 5 adds the internal and external

shock dummies. Both carry significantly negative coefficients, in accordance with the

fact noted earlier that the term structure tends to become inverted at times of crisis.

Introducing the dummies also causes some changes in other parameters. Most notably,

the high-yield spread becomes significant at the 10 percent level with a negative sign,

while foreign reserves become insignificant.

       Columns 6 and 7 report EGARCH estimates, restricting as before the lag length of

the domestic financial ratios in the estimated specifications – in order to conserve sample

size – and combining the two crisis dummies into a single one. In column 6, the crisis

dummy affects only the conditional mean of the term premium. Like in the OLS

estimates of column 5, the dummy carries a negative and significant coefficient. The sign

pattern of the remaining coefficients is similar to that in column 5. Now, however, all

regressors, except for the high-yield spread, carry significant parameter estimates –

positive in the case of the U.S. term structure, the EMBI spread and the foreign reserve

ratio, and negative for the liquidity ratio of banks. There is strong indication of EGARCH

effects, including significant asymmetry that results in positive disturbances increasing

the conditional variance more than negative ones. The Q statistics do not reveal residual




                                             33
autocorrelation. However, the autoregressive parameter in the variance equation is close

to unity, suggesting that the variance process is close to an integrated EGARCH

(IEGARCH).

       Column 7 adds the crisis dummy also in the conditional variance equation. It is

found to exert a positive and highly significant effect, confirming the finding in Table 4

above that volatility of the term premium rises at times of major shocks. The remaining

estimates show very little change relative to those in column 6, and they all continue to

be highly significant with the exception of the high-yield spread. We again find a

strongly asymmetric impact of disturbances on the conditional variance, but now there is

much less evidence of IEGARCH effects. The residuals display no symptoms of

autocorrelation.



V. Conclusions

       Emerging economies typically show positive interest rate differentials vis-à-vis

industrial economies. They reflect two ingredients: the country premium and the currency

premium. While the former has been studied in depth by the recent literature, the latter

has received much less empirical attention, probably due to lack of adequate data.

Nevertheless, the currency premium has attracted considerable interest in the debate on

the choice of exchange rate regime for emerging countries, as well as in the analysis of

target zones and covered interest parity, both of which focus mainly on developed

countries.

       In this paper we have characterized the behavior of the currency premium in two

currency boards that have been able to maintain a hard peg to the U.S. dollar for a very




                                           34
long time. Several interesting findings emerge from the paper, and some puzzles are left

open for future research. They can be summarized in five main points.

           First, despite the presumed rigidity of the peg underlying currency boards,

currency premia tend to be uniformly positive, suggesting that markets persistently

anticipate a devaluation of the exchange rate. We find very few instances in which the

currency premium is negative. This raises the question of whether currency boards really

yield sufficient credibility as to minimize currency risk. Of course, to answer the question

one would need to examine also the currency premium under other exchange rate

regimes; perhaps that observed under currency boards is consistently lower than in other

regimes. But in any case, the implication is that even full backing of the monetary base

does not suffice to eliminate currency risk.

           Second, political and economic events seem to be important factors in the

behavior of currency premia. The currency premium in Argentina increased during the

Mexican, Asian, Russian, and Brazilian crises. Moreover, several political and economic

events – such as the crisis ignited in March 2001 – had a large impact on the premium.

Regarding Hong Kong, the currency premium increased significantly during the Mexican

crisis, the Asian crisis and, especially, during the attacks on the Hong Kong dollar.

           In a related paper we have argued that it is easier for currency regimes to achieve

credibility when they follow simple rules.28 In this paper we find that Argentine markets

reacted negatively to the announcement of a proposal to replace the simple dollar peg

underlying the convertibility system with a basket peg composed of U.S. dollars and

euros. The immediate result was a jump in the currency premium, as markets perceived


28
     See Frankel, Fajnzylber, Schmukler, and Servén (2001).



                                                    35
the peso to be riskier rather than more stable, as the government had intended. This is

also consistent with the evidence found during the management of the Mexican crisis.

When the government took measures to reinforce the existing currency board, markets

welcomed those moves. But any actions viewed as departures from the rigid currency

board generated a negative reaction among investors.29

          Third, the yield curve of the currency premium tends to slope upward, but

invariably flattens out or turns negative at the peak of crises. This is consistent with

previous research that has found short-term premia to be more volatile than long premia,

and can be explained by several factors. During financial turmoil, markets may revise

upward their perceived probability of immediate collapse of the regime more than the

probability of eventual collapse, and/or may anticipate an overshooting of the exchange

rate after the collapse. Furthermore, fluctuations in the term structure might also reflect

different liquidity in the short- and long-term markets. These fluctuations in term premia

imply that one needs to proceed with care when comparing interest rate differentials,

currency premia, and country premia on assets of different maturities. A remaining

question is whether this seemingly predictable behavior of term premia generates

opportunities for arbitrage. Informal evidence suggests that it certainly prompts investors

to take speculative bets.

          Fourth, we find that prices of currency risk differ across markets. The spread

between the forward discount and the currency premium derived from both interbank

loan and deposit rates tends to be positive, and increases substantially at times of

financial turbulence. This finding admits different interpretations. It might reflect a


29
     See Ganapolsky and Schmukler (2001).



                                            36
failure of covered interest parity that leaves unexploited arbitrage opportunities. In

principle, domestic banks could arbitrage them away, but anecdotal evidence suggests

that at times of financial stress banks prefer to protect their liquidity and refrain from

cross-market arbitrage. Alternatively, it is also possible that heterogeneity across markets,

reflected in different pricing of the same risk, cannot be arbitraged due to the existence of

large transaction costs. In the Argentine case, however, formal transaction costs are not

large in the markets we analyze, and they are unlikely to get much larger during crises –

although bid-ask spreads can certainly increase at times of high volatility. Finally, the

two measures of the currency premium might involve risks not considered in most

analyses, such as differential default risk in the exchange and money markets. While our

approach focuses on what we have labeled strict covered interest parity, and hence the

cross-market differentials that we construct are free from country risk premia, we cannot

rule out this possibility. Thus, without detailed information on market transactions it is

not possible to disentangle this puzzle, whose resolution remains open to future research.

       Fifth, in the case of Argentina we find that domestic and foreign monetary and

financial factors related to risk perceptions and anticipations of devaluation exert a

systematic effect on the currency premium and its term structure. Risk related to EMBI

spreads, as well as that captured by standard risk ratings, have in most cases a positive

effect on currency premia. Reserves – especially hard-currency reserves, more than

government-bond reserves – have a negative impact on currency premia, and a positive

one on the term premium. The liquidity position of the financial sector, which reflects the

risk perceived by financial institutions, affects positively currency premia and negatively

the term premium. Finally, adverse domestic and external events that threaten the




                                             37
sustainability of the convertibility system raise the currency premium and tend to invert

its term structure.

        In this paper we have made some progress towards understanding the currency

premium, and we have also uncovered new puzzles. It would be useful to know whether

similar facts and puzzles emerge for other countries and other currency regimes.

Preliminary research suggests that this is the case, but the question remains open for

future work.




                                           38
References

Aliber, R., 1973. The Interest Rate Parity Theorem: A Reinterpretation. Journal of
       Political Economy 81, 1451-1459.

Artis, M., and Taylor, M., 1990. Abolishing Exchange Rate Controls: The UK
       Experience, in: Courakis, A., Taylor, M. (Eds.), Private Behavior and
       Government Policy in Interdependent Economies, Clarendon Press, Oxford, U.K.,
       129-158.

Bartolini, L. and Bodnar, G. M., 1992. Target Zones and Forward Rates in a Model with
       Repeated Realignments. Journal of Monetary Economics 30:3, 373-408.

Blenman, Lloyd, 1991. A Model of Covered Interest Arbitrage under Market
      Segmentation. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 23:4, 706-716.

Branson, William, 1969. The Minimum Covered Interest Differential Needed for
      International Arbitrage Activity. Journal of Political Economy 77:6, 1028:35.

Broda, Christian, and Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, 2001. Safety Nets and Endogenous
      Financial Dollarization. Mimeo, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

Calomiris, Charles, and Powell, Andrew, 2001. The Argentine Financial System under
      the Currency Board. Mimeo Columbia University.

Cheng, Leonard, Kwan, Yum, and, Lui, Francis, 1999a. Risk Premium, Currency Board,
      and Attacks on the Hong Kong Dollar. Mimeo, Hong Kong University of Science
      and Technology.

Cheng, Leonard, Kwan, Yum, and, Lui, Francis, 1999b. An Alternative Approach to
      Defending the Hong Kong Dollar. Mimeo, Hong Kong University of Science and
      Technology.

Cheung, Y., 1993. Exchange Rate Risk Premiums. Journal of International Money and
      Finance 12, pp. 182-194.

Chinn, Menzie, and Frankel, Jeffrey, 1994. Financial Links around the Pacific Rim:
       1982-1992, in: Glick, R., and Hutchison, M., (Eds.), Exchange Rate Policy and
       Interdependence: Perspective from the Pacific Basin, Cambridge University Press,
       New York and Melbourne, 17:47.

Clarida, Richard, and Taylor, Mark, 1993. The Term Structure of Forward Exchange
       Premia and the Forecastability of Spot Exchange Rates: Correcting the Errors.
       NBER Working Paper 4442.

Clinton, Kevin, 1988. Transactions Costs and Covered Interest Arbitrage: Theory and
       Evidence. Journal of Political Economy 96:2, pp. 358-370.



                                          39
Cochrane, John, 1991. Comment on Campbell and Perron, in: Olivier Blanchard and
      Stanley Fischer (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 201-210.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Solnik, Bruno, 2001. On the Term Structure of Default
       Premia in the Swap and LIBOR Markets. Journal of Finance 56:3, 1095:1115.

Deardorff, Alan, 1979. One-Way Arbitrage and Its Implications for the Foreign Exchange
      Markets. Journal of Political Economy 87:2, pp. 351-364.

Domowitz, Ian, Glen, Jack, and Madhavan, Ananth, 1998. Country and Currency Risk
     Premia in an Emerging Market. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
     33, 189-216, June.

Dooley, Michael, and Isaard, Peter, 1980. Capital Controls, Political Risk and Deviations
      from Interest-Rate Parity. Journal of Political Economy 88:2, 370-384.

Druck, Pablo, Morón, Eduardo, and Stein, Ernesto, 2001. The Twin Risks in the
      Dollarization Debate: Country and Devaluation Risks. Mimeo Universidad del
      CEMA.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1984. LDC Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
      Investigation, 1976-80. American Economic Review 74:4, pp. 726-734.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1986. The Pricing of Bonds and Bank Loans in International
      Markets. European Economic Review 30, 565-589.

Edwards, Sebastian, 2000. Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Flows, and Crisis
      Prevention. Paper presented at the NBER conference Crisis Prevention.

Edwards, Sebastian, and Susmel, Raul, 2001. Interest Rate Volatility and Contagion in
      Emerging Markets. Journal of Development Economics 66:2, 505:532.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Mody, Ashoka, 1998. What Explains Changing Spreads on
      Emerging-Market Debt: Fundamentals or Market Sentiment? NBER Working
      Paper No. W6408.

Engel, Charles, 1992. The Risk Premium and the Liquidity Premium in Foreign
       Exchange Markets. International Economic Review, 33, 871-879.

Engel, Charles, 1996. The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey
       of Recent Empirical Evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance, 3, 123-192.

Engel, Charles, 1999. On the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in Sticky-Price General
       Equilibrium Models. International Tax and Policy Finance, 491-505, and in: Isard,
       P., Razin, A., and Rose, A. (Eds.), International Finance and Financial Crises:
       Essays in Honor of Robert P. Flood, Jr., IMF and Kluwer Academic Press, 71-85.




                                           40
Evans, Lynne and Kenc, Turalay, 2001. Foreign Exchange Risk Premia in a Stochastic
       Small Open Economy Model. Mimeo, University of Durham.

Favero, Carlo, Giavazzi, Francesco, and Spaventa, Luigi, 1997. High-yields: The spread
       on German Interest Rates. Economic Journal 107:443, July, pp. 956-985.

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2001. The Foreign Exchange and Interest Rate
       Derivatives Markets Survey: Turnover in the United States. Document prepared
       for the “Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives
       Market Activity 2001” organized by the Bank for International Settlements. The
       information is available at http://www.bis.org/press/p011009.pdf and
       http://www.ny.frb.org/fxc/fxds.pdf.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1991. Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980’s, in
       Berheim, D., Shoven, J. (Eds.), National Saving and Economic Performance,
       University of Chicago Press, pp. 227-260.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1992. Measuring International Capital Mobility: A Review. American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 82:2, 197:202.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Fajnzylber, Eduardo, Schmukler, Sergio, and Servén, Luis, 2001.
       Verifying Exchange Rate Regimes. Journal of Development Economics 66:2,
       351:386.

Frenkel, Jacob, and Levich, Richard, 1977. Transaction Costs and Interest Arbitrage:
       Tranquil versus Turbulent Periods. Journal of Political Economy 85:6, pp. 1209-
       26.

Ganapolsky, Eduardo, and Schmukler, Sergio, 2001. Crisis Management in Argentina
      during the 1994-95 Mexican Crisis: How Did Markets React? World Bank
      Economists’ Forum 1, 3-30.

Garcia, Marcio, and Didier, Tatiana, 2001. Very High Interest Rates in Brazil and the
       Cousin Risks: Brazil during the Real Plan. Mimeo, Catholic University, Rio de
       Janeiro.

Giavazzi, F., and Pagano, M., 1985. Capital Controls and the European Monetary
      System, in Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange Legislation, Occasional Paper,
      Milano:Euromobiliare.

Ghosh, Atish, Gulde, Anne-Marie, and Wolf, Holger, 2000. Currency Boards: More Than
       a Quick Fix? Economic Policy 15, Issue 31.

Goldman Sachs, 1999. The Foreign Exchange Market. GS Financial Workbench,
      www.gs.com.

Hakkio, Craig and Siebert, Anne, 1995. The Foreign Exchange Premium: Is It Real?
      Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27.


                                         41
Hausmann, Ricardo, 2001. After 10 Years of Convertibility: Should Argentina Move to
     Greener Pastures? Paper prepared for the conference on the 10th Anniversary of
     the Convertibility Law, Harvard University.

Herrera, Luis, and Valdés, Rodrigo, 2001. The Effect of Capital Controls on Interest Rate
       Differentials. Journal of International Economics 53:2, pp. 385-398.

Hodrick, Robert, 1987. The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and
      Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, in Lesourne, J. and Sonnenschein, H. (Eds.),
      Fundamentals of Pure and Applied Economics, Harwood Academic Publishers,
      Vol. 24.

Kamin, Steven, and von Kleist, Karsten, 1999. The Evolution and Determinants of
      Emerging Market Credit Spreads in the 1990s. International Finance Discussion
      Paper 1999-653, Federal Reserve Board.

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Schmukler, Sergio, 2001. Emerging Markets Instability: Do
      Sovereign Ratings Affect Country Risk and Stock Returns? World Bank Policy
      Research Working Paper 2678.

Kumhof, Michael, 2000. International Capital Mobility in Emerging Markets: New
     Evidence from Daily Data. Mimeo Stanford University.

Kwan, Yum, and Lui, Francis, 1996. Hong Kong’s Currency Board and Changing
      Monetary Regimes. NBER Working Paper No. 5723.

Lewis, Karen, 1995. Puzzles in International Financial Markets, in: Grossman, G.,
       Rogoff, K., (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics 3, 1913-71, Elsevier,
       North-Holland.

Mauro, Paolo, Sussman, Nathan, and Yafeh, Yishay, 2002. Emerging Market Spreads:
      Then versus Now. Forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Merrick, John, 2001. Crisis Dynamics of Implied Default Recovery Ratios: Evidence
       from Russia and Argentina. Journal of Banking and Finance, 25:10, October,
       pages 1921-1939.

McCormick, Frank, 1979. Covered Interest Arbitrage: Unexploited Profits? Comment.
     Journal of Political Economy 87:2, pp. 411-417.

Nelson, D., 1991. Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach.
       Econometrica 59, 347-371.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1995. International Capital Mobility in the 1990s, in Kenen P. (Ed.),
       Understanding Interdependence: The Macroeconomics of the Open Economy,
       Princeton University Press.




                                           42
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Taylor, Alan, 1997. Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market
       Arbitrage and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited. Journal of
       the Japanese and International Economies 11:4, 441-479.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Rogoff, Kenneth, 1998. Risk and Exchange Rates. NBER
       Working Paper 6694.

Pagan, A. and Schwert, G., 1990. Alternative Models for Conditional Stock Volatility.
       Journal of Econometrics 45:1-2, 267-90.

Prakash, Gauri, and Taylor, Alan, 1997. Measuring Market Integration: A Model of
       Arbitrage with an Econometric Application to the Gold Standard, 1879-1913.
       NBER Working Paper 6073.

Rivera Batiz, Luis, and Sy, Amadou, 2000. Currency Boards, Credibility, and
      Macroeconomic Behavior. International Monetary Fund Working Paper 00/97.

Rigobon, Roberto, 2002. The Curse of Non-investment Grade Countries. NBER Working
      Paper 8706.

Schmukler, Sergio, and Servén, Luis, 2002. Pricing Currency Risk: Facts and Puzzles
     from Currency Boards. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2815.

Siebert, Anne, 1996. Unconventional Preferences: Do They Explain Foreign Exchange
        Risk Premia? Journal of International, Money, and Finance 15.

Sturzenegger, Federico, and Powell, Andrew, 2000. Dollarization: The Link between
       Devaluation Risk and Default Risk. Mimeo, Universidad Di Tella.

Svenson, Lars, 1991. The Term Structure of Interest Rate Differentials in a Target Zone:
      Theory and Swedish Data, Journal of Monetary Economics 28: 87-116.

Taylor, Mark, and Peel, David, 2000. Nonlinear Adjustment, Long-Run Equilibrium, and
       Exchange Rate Fundamentals. Journal of International Money and Finance, 19,
       33-53.

Taylor, Mark, Peel, David, and Sarno, Lucio, 2001. Nonlinear Mean Reversion in Real
       Exchange Rates: Towards a Solution to the Purchasing Power Parity Puzzles.
       CEPR Working Paper 2658.

Wolf, C., 1987. Forward Foreign Exchange Rates, Expected Spot Rates, and Premia: A
       Signal-Extraction Approach. Journal of Finance 42:2, pp. 395-406.




                                          43
Appendix: The cross-market currency premium differential

           This appendix investigates the differences in the currency premium across

instruments in the case of Argentina. Specifically, we study deviations from the strict

version of covered interest parity, as reflected by the difference between the currency

premium implied by the NDF and that implied by interbank offer (or lending) interest

rates. The interbank market is the most liquid onshore/domestic money market.

           We first analyze the different factors behind the cross-market currency premium

differential. Specifically, we consider transaction costs and default risk as potential

explanations for the failure of covered interest parity. Then we look for evidence of

unexploited arbitrage opportunities, by assessing the speed of convergence of the cross-

market differential to non-arbitrage levels.



A.I Transaction costs and the cross-market currency premium differential

           In a world of perfectly integrated markets with no restrictions on capital

movements, covered arbitrage would equalize the discount in the forward market with the

currency premium implied by interest rates. However, the textbook case of covered

interest parity ignores various types of transaction costs that tend to segment the markets.

A large empirical literature, originated in the 1970s and 1980s, focuses on testing covered

interest parity after taking into account such transaction costs, and examines alternative

ways to perform arbitrage.30


30
     Much of this literature focuses on identifying “neutral” bands taking into account various transactions
      costs involved in arbitrage operations. For example, Frenkel and Levich (1977) consider: (i) costs of
      selling (buying) a domestic security; (ii) costs of buying (selling) spot the foreign currency; (iii) costs
      of buying (selling) a foreign security; and (iv) the transactions costs of forward coverage. In addition,
      other papers (e.g., Blenman 1991) consider differentials between borrowing and lending rates and
      introduce heterogeneous arbitrageurs. Some researchers have used offshore Euromarket rates for these


                                                       44
          Here we consider three different arbitrage scenarios. The first one assumes that

the arbitrageur has “own” funds. In such case, she will simply compare the currency

premium in the foreign exchange rate market and in the money market. The second and

third scenarios assume that the arbitrageur does not have funds, and hence she needs to

borrow in one currency and lend in the other currency to perform the arbitrage. In this

case, the relevant deposit and lending rates need to be considered.

          It is important to note that, in each case, there is some risk involved, so there is no

pure arbitrage in a strict sense – gains can be realized but at the expense of taking some

risks. These have received only limited attention in the literature, however, and thus in

each of the scenarios below we highlight the specific risks involved.31

          Case 1. Arbitrageur with funds

          If the arbitrageur has funds invested in the domestic banking sector, she will

compare the differential in interbank rates with the forward discount. If the forward

discount is greater than the interest rate differential, investors with peso assets will switch

their investment to dollar assets and buy pesos in the forward market. If the forward

discount is smaller than the interest rate differential, investors with dollar assets will

switch their investment to peso assets and buy dollars in the forward market. If the

arbitrageur is a financial institution, the relevant rates are lending rates. Otherwise, the

relevant rates are deposit rates. A similar analysis can be performed from the borrowers’

side. Hence arbitrage yields two covered parity conditions – one for deposit rates and

another for lending rates


       tests, in addition to the more commonly used onshore domestic currency rates. See also Clinton
       (1988).
31
     In all three cases we assume that the bid-ask spread in the forward market is negligible. If the spread
       were significantly different from zero, the parity conditions would need modification to reflect it.


                                                     45
                          (ilending
                            t ,k      − itlending
                                           ,k    ),*
                                                                (
                                                     = fd t ,k = itdeposit
                                                                   ,k          ,k   )
                                                                           − itdeposit ,*
                                                                                          . (A1)

Thus, if arbitrageurs possessed sufficient funds, they would equalize currency premia in

all three markets.

         Note that this arbitrage might not be risk free, since loans and deposits may be

subject to default risk. In particular, borrowers might be more likely to repay loans in one

currency – typically the local currency – than in the other, as already noted in Section II

above.

         Case 2. Arbitrageur without funds: borrow and deposit in the same (domestic)

market.

         The arbitrage in Case 1 might fail to equalize the currency premium across

markets if arbitrageurs lack sufficient funds, since in general they may not be able to

short deposits. In such case, an alternative form of arbitrage may be possible. If the

currency premium in the forward market is greater than the one implied by interest rates,

the arbitrageur takes a peso loan at the interest rate itlending
                                                          ,k     , sells pesos spot and deposits

the resulting dollar amount in the domestic market at the rate itdeposit
                                                                 ,k
                                                                         ,*
                                                                            . To cover the

position, the arbitrageur buys pesos in the forward market. In the opposite case, if the

currency premium in the forward market is smaller than that implied by interest rates, the

arbitrageur does the reverse operation. She borrows in dollars and makes a deposit in

pesos, buying dollars in the forward market. According to this type of arbitrage, the

forward discount lies between two bands

                     (1i 442
                       t ,k−i
                       lending
                             443
                                )≥ deposit ,*
                                  t ,k                    (
                                                 fd t ,k ≥ itdeposit
                                                           1,k442t4       ,k  )
                                                                     − i lending
                                                                             43
                                                                                 ,*
                                                                                    . (A2)
                        upper band                            lower band




                                                       46
        This arbitrage might entail some risk as well, because the arbitrageur deposits the

loan in the domestic financial system. If the domestic bank fails, the arbitrageur may still

be liable for the loan she took, even though the bank does not return her deposit. The

arbitrage in Case 3 avoids in part this risk.

        Case 3. Arbitrageur without funds: borrow in one market and deposit in the other

market.

        The arbitrage in this case is similar to the one in Case 2, but the arbitrageur

deposits the dollar value of the peso loan in the offshore market when the currency

premium in the forward market is greater than the one implied by interest rates. In the

opposite case, when the forward discount is smaller than the currency premium implied

by interest rates, the arbitrageur borrows in the offshore market and makes a deposit in a

domestic bank. This type of arbitrage implies that the forward discount lies within two

bands

             (1i 44−424i 443) ≥
               lending
               t ,k
                         offshore deposit ,* f
                                  t ,k           fd t ,k ≥ (itdeposit − offshore i lending
                                                           1,k44424t ,4              k
                                                                                        43
                                                                                           ,* f
                                                                                                ).   (A3)
                    upper band                                     lower band

        If offshore deposits are less risky than onshore deposits arbitrage will probably

take place when the forward discount is larger than the upper band, since this arbitrage

involves relatively little risk. In contrast, when the forward discount is below the lower

band arbitrage might not take place, because the arbitrageur would have to bear the

differential risk of the onshore bank. The arbitrageur would need to contract a liability in

the offshore market and absorb the onshore risk.




                                                           47
A.II Default risk and the cross-market currency premium differential

           Even onshore instruments issued by the same borrower in different currencies

may pose different default risks – e.g., default probabilities and/or recovery ratios in the

event of default may differ systematically across assets depending on their currency of

denomination. In such case, the onshore interest differential (10) would equal the forward

premium plus another term (positive or negative) reflecting the different default

characteristics of domestic- and foreign-currency denominated instruments.32

           As an example, consider the case in which domestic debtors default with

probability 1-α (respectively, 1-α*) on their domestic- (foreign-) currency one-period

liabilities, whose respective gross yields are Rt,1 and R*t,1 , and assume that in the event of

default the corresponding recovery values are θRt,1 and θ*R*t,1, where θ, θ* < 1. Risk-

neutral speculation across the two assets, using the forward market,33 can be shown to

imply

                                            (1 − α )(θ − θ * ) (α − α * )(1 − α * ) 
             (it ,1 − i ) = fd t ,1 − ln 1 + *
                     *
                                                                + *
                                                                 α + (1 − α * )θ * 
                                                                                       .    (A4)
                                          α + (1 − α )θ
                     t ,1                                *    *




           Comparing this expression with (10) above, it is immediately apparent that

covered interest parity fails to hold except if α=α* and θ=θ*, i.e., when default

probabilities and recovery ratios are identical across assets. Otherwise, the observed

interest rate differential falls short of the forward premium if domestic-currency assets

32
     Note also that forward exchange contracts themselves may not be free of counterparty default risk; see
       Hodrick (1987). As discussed in the text, this risk is considerably smaller in the case of the non-
       deliverable forward contracts, which we use in our empirical work here, than in the case of outright
       forward contracts.
33
     Note that in this case forward arbitrage is not risk-free anymore due to the existence of default risk –
       even though it is free of exchange rate risk.


                                                      48
entail a lower probability of default (α >α*) and/or a higher recovery ratio (θ > θ*) than

foreign-currency assets. If the reverse is true, then the observed interest rate differential

exceeds the forward premium.34



A.III Unexploited arbitrage opportunities?

           We next review in more detail how different markets price currency risk. First we

assess whether the evidence from Argentina seems consistent with no-arbitrage

opportunities. To do this, Appendix Figure 1 displays three charts. The top panel plots the

1-month forward discount along with the currency premium derived from 1-month

lending and deposit rates. The middle panel plots the forward discount along with the

upper and lower bands described in equation (A2), while the bottom panel uses the bands

displayed in equation (A3).

           The top panel shows that the forward discount differs from the currency premium

derived from interbank rates. For most of the sample the two measures are roughly

similar, but in many instances the forward discount is significantly different from the

interbank market currency premium. This is especially the case during turbulent times

and at the end of the sample, when the forward discount become considerably larger than

the currency premium derived from interbank rates. The forward discount has very few

values below the interbank currency premium.

           A similar picture is displayed in the middle and lower panels of Appendix Figure

1, corresponding to Cases 2 and 3 above. In these panels the forward discount lies for the

most part within the no-arbitrage bands. But in some observations, particularly at the end


34
     On this point, see also Broda and Levy Yeyati (2001).



                                                     49
of the sample, the forward discount jumps above the upper band. As we shall discuss

below, these are not just one-day events. The lower panel uses offshore deposit and

lending rates. Relative to the middle panel, the bands shift upward because country risk is

not present in the offshore rates. These rates are lower than domestic interbank rates, so

the differential shrinks. Despite the upward shift in the band, the forward discount still

lies above the band during crisis times. But in this case there exist a few observations in

which the forward discount lies below the lower band.

           Does this evidence imply that arbitrage opportunities exist? The answer is just

maybe. There are three alternative explanations for the evidence found; we have already

mentioned two of them.35 One explanation is that in fact there are unexploited arbitrage

opportunities in the short run and, thus, covered interest parity fails to hold. The currency

premium derived from the exchange market is significantly different from the one

derived from the money market, and is larger than any existing transaction costs. For

some reason, arbitrage does not take place.36

           A second possible explanation is that unobserved transaction costs – aside from

the spread between lending and borrowing rates considered above – are large enough to

rule out profitable arbitrage opportunities. However, this argument does not explain why


35
     In fact, there is a fourth explanation, which claims that data might not be well aligned by time of day.
        This can generate differences across markets, as shown by McCormick (1979). In our case, we use
        closing daily data, which in terms of trading hours are reasonably aligned. The trading hours in
        Buenos Aires are the same as those in New York, while trading hours in Hong Kong are similar to
        those in other financial centers in Asia. Given the regularities found in the data for both Argentina and
        Hong Kong, we believe that lack of perfect data alignment is not the reason behind the cross-market
        differences. We thank Maury Obstfeld for raising this point.
36
     Informal evidence gathered from market participants suggests that at times of turbulence, when the
       forward premium becomes quite large, domestic banks refrain from getting involved in short-term
       arbitrage operations and prefer to “stay liquid.” While this is consistent with the opening of a gap
       between the interbank and forward currency premia, the precise reasons for this decision are not
       known to us.



                                                       50
the different markets exhibit systematically different currency premia. The cross-market

differentials might reflect the action of heterogeneous agents, endowed with different

expectations, in the various markets. In this case, the cross-market differential will lie

within bounds determined by the magnitude of these unspecified transaction costs,

similarly to (A2) and (A3) above.

           In the case of Argentina, however, there were no obvious transaction costs to

support this explanation. There were no restrictions on capital movements, and local

residents could operate in the local and foreign markets without being taxed on interest,

dividend, or capital gains.37 Yet the fact that currency premia was not equal across

markets suggests that other types of transaction costs or market imperfections leading to

market segmentation could be responsible for our findings. For example, there could be

large bid-ask spreads unknown to us in the forward market,38 or it might not be possible

to perform transactions at quoted prices. In view of the large volume of transactions in

the NDF market, however, this explanation does not seem plausible.

           A third possible explanation for our findings is that the differences in currency

premia reflect in fact differences in other risks across markets. In other words, the

measures of the currency premium that we (and the rest of the literature) use embed other

types of risks and do not solely measure “currency risk.” In such case, the cross-market

currency premium differential could reflect default risk. Specifically, borrowers or banks

37
     In April 2001 a small transaction tax of 0.2 percent was imposed on some financial transactions in
       Argentina, what could not explain the large differentials in the sample found before and after that
       date. In countries with substantial explicit costs, like capital controls, there is a wedge between local
       and foreign rates, as shown by Herrera and Valdés (2001) for the case of Chile.
38
     Data on bid-ask spreads from NDFs are not available. However, we were able to obtain data on bid-ask
       spreads from the peso spot market. The maximum annualized spread from this market is 240 basis
       points between January 1995 and December 1998. Unless spreads on NDFs are much larger than




                                                       51
might be more likely to default on dollar loans and deposits than on peso contracts.39 As a

result, the forward discount would exceed the peso-dollar interest differential by a default

premium along the lines of equation (A4) in the text.40

           This factor might have been at work in Argentina, to the extent that depositors

(creditors) could have perceived ex-ante the possibility of a partial confiscation of dollar

deposits (respectively, loans) in the event of a devaluation, through their forced

conversion in pesos at an artificial rate – as it actually happened ex-post with loans in the

2001 crisis – or through some other form of differential treatment of peso and dollar

assets – as it did in fact happen with deposits.

           In sum, at one extreme the discrepancy between the forward discount and the

currency premium derived from interbank rates might reflect divergent expectations that

are not or cannot be arbitraged away. At the other extreme, the discrepancy might reflect

the perceived default risks in the interbank market. Transaction costs might also play a

role. Of course, it is also possible that all three factors are simultaneously behind the

cross-market differentials. It is difficult to disentangle these alternative explanations

without much more detailed information on market transactions.




       those on spot transactions, they will be unable to explain the observed cross-market differences. We
       thank Amadou Sy for generously providing us the data.
39
     Collin-Dufresne and Solnik (2001) describe a similar case for the swap and LIBOR markets.
40
     The same result would be obtained if default probabilities were the same for dollar and peso deposits but
       a government bailout was less likely on the former than the latter – so that their anticipated recovery
       values differ. An alternative, but related, argument would resort to systematic differences in default
       risks between domestic banks operating in dollars and those operating in pesos. In Argentina,
       however, virtually all banks used to borrow and lend in both currencies.



                                                      52
A.IV Convergence of the cross-market currency premium differential

       Though we cannot determine exactly the source of the spread between the

forward discount and the interbank currency premium, it is still interesting to study its

behavior, as it provides information about the differential behavior of both markets.

Formally, we define the spread between the forward and the interbank market as follows

                                δ t ,k = fd t ,k − (it ,k − it*,k ) .   (A5)

These interbank rates can be either lending or deposit rates. Here we shall work with

lending rates, since they display much more variability than deposit rates (see Figure 2 in

the text) and hence their behavior resembles more closely that of the NDF premium.

       The literature on covered interest parity has employed two main approaches to

analyzing this spread. The first one simply takes the observed deviations from covered

interest parity and assesses whether they frequently exceed what would be justified by

transaction costs. The second approach performs unit root tests on the covered interest

differential to determine whether non-stationarity can be rejected; failure to reject non-

stationarity implies that the covered differential persists indefinitely and thus covered

interest parity fails to hold. Still, even if non-stationarity is rejected the covered

differential may converge very slowly to its mean, reflecting persistent (albeit not

permanent) failures of covered interest parity.

       In our case, we take the case most favorable to covered interest parity – namely

that in which the arbitrageurs have no funds (Cases 2 and 3 above). We also work with

the onshore rates used in the strict form of covered interest parity described in Section II.

We then examine the behavior of the forward discount relative to the no-arbitrage band

defined by borrowing and lending rates, using the band displayed in the middle panel of



                                                   53
Appendix Figure 1. For those observations where the forward discount lies above the

band, we examine the dynamics of the differential between the forward discount and the

upper band. For the observations inside the band, we study the dynamics of the forward

discount.41

           This approach is in the spirit of the threshold autoregression (TAR) models used

to study arbitrage in goods and assets markets.42 These models typically need to estimate

the “commodity points” or thresholds of no arbitrage. In our case, however, the problem

is simpler because the thresholds are known, and given by the no-arbitrage bands in

Figure A1. Therefore, we estimate the following model:

            (
        ∆ fd t ,k − B t ,k   )                    (               )
                                   = c out + λout fd t −1,k − B t ,k + ε tout
                                                                          ,k    if   fd t ,k > B t ,k
                                                                                                     ,   (A6)
         ∆fd t ,k                = c + λ fd t −1,k + ε t ,k
                                       in    in              in
                                                                                if   fd t ,k ≤ B t ,k

where B t ,k is the upper band (itlending
                                   ,k     − itdeposit
                                              ,k
                                                      ,*
                                                         ). Note that the mean and the speed of
adjustment, as well as the variance of the disturbance, are allowed to differ across

equations. Our primary concern is to assess the speed of adjustment λ both within and

outside the band.

           The top panel of Appendix Table 1 shows the number of observations for which

the forward discount lies outside and inside the no-arbitrage band. Around 30 percent of

the observations are above the no-arbitrage bands (220 observations). The histogram

displayed in the table shows the distribution of observations relative to the upper band.

Negative numbers represent observations below the upper band, while positive numbers



41
     Since we have no observations below the lower band, we ignore this case.
42
     These models have been used to examine issues such as the validity of purchasing power parity, or the
       extent of arbitrage under the gold standard. See for example, Obstfeld and Taylor (1997), Prakash and
       Taylor (1997), Taylor and Peel (2000), and Taylor, Peel, and Sarno (2001).



                                                              54
are observations above the band. The histogram shows that the observations above the

band can take very large values – their median exceeds 1,000 basis points.

       The bottom of Appendix Table 1 reports the results from estimating the TAR

model. Since the observations above the upper band clearly become more abundant in the

latter part of the sample, we perform the estimation on two different samples: the full

sample of available data, and a subsample ending at the time of the cut in international

financing (early July 2001).

       For the observations outside the band we can reject nonstationarity of the

dependent variable. The estimates reflect reversion to the mean. Interestingly, for the

observations inside the band we cannot reject nonstationarity. The speed of adjustment to

the mean appears to have declined dramatically after the cut in international lending of

July 2001. This is particularly evident from the half-life of the differential [calculated as

ln(0.5) ln(1 + λ ) ] outside the band, which is one and a half day in the restricted sample

and nearly five days in the full sample. Hence, departures from the arbitrage band appear

to have become much more lasting – indeed, much more lasting than should be expected

under perfect arbitrage.

       To conclude, we document the main features of the cross-market currency

premium differential, as a reflection of unspecified heterogeneity across markets rather

than specifically as a potential failure of covered arbitrage. Appendix Figure 2 plots the

1-month forward-interbank spread δ t ,k , while Appendix Table 2 displays summary

statistics of the spread for the 1- and 12-month maturities. The spread is on average

positive, particularly for the 1-month maturity. But the mean is affected by large positive

values reaching as high as 11,000 basis points during the 2001 crisis. The distribution is



                                             55
skewed to the right, so that the median is smaller than the mean, but still positive. It is

noteworthy that all the large values take place during crisis times. In tranquil times, the

cross-market difference is also positive but smaller. The differential takes on only a few

negative numbers, reaching at most –200 basis points.




                                            56
                                                                                                       Figure 1
                                                                                         Currency Premia under Currency Boards
The figure shows daily values of currency premia in Argentina (top panel) and Hong Kong (lower panel). The currency premium for Argentina is
calculated as the spread of local peso time deposit rates over local U.S. dollar interbank deposit rates, with maturities up to two months. The currency
premium for Hong Kong is computed from the forward discount -- the forward exchange rate minus the spot exchange rate, using 1-month contracts. The
sample for Argentina covers the period 4/1/93 - 9/25/01, for Hong Kong it covers the period 1/4/93 - 9/25/01. All rates are in basis points, annualized, and
continuously compounded.


                                                                                     Currency Risk Premium from Argentina's Time Deposit Rates
2,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cut of international credit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Financial Times article and elections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Devaluation of the Brazilian real
1,600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Attack on the Hong Kong dollar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Changes of finance minister
                                                                                                                Domingo Cavallo steps down




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vice president resigns
                                                        Mexican crisis




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Russia's default
1,200



 800



 400



   0
        1/4/1993


                    7/4/1993


                                1/4/1994


                                            7/4/1994


                                                                     1/4/1995


                                                                                        7/4/1995


                                                                                                    1/4/1996


                                                                                                                                7/4/1996


                                                                                                                                                                                1/4/1997


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7/4/1997


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/4/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7/4/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/4/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7/4/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/4/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7/4/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/4/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7/4/2001
                                                                                     Currency Risk Premium from Hong Kong's Forward Exchange Rates
3,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1st Attack on the Hong Kong dollar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4rd Attack
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2nd Attack
                                                                                                                                                                                                Attack on the Thai baht




2,500
                                                                                                                                                 Financial distress in South Korea




2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3rd Attack
                                                         Mexican crisis




1,500


1,000


 500


    0


 -500
         1/4/1993


                     7/4/1993


                                 1/4/1994


                                             7/4/1994


                                                                          1/4/1995


                                                                                         7/4/1995


                                                                                                     1/4/1996


                                                                                                                                      7/4/1996


                                                                                                                                                                                     1/4/1997


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7/4/1997


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/4/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7/4/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/4/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7/4/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/4/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7/4/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/4/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7/4/2001
                                                              Table 1
                                       History of Currency Premia in Argentina and Hong Kong
                                                         Summary Statistics
The table shows summary statistics of daily data on the currency premium in Argentina and Hong Kong for different samples. The currency premium for
Argentina is calculated as the spread of local peso time deposit rates over local U.S. dollar interbank deposit rates, with maturities up to two months. The
currency premium for Hong Kong is computed from the 1-month forward discount. The crisis periods for Argentina are the following: (i) Mexican crisis, (ii)
attack on the Hong Kong dollar, (iii) Russia's default, (iv) devaluation of the Brazilian real, (v) Financial Times article and presidential elections, (vi) vice
president resigns, (vii) changes of finance minister, and (viii) cut of international credit. The crisis periods for Hong Kong are: (i) the Mexican crisis, (ii) the
financial distress in S. Korea, (iii) the attacks on the Thai baht and the four attacks on the Hong Kong dollar. See text for a description of the events. All rates
are in basis points, annualized, and continuously compounded.

                                                                                    Number of                             Standard
                                                                  Dates                              Mean Median                           Min         Max
                                                                                   Observations                           Deviation
  Argentina
  Time Deposit Rates (deposits up to two months)
    Total                                       04/01/93 - 06/05/01                    2,121          211        148          204             1        1,986
    Tranquil Periods (after the Mexican Crisis)                                        1,228          126         98           97             1         812
    Crisis Periods                                                                      446           383        252          333            25        1,986
      Mexican crisis                            01/10/95 - 04/10/95                      63           603        520          243           264        1,316
      Attack on the Hong Kong dollar            10/29/97 - 11/26/97                     21            223        223          90             83         393
      Russia's default                          08/19/98 - 10/16/98                      42           201        193           69            65         405
      Devaluation of the Brazilian real         01/13/99 - 02/12/99                      23           210        206           56            97         315
      Financial Times article and elections     05/17/99 - 12/17/99                     149           186        155           74            88         397
      Vice president resigns                    10/06/00 - 12/29/00                     56            216        220          90            25          397
      Changes of finance minister               03/16/01 - 05/18/01                      38           548        480          252           202        1,308
      Cut of international credit               07/10/01 - 09/25/01                      54          1,005       940          359           441        1,986
  Hong Kong
  Forward Rates
  Total                                         01/04/93 - 06/05/01                    2,240           58         12          165          -111        2,840
    Tranquil Periods                                                                   1,908           15          6           53          -111         325
    Crisis Periods                                                                      332           301        217          313           -47        2,840
      Mexican crisis                            01/10/95 - 04/10/95                     62             73         38          106           -47         341
      Early signs of financial distress         01/27/97 - 02/21/97                      19            50          9          112           -19         376
      Attack on the Thai Baht                    05/14/97 - 7/24/97                      51           182        101          163            23         621
      1st Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        08/15/97 - 12/15/97                     87            386        225          398           70         2,840
      2nd Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        01/05/98 - 02/04/98                     22            598        491          293          147         1,165
      3rd Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        05/27/98 - 07/06/98                     29            418        348          205          212         1,119
      4th Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        07/10/98 - 10/06/98                     62            426        306          272          178         1,309
                                                           Table 2
                                     Maximum Implied Devaluation in Argentina and Hong Kong


The table shows the maximum devaluation implied by the currency premium in Argentina and Hong Kong, for different probabilities of devaluation and
different sample periods. Under risk neutrality, the currency premium is equal to the probability of devaluation times the size of the devaluation. Therefore, the
maximum implied devaluation is obtained by dividing the maximum currency premium observed in each sample period by the assumed probability of
devaluation. The currency premium for Argentina is calculated as the spread of local peso time deposit rates over local U.S. dollar interbank deposit rates, with
maturities up to two months. The currency premium for Hong Kong is calculated with the 1-month forward discount.
The crisis periods for Argentina are the following: (i) Mexican crisis, (ii) attack on the Hong Kong dollar, (iii) Russia's default, (iv) devaluation of the
Brazilian real, (v) Financial Times article and presidential elections, (vi) vice president resigns, (vii) changes of finance minister, and (viii) cut of international
credit. The crisis periods for Hong-Kong are: (i) the Mexican crisis, (ii) the financial distress in Korea, (iii) the attacks on the Thai baht and the four attacks on
the Hong Kong dollar. See text for a description of all the events. All rates are in basis points, annualized, and continuously compounded.

                                                       Dates                                  10%            25%            50%           75%            90%
  Argentina
  Time Deposit Rates (deposits up to two months)
    Total                                       04/01/93 - 06/05/01                          19,861         7,944          3,972          2,648         2,207
    Tranquil Periods (after the Mexican Crisis)                                               8,122         3,249          1,624          1,083          902
    Crisis Periods                                                                           19,861         7,944          3,972          2,648         2,207
      Mexican crisis                            01/10/95 - 04/10/95                          13,165         5,266          2,633          1,755         1,463
      Attack on the Hong Kong dollar            10/29/97 - 11/26/97                          3,934          1,574           787            525           437
      Russia's default                          08/19/98 - 10/16/98                           4,052         1,621           810            540           450
      Devaluation of the Brazilian real         01/13/99 - 02/12/99                           3,146         1,258           629            419           350
      Financial Times article and elections     05/17/99 - 12/17/99                           3,968         1,587           794            529           441
      Vice president resigns                    10/06/00 - 12/29/00                           3,974         1,590           795            530           442
      Changes of finance minister               03/16/01 - 05/18/01                          13,078         5,231          2,616          1,744         1,453
      Cut of international credit               07/10/01 - 09/25/01                          19,861         7,944          3,972          2,648         2,207
  Hong Kong
  Forward Rates
  Total                                         01/04/93 - 06/05/01                          28,398         11,359         5,680          3,786         3,155
    Tranquil Periods                                                                          3,252          1,301          650            434           361
    Crisis Periods                                                                           28,398         11,359         5,680          3,786         3,155
      Mexican crisis                            01/10/95 - 04/10/95                           3,409          1,364          682            455           379
      Early signs of financial distress         01/27/97 - 02/21/97                           3,760          1,504          752            501           418
      Attack on the Thai Baht                    05/14/97 - 7/24/97                           6,213          2,485         1,243           828           690
      1st Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        08/15/97 - 12/15/97                          28,398         11,359         5,680          3,786         3,155
      2nd Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        01/05/98 - 02/04/98                          11,651          4,660         2,330          1,553         1,295
      3rd Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        05/27/98 - 07/06/98                          11,187          4,475         2,237          1,492         1,243
      4th Attack on the Hong Kong dollar        07/10/98 - 10/06/98                          13,090          5,236         2,618          1,745         1,454
                                                                                                                      Figure 2
                                                                                                    Alternative Measures of the Currency Premium
The figure shows different measures of the currency premium for Argentina and Hong Kong, using daily 1-month interest rate premia and 1-month
forward exchange rate discounts. The interest rates used for Argentina include the interbank offer rate (BAIBOR), the interbank deposit rate index
or money market index (MMR) consisting of rates paid on deposits of more than one million pesos or U.S. dollars, and the time deposit rate for
deposits up to one million pesos or U.S. dollars. Both the BAIBOR and the MMR are from Bloomberg and the time deposit rates were obtained
from the Central Bank of Argentina. For each type of rate, the currency premium for Argentina is measured by the difference between the rate
denominated in domestic currency and that in U.S. dollars. The forward exchange rates for Argentina are non-deliverable forward (NDF) rates and
the NDF currency premium is measured by the forward discount. NDF forward rates are from two sources: Deutsche Bank and Bloomberg.
The interest rates used for Hong Kong are interbank offer rates (HIBOR), obtained from the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. The premium is
computed over the U.S.-dollar LIBOR. The forward rates used for Hong Kong are from Bloomberg and correspond to deliverable contracts. All the
rates are annualized, in basis points, and continuously compounded.

                                                                                                                                                                                  Argentina
                                                    Interbank Offer Rates Premium                                                                                                                                                              Interbank Deposit Rates Premium
  6,000                                                                                                                                                                                       6,000

  5,000                                                                                                                                                                                       5,000

  4,000                                                                                                                                                                                       4,000

  3,000                                                                                                                                                                                       3,000

  2,000                                                                                                                                                                                       2,000

  1,000                                                                                                                                                                                       1,000

      0                                                                                                                                                                                           0
          4/1/1993

                        12/1/1993

                                       8/1/1994

                                                     4/1/1995

                                                                 12/1/1995

                                                                              8/1/1996

                                                                                         4/1/1997

                                                                                                       12/1/1997

                                                                                                                     8/1/1998

                                                                                                                                   4/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                  12/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                  8/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                  4/1/2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                       4/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8/1/1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8/1/1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/1/2001
                                                     Time Deposit Rates Premium                                                                                                                                                            Non-Deliverable Forward Discount
  6,000                                                                                                                                                                                      16,000

  5,000                                                                                                                                                                                      14,000
                                                                                                                                                                                             12,000
  4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                             10,000
  3,000                                                                                                                                                                                       8,000

  2,000                                                                                                                                                                                       6,000
                                                                                                                                                                                              4,000
  1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                              2,000
      0                                                                                                                                                                                          0
          4/1/1993

                        12/1/1993

                                       8/1/1994

                                                     4/1/1995

                                                                 12/1/1995

                                                                              8/1/1996

                                                                                         4/1/1997

                                                                                                      12/1/1997

                                                                                                                    8/1/1998

                                                                                                                                  4/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                 12/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                 8/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                 4/1/2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                      4/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8/1/1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8/1/1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4/1/2001




                                                                                                                                                                             Hong Kong
                                                        Interbank Offer Rates Premium                                                                                                                                                         Deliverable Forward Discount
   3,000                                                                                                                                                                                      3,000

   2,500                                                                                                                                                                                      2,500

   2,000                                                                                                                                                                                      2,000

   1,500                                                                                                                                                                                      1,500

   1,000                                                                                                                                                                                      1,000

     500
                                                                                                                                                                                               500
       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
    -500
                                                                                                                                                                                               -500
             4/1/1993

                           12/1/1993

                                         8/1/1994

                                                      4/1/1995

                                                                  12/1/1995

                                                                              8/1/1996

                                                                                         4/1/1997

                                                                                                     12/1/1997

                                                                                                                   8/1/1998

                                                                                                                                4/1/1999

                                                                                                                                              12/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                              8/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                             4/1/2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                      4/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12/1/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8/1/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12/1/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8/1/1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12/1/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8/1/1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12/1/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8/1/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4/1/2001
                                                           Table 3
                                        Alternative Measures of the Currency Premium
                                                     Summary Statistics


The table shows summary statistics for different measures of the currency premium for Argentina and Hong Kong, using daily 1-month interest rates
and 1-month forward exchange rate discounts from 9/9/98 to 9/25/01 for Argentina and 1/4/93 to 9/25/01 for Hong Kong. The differences in the
number of observations are due to missing values. The interest rates used for Argentina include the interbank offer rate (BAIBOR), the interbank
deposit rate index or money market index (MMR) consisting of rates paid on deposits of more than one million pesos or U.S. dollars, and the time
deposit rate for deposits up to one million pesos or U.S. dollars. Both the BAIBOR and the MMR are from Bloomberg and the time deposit rates were
obtained from the Central Bank of Argentina. For each type of rate, the currency premium for Argentina is measured by the difference between the rate
denominated in domestic currency and that in U.S. dollars. The forward exchange rates for Argentina are non-deliverable forward (NDF) rates and the
NDF currency premium is measured by the forward discount. NDF forward rates are from two sources: Deutsche Bank and Bloomberg.
The interest rates used for Hong Kong are interbank offer rates (HIBOR), obtained from the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. The premium is
computed over the U.S.-dollar LIBOR. The forward rates used for Hong Kong are obtained from Bloomberg and correspond to deliverable contracts.
All the rates are annualized, in percentages, and continuously compounded.

                                                                    Argentina
                                              Number of                                                 Standard
                                                                    Mean               Median                               Min         Max
                                             Observations                                               Deviation
    Argentina
     Interbank Offer Rates                         720                318                  144              487              29         5,217
     Time Deposit Rates                            726                214                  126              271              -4         2,067
     Interbank Deposit Rates                       704                206                   93              312               0         2,305
     Non-Deliverable Forward Rates                 737                857                  228             1,772             42        14,726
    Hong Kong
     Interbank Offer Rates                        2,090               39                   1                150             -115        3,336
     Deliverable Forward Rates                    2,240               58                   12               165             -111        2,840
                                                                            Correlations

                                            Interbank Offer     Time Deposit        Interbank    Non-Deliverable
                                                 Rates             Rates           Deposit Rates Forward Rates

       Interbank Offer Rates                        1
       Time Deposit Rates                         0.83                 1
       Interbank Deposit Rates                    0.89               0.78                    1
       Non-Deliverable Forward Rates              0.91               0.82                  0.85              1
                                            Interbank Offer  Deliverable
                                                 Rates      Forward Rates
       Interbank Offer Rates                        1
       Deliverable Forward Rates                  0.94                 1
                                                                                                                                                               Figure 3
                                                                                                                                                   Term Structure of Currency Premia

The figure shows the term premium of currency premia in Argentina (top panel) and Hong Kong (bottom panel), calculated as the difference
between the 12-month and the 1-month currency premium. For each country, the currency premium is measured using both interbank offer rates and
forward exchange rates. For Argentina the peso interbank offer premium is obtained with the spread of peso over dollar denominated Argentine
interbank offer rates, while for Hong Kong the interbank offer premium is measured with the spread of the Hong Kong interbank offer rates over
the U.S.-dollar LIBOR. The forward discounts are measured by the spreads of non-deliverable forward (NDF) exchange rates, for Argentina, and
deliverable forward rates, for Hong Kong, over the spot exchange rate, respectively. The interest rates for Hong Kong were obtained from the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority and the forward rates from Bloomberg. The Argentine interbank rates are from Bloomberg and the NDF rates were
obtained from Deustche Bank and Bloomberg. All the rates are annualized, in basis points, and continuously compounded.




                                      Argentina's Interbank Offer Term Structure                                                                                                                                                               Argentina's Non-Deliverable Forward Discount Term
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Structure
   2,000                                                                                                                                                                                                              2,000

           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0

  -2,000                                                                                                                                                                                                             -2,000

  -4,000                                                                                                                                                                                                             -4,000

  -6,000                                                                                                                                                                                                             -6,000

  -8,000                                                                                                                                                                                                             -8,000

 -10,000                                                                                                                                                                                                            -10,000

 -12,000                                                                                                                                                                                                            -12,000
                    4/21/1997


                                             10/21/1997


                                                                4/21/1998


                                                                                10/21/1998


                                                                                                         4/21/1999


                                                                                                                                10/21/1999


                                                                                                                                                    4/21/2000


                                                                                                                                                                     10/21/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                             4/21/2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/9/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/9/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5/9/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9/9/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/9/2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/9/2001
                                            Hong Kong's Interbank Offer Term Structure                                                                                                                                                                     Hong Kong's Forward Discount Term Structure

1,000                                                                                                                                                                                                               1,000


  500                                                                                                                                                                                                                 500


    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0


 -500                                                                                                                                                                                                                -500


-1,000                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1,000


-1,500                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1,500


-2,000                                                                                                                                                                                                              -2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/4/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10/4/1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7/4/1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4/4/1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/4/1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10/4/1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7/4/1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4/4/1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/4/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10/4/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7/4/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4/4/2001
         1/4/1993

                                10/4/1993

                                                     7/4/1994

                                                                 4/4/1995

                                                                            1/4/1996

                                                                                             10/4/1996

                                                                                                                     7/4/1997

                                                                                                                                        4/4/1998

                                                                                                                                                     1/4/1999

                                                                                                                                                                10/4/1999

                                                                                                                                                                                  7/4/2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                         4/4/2001
                                                                      Table 4
                                                         Term Structure of Currency Premia
                                                                Summary Statistics
The table shows the summary statistics for the term premium, defined as the spread between the currency premium from 12-month rates over the one from 1-
month rates, during crisis and tranquil periods, for Argentina and Hong Kong. The crisis periods for Argentina are the following: (i) Mexican crisis, (ii) attack
on the Hong Kong dollar, (iii) Russia's default, (iv) devaluation of the Brazilian real, (v) Financial Times article and presidential elections, (vi) vice president
resigns, (vii) changes of finance minister, and (viii) cut of international credit. The crisis periods for Hong-Kong are: (i) the Mexican crisis, (ii) the financial
distress in S. Korea, (iii) the attacks on the Thai baht and the four attacks on the Hong Kong dollar. See text for a description of all the events. All rates are in
basis points, annualized, and continuously compounded.

                                                                                       Number of                             Standard
                                                                    Dates                              Mean Median                             Min       Max
                                                                                      Observations                           Deviation
Argentina
    Interbank Offer Rates
       Total                                                 04/21/97-06/05/01            1,098           168          151           204     -2,283       864
       Tranquil Periods                                                                    720            139          134            95       -238       442
       Crisis Periods                                                                      378            222          198           315     -2,283       864
         Attack on the Hong Kong dollar                     10/29/97 - 11/26/97             21            -24          -30            35        -81        54
         Russia's default                                   08/19/98 - 10/16/98             42             81           49            95        -59       258
         Devaluation of the Brazilian real                  01/13/99 - 02/12/99             23            130          131            31         54       193
         Financial Times article and elections              05/17/99 - 12/17/99            149            444          486           126        200       627
         Vice president resigns                             10/06/00 - 12/29/00             56            124          130            47        -41       188
         Changes of finance minister                        03/16/01 - 05/18/01             38            -73         -114           249       -491       311
         Cut of international credit                        07/10/01 - 09/25/01             49            158          222           621     -2,283       864
    NDF Rates
       Total                                                 10/20/97-06/05/01             732            -12          270         1,198 -11,720          984
       Tranquil Periods (after the Mexican Crisis)                                         393            231          282           423 -3,667           643
       Crisis Periods                                                                      339           -293          160         1,657 -11,720          984
         Russia's default                                   08/19/98 - 10/16/98             27             66           -1           278    -481          579
         Devaluation of the Brazilian real                  01/13/99 - 02/12/99             22            157          135           139    -120          337
         Financial Times article and elections              05/17/99 - 12/17/99            143            502          490           276      44          984
         Vice president resigns                             10/06/00 - 12/29/00             56             33           46           159    -485          297
         Changes of finance minister                        03/16/01 - 05/18/01             38         -1,295         -846         1,648 -7,200           251
         Cut of international credit                        07/10/01 - 09/25/01             53         -2,430       -2,348         2,872 -11,720          941
Hong Kong
    Interbank Offer Rates
    Total                                                    01/04/93-06/05/01            2,065            49           30            81       -836       358
       Tranquil Periods                                                                   1,754            50           32            69        -51       358
       Crisis Periods                                                                      311             44           17           130       -836       346
         Mexican crisis                                     01/10/95 - 04/10/95            59              24           58            65       -175        99
         Early signs of financial distress                  01/27/97 - 02/21/97            18              18           19             9         -7        38
         Attack on the Thai Baht                             05/14/97 - 7/24/97            46              -8          -11            20        -44        25
         1st Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 08/15/97 - 12/15/97            81               6          -34           152       -836       345
         2nd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 01/05/98 - 02/04/98            20             137          169           139        -24       346
         3rd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 05/27/98 - 07/06/98            28              81          104           129       -437       269
         4th Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 07/10/98 - 10/06/98            59             118          156           158       -483       316
    Forward Rates
    Total                                                    01/04/93-06/05/01            2,152            37           25           118     -1,854       481
       Tranquil Periods                                                                   1,820            45           26            81       -269       481
       Crisis Periods                                                                      332             -9           -6           228     -1,854       430
         Mexican crisis                                     01/10/95 - 04/10/95            62             -16           11            79       -217       108
         Early signs of financial distress                  01/27/97 - 02/21/97            19             -37            7           113       -366        28
         Attack on the Thai Baht                             05/14/97 - 7/24/97            51            -143          -55           160       -570         3
         1st Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 08/15/97 - 12/15/97            87             -76          -37           312     -1,854       354
         2nd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 01/05/98 - 02/04/98            22             139          263           219       -205       430
         3rd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 05/27/98 - 07/06/98            29              93          125           163       -405       263
         4th Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar                 07/10/98 - 10/06/98            62             114          175           186       -532       334
                                                                            Table 5
                                                      Determinants of the Currency Premium in Argentina
The columns of the table show the results of regressing the 1-month currency premium on a set of explanatory variables. The dependent variable is in first difference. Columns 1 to 5
correspond to ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions and columns 6 and 7 extend the model to an exponential garch (EGARCH). The models estimated are described in equations
(16) and (17) in the paper. The first column of the table shows the results for the basic specification, including as regressors (i) the spread of a high-yield bond index over a
comparable U.S. government bond, (ii) the EMBI spread of Latin American countries excluding Argentina, (iii) the ratio of total reserves of the central bank to total deposits, and (iv)
the ratio of total cash held by the financial system over total deposits. The second specification, column (2), adds the Goldman Sachs measure of currency misalignment.
Specification (3) disaggregates the reserves of the central bank into the ratio of reserves held in the form of government bonds to total deposits and the ratio of hard-currency
reserves to total deposits. Specification (4) tests the effect of Argentina's average foreign-currency credit rating.
The last OLS specification, in column (5), tests the effects of external and internal shocks on the conditional mean with two dummy variables. The external shocks dummy captures
the effect of the Russian default and the Brazilian devaluation, while the internal shocks dummy captures the effects of the internal crisis events during 1999 and 2001 (Financial
Times article and presidential elections, vice president resigns, changes of finance minister, and cut of international credit). In all OLS specifications four lags in differences of the
dependent variable and all regressors were included. In the EGARCH specifications, the lags of the reserves and cash ratios were trimmed down to two to allow for a larger sample
and facilitate convergence. The EGARCH specifications use the basic set of regressors and a dummy variable for all crisis (internal and external). Column (6) tests for the effects of
the crisis dummy in the conditional mean. Column (7) tests for its effects also in the conditional variance. Standard errors are in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** at 5%, and ***
at 1%.

                                                                                                       1-month NDF Discount

                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)
   Lagged Dependent Variable                         -0.326 ***         -0.331 ***        -0.319 ***         -0.369 ***         -0.369 ***        -0.129 ***         -0.140 ***
                                                    (0.066)            (0.067)           (0.064)            (0.073)            (0.074)           (0.010)            (0.005)
   High-Yield Spread                                 -0.161              1.035            -0.424              1.343              1.071             0.219 **          -0.635 ***
                                                    (0.952)            (1.095)           (0.855)            (0.902)            (1.025)           (0.101)            (0.045)
   GS Misalignment Measure                                               0.079
                                                                       (0.131)
   LAC EMBI Spread                                    0.640 ***          0.369 ***         0.666 ***          0.438 **           0.287             0.013              0.033 ***
                                                    (0.236)            (0.115)           (0.230)            (0.211)            (0.189)           (0.016)            (0.010)
   Total Reserves to Deposits Ratio (t-3)            -0.327 ***         -0.441 ***                           -0.185             -0.248 *          -0.109 ***         -0.009 ***
                                                    (0.117)            (0.112)                              (0.133)            (0.128)           (0.007)            (0.003)
   Bond Reserves to Deposits Ratio (t-3)                                                  -0.040
                                                                                         (0.032)
   Hard-Currency Reserves to Deposits                                                     -0.292 **
   Ratio (t-3)                                                                           (0.114)
   Banks' Cash over Deposits Ratio (t-3)              0.169 ***          0.162 ***         0.161 ***          0.115 **           0.283 ***         0.048 ***          0.007 ***
                                                    (0.049)            (0.055)           (0.046)            (0.050)            (0.082)           (0.003)            (0.001)
   Average Foreign-Currency Credit Rating                                                                    -8.598 **
                                                                                                            (3.892)
   External Shocks (Russia and Brazil)                                                                                           1.957 *
                                                                                                                               (1.004)
   Internal Shocks                                                                                                               3.358 **
                                                                                                                               (1.465)
   Crisis Dummy                                                                                                                                    0.494   ***        0.660   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.061)            (0.046)
   Constant                                           9.584            -1.398             -6.313             47.254 **         55.715 *            3.125   ***        1.772   ***
                                                   (13.462)          (16.047)           (15.902)           (22.297)          (29.490)            (0.976)            (0.131)
   Time                                               0.007                                0.007              0.000             0.007              0.000   ***        0.001   ***
                                                    (0.005)                              (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.005)            (0.000)            (0.000)
   EARCH                                                                                                                                          -0.468   ***        0.045
                                                                                                                                                 (0.064)            (0.091)
   ARCH-Abs.                                                                                                                                       2.590   ***        2.746   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.108)            (0.097)
   EGARCH                                                                                                                                          0.918   ***        0.828   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.016)            (0.018)
   Crisis Dummy                                                                                                                                                       1.611   ***
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.129)
   Constant                                                                                                                                       -0.029             -0.692   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.079)            (0.098)
   Number of observations                             378                358                378                378               378                 454                454
   R2                                                 0.40               0.42               0.41               0.41              0.42
   Maximum number of lags                                4                  4                  4                  4                 4                  4                  4
   Q(5) p-value                                       0.88               0.92               0.85               0.86              0.91               0.08               0.56
   Q(10) p-value                                      0.72               0.78               0.76               0.67              0.70               0.23               0.59
   Log-likelihood                                 -1203.63           -1145.88           -1201.02           -1201.76          -1197.90            -824.71            -740.44
   Wald test of joint significance                    0.00 ***           0.00 ***           0.00 ***           0.00 ***          0.00 ***           0.00 ***           0.00 ***
   (p-value)
                                                                            Table 6
                                                        Determinants of the Term Premium in Argentina
The columns of the table show the results of regressing the term premium on a set of explanatory variables. The dependent variable is in first difference. Columns 1 to 5 correspond
to ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions and columns 6 and 7 extend the model to an exponential garch (EGARCH). The models estimated are described in equations (16) and
(17) in the paper. The first column of the table shows the results for the basic specification, including as regressors (i) the U.S. dollar LIBOR term premium, (ii) the spread of a high
yield bond index over a comparable U.S. government bond, (iii) the EMBI spread of Latin American countries excluding Argentina, and (iv) the ratio of total reserves of the central
bank to total deposits and (v) the ratio of total cash held by the financial system over total deposits. The second specification, column (2), adds the Goldman Sachs measure of
currency misalignment. Specification (3) disaggregates the reserves of the central bank into the ratio of reserves held in the form of government bonds to total deposits and the ratio
of hard currency reserves to total deposits. Specification (4) tests the effect of Argentina's average foreign currency credit rating.
The last OLS specification, in column (5), tests the effects of external and internal shocks on the conditional mean with two dummy variables. The external shocks dummy captures
the effect of the Russian default and the Brazilian devaluation, while the internal shocks dummy captures the effects of the internal crisis periods during 1999 and 2001: Financial
Times article and presidential elections, vice president resigns, changes of finance minister, and cut of international credit. In all OLS specifications 4 lags in differences of the
dependent variable and all regressors were included. In the EGARCH specifications, the lags of the reserves and cash ratios were trimmed down to two to allow for a larger sample
and facilitate convergence. The EGARCH specifications use the basic set of regressors and a dummy variable for all crisis (internal and external). Column (6) tests for the effects of
the crisis dummy in the conditional mean. Column (7) tests for its effects also in the conditional variance. Standard errors are in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** at 5%, and ***
at 1%.

                                                                                                       NDF Term Sructure

                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                (7)
   Lagged Dependent Variable                         -0.483 ***         -0.508 ***        -0.482 ***         -0.510 ***        -0.523 ***         -0.204 ***         -0.216 ***
                                                    (0.078)            (0.081)           (0.076)            (0.086)           (0.084)            (0.009)            (0.009)
   U.S. Term Structure                                0.717              0.947             0.686              0.731             0.827              0.227 ***          0.226 ***
                                                    (0.664)            (0.856)           (0.694)            (0.663)           (0.723)            (0.046)            (0.038)
   High-Yield Spread                                 -0.622             -1.056             0.006             -1.509            -1.967 *           -0.082             -0.031
                                                    (1.130)            (0.849)           (1.045)            (1.089)           (1.100)            (0.098)            (0.084)
   GS Misalignment Measure                                               0.032
                                                                       (0.133)
   LAC EMBI Spread                                   -0.104              0.013            -0.209              0.062             0.313              0.139 ***          0.139 ***
                                                    (0.166)            (0.117)           (0.166)            (0.161)           (0.217)            (0.015)            (0.018)
   Total Reserves to Deposits Ratio (t-3)             0.237 **           0.317 ***                            0.143             0.145              0.017 **           0.019 ***
                                                    (0.098)            (0.095)                              (0.113)           (0.120)            (0.007)            (0.006)
   Bond Reserves to Deposits Ratio (t-3)                                                   0.058 *
                                                                                         (0.031)
   Hard-Currency Reserves to Deposits                                                      0.232 **
   Ratio (t-3)                                                                           (0.096)
   Banks' Cash over Deposits Ratio (t-3)             -0.165 ***         -0.173 ***        -0.165 ***         -0.131 ***        -0.256 ***         -0.046 ***         -0.045 ***
                                                    (0.047)            (0.050)           (0.043)            (0.047)           (0.066)            (0.002)            (0.003)
   Average Foreign-Currency Credit Rating                                                                     4.916
                                                                                                            (3.618)
   External Shocks (Russia and Brazil)                                                                                         -2.095 **
                                                                                                                              (1.008)
   Internal Shocks                                                                                                             -2.931 **
                                                                                                                              (1.292)
   Crisis Dummy                                                                                                                                   -0.552 ***         -0.559 ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.049)            (0.062)
   Constant                                        -22.729 *          -18.560              1.253            -45.397 **        -63.063 **         -13.500 ***         -0.523 ***
                                                   (13.448)          (15.735)           (15.732)           (22.529)          (26.537)            (0.288)            (0.079)
   Time                                              -0.003                               -0.003              0.002            -0.002              0.000              0.000
                                                    (0.004)                              (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.000)            (0.000)
   EARCH                                                                                                                                           0.529 ***          0.478   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.069)            (0.079)
   ARCH-Abs.                                                                                                                                       2.051 ***          2.032   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.104)            (0.112)
   EGARCH                                                                                                                                          0.993 ***          0.929   ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.014)            (0.017)
   Crisis Dummy                                                                                                                                                       0.786   ***
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.113)
   Constant                                                                                                                                       -0.152 **        -13.268    ***
                                                                                                                                                 (0.062)            (1.091)
   Number of observations                             351                331                351                351               351                 415                415
   R2                                                 0.46               0.47               0.47               0.46              0.47
   Maximum number of lags                                4                  4                  4                  4                 4                  4                  4
   Q(5) p-value                                       0.48               0.73               0.49               0.44              0.69               0.32               0.88
   Q(10) p-value                                      0.52               0.73               0.56               0.46              0.64               0.67               0.99
   Log-likelihood                                 -1070.58           -1013.29           -1067.26           -1069.79          -1065.11            -694.61            -672.76
   Wald test of joint significance                    0.00 ***           0.00 ***           0.00 ***           0.00 ***          0.00 ***           0.00 ***           0.00 ***
   (p-value)
                                                                    Appendix Figure 1
                                                 Non-Deliverable Forward Discount and No-Arbitrage Bands
The figure shows the 1-month Non-Deliverable Forward (NDF) discount and two threshholds defining no-arbitrage bands. The top panel displays
the forward discount and two currency premia, the spread between peso and dollar denominated Argentine interbank offer rates and the spread
between peso and dollar Argentine time deposit rates. In the middle panel, the upper threshhold is the difference between the interbank offer rate in
pesos and the time deposit rate in dollars; the lower threshhold is the difference between the time deposit rate in pesos and the interbank offer rate in
dollars. In the lower panel, the upper threshold is the difference between the BAIBOR in pesos and the U.S. deposit rate in dollars; the lower
threshold is the spread of the Argentine time deposit rate in dollars over the U.S. Federal Funds Rate. All rates are annualized, in basis points, and
continuously compounded. See text for a discussion of arbitrage in cases 1, 2, and 3.


                                                       Case 1:                              (i
                                                                                             lending
                                                                                             t ,k                − itlending
                                                                                                                      ,k
                                                                                                                             ,*
                                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                = fdt ,k = itdeposit
                                                                                                                                             ,k      − itdeposit
                                                                                                                                                         ,k     (,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                   )
14,000

12,000

10,000

 8,000

 6,000

 4,000

 2,000

     0

 -2,000
          9/9/1998


                     11/9/1998


                                 1/9/1999


                                            3/9/1999


                                                        5/9/1999


                                                                    7/9/1999


                                                                                9/9/1999


                                                                                                     11/9/1999


                                                                                                                        1/9/2000


                                                                                                                                         3/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                            5/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                          7/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                        9/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                        11/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9/9/2001
                                                       Case 2:                               (1
                                                                                              i   −i
                                                                                                 t ,k
                                                                                                442443
                                                                                                      )≥
                                                                                                 lending              deposit ,*
                                                                                                                     t ,k                                        (
                                                                                                                                                   f dt ,k ≥ itdeposit
                                                                                                                                                             1,k442t4
                                                                                                                                                                       − i lending
                                                                                                                                                                            ,k
                                                                                                                                                                               43
                                                                                                                                                                                   ,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                  upper band                                                    low er band

14,000

12,000

10,000

 8,000

 6,000

 4,000

 2,000

     0

-2,000
          9/9/1998


                     11/9/1998


                                 1/9/1999


                                            3/9/1999


                                                        5/9/1999


                                                                    7/9/1999


                                                                                9/9/1999


                                                                                                    11/9/1999


                                                                                                                       1/9/2000


                                                                                                                                        3/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                           5/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                         7/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                       9/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                       11/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9/9/2001



                                                       Case 3:                  (1
                                                                                 i   −  i
                                                                                     t ,k
                                                                                   44424443
                                                                                           )≥
                                                                                     lending           offshore deposit ,*
                                                                                                                t ,k                                               (
                                                                                                                                                    f dt ,k ≥ itdeposit
                                                                                                                                                              1,k44424t4
                                                                                                                                                                        − offshore i lending
                                                                                                                                                                                      ,k
                                                                                                                                                                                         4 3
                                                                                                                                                                                             ,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                 upper band                                                         lower band
14,000

12,000

10,000

 8,000

 6,000

 4,000

 2,000

     0

-2,000
          9/9/1998


                     11/9/1998


                                 1/9/1999


                                            3/9/1999


                                                         5/9/1999


                                                                     7/9/1999


                                                                                 9/9/1999


                                                                                                      11/9/1999


                                                                                                                         1/9/2000


                                                                                                                                          3/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                              5/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                            7/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                          9/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                           11/9/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7/9/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9/9/2001




                                                                                                                     NDF discount
                                                                                                 Appendix Table 1
                                                                                     Currency Premia and the No-Arbitrage Band
The top panel shows summary statistics fo the 1-month Non-Deliverable Forward (NDF) discount and two threshholds defining the no-arbitrage band. The upper
threshhold is the difference between the interbank offer rate in pesos and the time deposit rate in dollars. The lower threshhold is the difference between the time
deposit rate in pesos and the interbank offer rate in dollars. The mid panel shows the histogram of the difference between the NDF discount and the upper band.
Since there are no observations bellow the lower band, negative observations correspond to observations inside the no-arbitrage band, while positive observations
correspond to deviations from the no-arbitrage condition. The lower panel shows econometric estimations of reversion to the no-arbitrage band for observations of
the NDF discount outside the band, and to the conditional mean for observations of the NDF discount inside the band. All rates are annualized, in basis points, and
continuously compounded.

                                                                                                                    Summary Statistics
                                                                                                      Obs. in
                                                                       Number of
                                                                                                      Percent of                      Mean               Median             Std. Dev.                        Min                Max
                                                                       Observations
                                                                                                      Total
NDF discount                                                                        737                     -                           857                    228                  1,772                 42               14,726
Upper band                                                                         1,098                    -                           458                    287                    568                100                6,702
Lower band                                                                         1,098                    -                           -39                    -49                    148             -1,042                1,253
Obs. above the no-arbitrage band                                                    220                  30%                          2,380                  1,049                  2,673                120               14,726
Obs. inside the no-arbitrage band                                                   517                  70%                            209                    150                    189                 42                2,141


                                                              Distribution of Deviations from theof
                                                                                Distribution      Upper Band
                                                                                                    Deviations                             from the Upper Band
    140
   250

     120
   200
    100

   15080                                  Observations inside                                                                      Observations above
                                              the band                                                                               the upper band
     60
   100                                                                                                                                                                                    Observations above the upper
     40                                                                                                                                                                                              band
                                          Observations inside the band
     5020

          0
      0
                 -693


                           -624


                                             -556


                                                       -487


                                                                    -419


                                                                                -350


                                                                                              -281


                                                                                                        -213


                                                                                                                 -144


                                                                                                                             -76


                                                                                                                                     -7


                                                                                                                                                  473


                                                                                                                                                           1,433


                                                                                                                                                                        2,394


                                                                                                                                                                                  3,354


                                                                                                                                                                                            4,315


                                                                                                                                                                                                     5,275


                                                                                                                                                                                                                6,235


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7,196


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8,156


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9,116
              -6.93

                        -6.21

                                  -5.49

                                          -4.77

                                                    -4.05

                                                                 -3.32

                                                                              -2.6

                                                                             -1.88

                                                                                           -1.16

                                                                                                     -0.44

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                          2.03

                                                                                                                           4.5

                                                                                                                                         14.4

                                                                                                                                                24.2

                                                                                                                                                          34.1

                                                                                                                                                                         44

                                                                                                                                                                       53.9

                                                                                                                                                                                 64.7




                                                                                                        Revertion of Forward Discount
                                                                               (
                                                                            ∆ fd t ,k − B t ,k       )       =                     (
                                                                                                                        c out + λ out fd t −1,k − B t ,k + ε tout
                                                                                                                                                               ,k  )              if        fd t ,k > B t , k
                                                                            
                                                                             ∆ fd t ,k                       =        c in + λin fd t −1, k + ε tin, k                          if        fd t ,k ≤ B t ,k
                                                                                                        ε t out ~N(0, σ out ) and ε t in ~N(0 ,σ in )


                                                                           Including the "Cut of international credit" crisis period Excluding the "Cut of international credit" crisis period

                                                                                                                                 Dickey-                                                                            Dickey-Fuller
                                                                                    λj                         t-ratio         Fuller 1%                Half-life                λj                 t-ratio          1% critical          Half-life
                                                                                                                              critical value                                                                            value

                                                                                    -0.16                      -4.00               -3.49                  3.86                   -0.45              -7.24               -3.50               1.17
      outside no-arbitrage band 1
                                                                                   (0.04)                                                                                       (0.06)
                                                                                   -0.07                       -6.28               -3.44                  9.68                  -0.07               -6.28               -3.44               9.68
       inside no-arbitrage band 2
                                                                                   (0.01)                                                                                       (0.01)
1 The half-life corresponds to the convergence to the non-arbitrage band.
2 The half-life corresponds to the convergence to the conditional mean.
                                                                                                            Appendix Figure 2
                                                                                                Cross-Market Currency Premium Differential
The figure shows the spread between the 1-month forward discount and the interbank currency premium for Argentina and Hong Kong. The interbank rate for
Argentina is the interbank offer rate (BAIBOR) obtained from Bloomberg. Since in Hong Kong these rates are denominated only in Hong Kong dollars, the
premium is measured by the spread of these over the U.S.-dollar LIBOR. The forward exchange rates for Argentina are non-deliverable forward (NDF) rates
obtained from Deutsche Bank and Bloomberg. The forward rates for Hong Kong correspond to deliverable contracts and come from Bloomberg. The
interbank rates used for Hong Kong are interbank offer rates (HIBOR), obtained from the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. All rates are annualized, in basis
points, and continuously compounded.



                                                                                                           Spread of NDF over BAIBOR Currency Premia, Argentina
 12,000


 10,000


  8,000


  6,000


  4,000


  2,000


            0


 -2,000
                  9/9/1998




                                        12/9/1998




                                                               3/9/1999




                                                                                     6/9/1999




                                                                                                               9/9/1999




                                                                                                                                      12/9/1999




                                                                                                                                                             3/9/2000




                                                                                                                                                                                       6/9/2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                             9/9/2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12/9/2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3/9/2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6/9/2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9/9/2001
                                                                                                Spread of FWD over HAIBOR Currency Premia, Hong Kong
800



600



400



200



  0



-200



-400



-600
       1/4/1993


                             7/4/1993


                                                1/4/1994


                                                           7/4/1994


                                                                          1/4/1995


                                                                                                7/4/1995


                                                                                                                1/4/1996


                                                                                                                           7/4/1996


                                                                                                                                                  1/4/1997


                                                                                                                                                                        7/4/1997


                                                                                                                                                                                   1/4/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                  7/4/1998


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/4/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7/4/1999


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/4/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7/4/2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1/4/2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7/4/2001
                                                                Appendix Table 2
                                                    Cross-Market Currency Premium Differential
                                                               Summary Statistics
The table shows summary statistics of the spread between the 1- and 12-month forward discount and the interbank currency premium for Argentina and Hong Kong,
using different samples. The currency premium for Argentina is calculated as the spread of local peso over local U.S. dollar interbank offer rates. The currency premium
for Hong Kong is the spread of Hong Kong dollar interbank offer rates over the U.S.-dollar LIBOR. The crisis periods for Argentina are the following: (i) Mexican
crisis, (ii) attack on the Hong Kong dollar, (iii) Russia's default, (iv) devaluation of the Brazilian real, (v) Financial Times article and presidential elections, (vi) vice
president resigns, (vii) changes of finance minister, and (viii) cut of international credit. The crisis periods for Hong Kong are: (i) the Mexican crisis, (ii) the financial
distress in S. Korea, (iii) the attacks on the Thai baht and the four attacks on the Hong Kong dollar. See text for a description of all the events. All rates are in basis
points, annualized, and continuously compounded.


                                                                                     Number of                                  Standard
                                                                  Dates                                Mean        Median                         Min           Max
                                                                                    Observations                                Deviation
Argentina
     NDF-BAIBOR 1-month
       Total                                               04/21/97-06/05/01             720               509             64         1,319           -109        11,221
       Tranquil Periods                                                                  392               154             37           493           -105         4,520
       Crisis Periods                                                                    328               934            183         1,790           -109        11,221
          Russia's default                                08/19/98 - 10/16/98             27               618            674           377              1         1,407
          Devaluation of the Brazilian real               01/13/99 - 02/12/99             22               343            374           225              5           673
          Financial Times article and elections           05/17/99 - 12/17/99            141                79             60           109           -109           580
          Vice president resigns                          10/06/00 - 12/29/00             54               231            158           183            -14           712
          Changes of finance minister                     03/16/01 - 05/18/01             36             1,651          1,108         1,695             29         7,102
          Cut of international credit                     07/10/01 - 09/25/01            48              4,147          4,054         2,462            632        11,221
     NDF-BAIBOR 12-month
       Total                                               04/21/97-06/05/01             905               285            161           381           -202         2,252
       Tranquil Periods                                                                  546               201            142           229           -202         1,340
       Crisis Periods                                                                    359               413            268           509           -154         2,252
          Attack on the Hong Kong dollar                  10/29/97 - 11/26/97            13                302            252           126            122           568
          Russia's default                                08/19/98 - 10/16/98             41               662            654           189            385         1,121
          Devaluation of the Brazilian real               01/13/99 - 02/12/99             22               369            369           150            150           730
          Financial Times article and elections           05/17/99 - 12/17/99            143               131             68           184           -154           595
          Vice president resigns                          10/06/00 - 12/29/00             54               141            127            90            -15           362
          Changes of finance minister                     03/16/01 - 05/18/01             38               374            352           245            -83           916
          Cut of international credit                     07/10/01 - 09/25/01            48              1,431          1,510           569            -63         2,252
Hong Kong
     FWD-HIBOR 1-month
       Total                                              01/04/93 - 06/05/01           2,090                18             6            57           -523           688
       Tranquil Periods                                                                 1,782                11             5            30            -85           306
       Crisis Periods                                                                    308                 57            24           123           -523           688
          Mexican crisis                                  01/10/95 - 04/10/95             59                 36            22            48           -111           175
          Early signs of financial distress               01/27/97 - 02/21/97             17                 53             1           119            -20           386
          Attack on the Thai Baht                          05/14/97 - 7/24/97            46                 131            35           163            -26           535
          1st Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              08/15/97 - 12/15/97            81                  44            23           132           -497           688
          2nd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              01/05/98 - 02/04/98            19                  61            44           132           -106           481
          3rd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              05/27/98 - 07/06/98            28                  46            26            94           -181           317
          4th Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              07/10/98 - 10/06/98            58                  46            26           120           -523           404
     FWD-HIBOR 12-month
       Total                                              01/04/93 - 06/05/01           2,106                -5            -3            28           -833           150
       Tranquil Periods                                                                 1,795                -4            -3            14            -69            99
       Crisis Periods                                                                    311                -12            -9            66           -833           150
          Mexican crisis                                  01/10/95 - 04/10/95             60                -24           -18            30           -194            43
          Early signs of financial distress               01/27/97 - 02/21/97            18                  -9           -10             8            -22             5
          Attack on the Thai Baht                          05/14/97 - 7/24/97             46                -13           -13             8            -32             1
          1st Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              08/15/97 - 12/15/97            81                 -29            -8           110           -833           150
          2nd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              01/05/98 - 02/04/98            20                   4            19            60           -140            89
          3rd Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              05/27/98 - 07/06/98            28                  16            13            31            -43            88
          4th Attack on the Hong-Kong dollar              07/10/98 - 10/06/98            58                   4             3            49           -257           136
                                                               Appendix Table 3
                                                               Data Description

                                             Description                    Maturiy                Sample                      Source

Argentine data
 Non-deliverable forward         Pesos per U.S. dollar; for some        1 and 12 months        9/9/98-9/25/01      Bloomberg (1- and 12-
 exchange rates (NDF)            dates the rates are reported as                                  (1-month)        months from 9/9/98); and
                                 points, for others as outright.                              10/20/97-9/25/01     Deutsche Bank (12-month
                                                                                                 (12-month)        before 9/9/98 )
 Spot exchange rate             Pesos per U.S. dollars                         -              10/20/97 - 9/25/01   Bloomberg
 Interbank offer rates in pesos Annualized rate                         1 and 12 months        4/21/97 - 9/25/01   Bloomberg
 and dollars (BAIBOR)


 Time deposit rates in pesos     Annualized rate                       1 month and up to 2    1/4/1993 - 6/5/01    Central Bank of Argentina
 and dollars                                                                months
 Interbank deposit rates in      Annualized rate                            1 month          1/13/1995 - 9/25/01 Bloomberg
 pesos and dollars
 Total reserves of the central   Total reserves held by the central             -            12/29/1994 - 9/25/01 Bloomberg
 bank                            bank of Argentina (government                                                    (original source: Central
                                 bonds and hard currency, U.S.                                                    Bank of Agentina)
                                 dollar, billions)
 Bond reserves of the central    Reserves in Argentine government               -            12/29/1994 - 9/25/01 Bloomberg
 bank                            bonds, (U.S. dollar, billions)                                                   (original source: Central
                                                                                                                  Bank of Agentina)

 Hard-currency reserves          Reserves held in hard currency and             -            12/29/1994 - 9/25/01 Bloomberg
                                 short- and long-term deposits (U.S.                                              (original source: Central
                                 dollar, billions)                                                                Bank of Agentina)
 Total deposits of the financial Total Argentine bank deposits                  -            12/29/1994 - 9/25/01 Bloomberg
 system                          (U.S. dollar, millions)                                                          (original source: Central
                                                                                                                  Bank of Agentina)
 Total cash holdings of the      Cash holdings in local and foreign             -            12/29/1994 - 9/25/01 Bloomberg
 financial system                currency (U.S. dollars, millions)                                                (original source: Central
                                                                                                                  Bank of Agentina)

Hong Kong data
 Deliverable forward             Hong Kong dollars per U.S. dollar      1 and 12 months        1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg
 exchange rate (FWD)
 Spot exchange rate              Hong Kong dollars per U.S. dollar              -              1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg

  Interbank rate in Hong Kong Annualized rate                           1 and 12 months        1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Hong Kong Monetary
  dollars (HIBOR)                                                                                                  Authority
International data
  U.S. Federal Funds rates    Annualized rate                               1 month            1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg
  (FFR)
 U.S. Deposit rates              Annualized rate                            1 month            9/25/96-9/25/01     Bloomberg
 U.S. Treasury bill rates        Annualized rate                        3 and 12 months        1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg

 U.S. dollar LIBOR               Annlualized rate                       1 and 12 months        1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg

 High-yield spread               Spread of Moody's junk bond                    -              1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg
                                 index over the U.S. 30-year
                                 government bond yield
 GS misalignment measure         Estimated equilibrium exchange                                 9/9/98-9/25/01     Goldman Sachs
                                 rate from trade-weighted real
                                 exchange rates
 Average foreign currency        Average risk ratings of the three              -              1/4/93 - 9/25/01    Bloomberg
 credit rating                   leading agencies: Moody’s,
                                 Standard and Poor’s, and Fitch-
                                 IBCA
 EMBI spread for Latin           Weighted average of the EMBI                   -              1/4/93 - 9/25/01    JP Morgan
 American Countries              spreads of Latin American
                                 countries excluding Argentina,
                                 using 1999 GDP weights
