NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING VALUE WEIGHTING: CORPORATE EVENTS AND MARKET TIMING

Owen A. Lamont

Working Paper 9049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9049

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

I thank Karl Diether for research assistance. I thank Malcolm Baker, Eugene Fama, Ken French, Robert
Shiller, and Jeff Wurgler for supplying data. I thank Eugene Fama, Jay Ritter, and seminar participants at
the London School of Economics, New York University Stern School, the University of Chicago, and Yale
University for helpful comments. I gratefully acknowledge support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the
Center for Research in Securities Prices at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, and the
National Science Foundation.
The most recent version of this paper is available at:
http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/owen.lamont The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Owen A. Lamont. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating Value Weighting: Corporate Events and Market Timing
Owen A. Lamont
NBER Working Paper No. 9049
July 2002
JEL No. G14, G32

ABSTRACT
Corporate events, such as new issues and new lists, appear in waves. These waves imply that the
market portfolio has a time-varying weight in new lists, and one can decompose the market return into
a fixed weight return plus a timing return. Most of the reduction in aggregate market returns caused by
holding new lists comes from timing, not from average underperformance. When new lists are a high
fraction of the market, subsequent returns for both new and old lists are low. A mean variance optimizing
investor holding the market would be better off replacing holdings of new lists with old lists, t-bills, or
even currency stuffed in a mattress.

Owen A. Lamont
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Tel: 773-702-6414
Fax: 773-702-0458
owen.lamont@gsb.uchicago.edu

The market, defined as the total value of publicly traded US equities, is an object of
intense interest in financial economics for obvious reasons. It represents the total net position of
all equity holders. Although one might be interested in many possible portfolios with associated
portfolio weights, the market portfolio with its value weights is a central concern. This paper
shows how to use these value weights to identify the sources of asset pricing puzzles and
understand their economic significance from the perspective of an investor who holds the
market. It constructs portfolios consisting of various subsets of the market, and decomposes
their contribution to market returns into components due to fixed weights and timing. Fixed
weight returns reflect the different portfolio’s average returns and their average weights in the
market portfolio. Timing returns reflect the effect of varying one’s exposure to different
portfolios (by changing the market weight given to each portfolio). This paper studies portfolios
based on new lists and shows that new lists reduce market returns mostly due to timing, not due
to the average underperformance of new lists.
The market is often thought of as the epitome of a passive portfolio. But as emphasized
by Grossman (1995), the market is actually an actively managed portfolio due to incomplete
equitization of assets. When a nontraded firm decides to go public, the composition of the
market changes. This makes the market an active portfolio where the portfolio managers are
corporate managers who make decisions about holding assets and issuing securities. The market
portfolio automatically buys all new IPOs (initial public offerings) in proportion to their market
capitalization. Since IPOs come in waves, this rule means the market is taking bigger positions
in IPOs during waves.
The goal of this paper is to understand the contribution of new lists to total returns on the
market. To do this, the paper introduces a simple method for decomposing the market into

Evaluating value weighting – Page 1

subcategories that have time varying weights. The focus is new lists since that is the case most
cleanly matching the existing literature on IPOs.
Consider the following two statements:
1)

IPOs have returns that are lower than non-IPOs over the first few years
following issuance, but do not have lower risk.

2)

An investor who is seeking to maximize his Sharpe ratio would prefer to shun
IPOs in the first few years following the IPO, rather than hold the market
portfolio which includes IPOs in proportion to their market capitalization.

At first glance, it seems that the two statements say the same thing, and that the answer to
statement (2) must be the same as statement (1). In fact, these two statements are different. It is
logically possible, for example, that it would be better to shun IPOs even if IPOs on average
have higher returns than nonissuers. The reason the statements differ is that (1) is static and
cannot accommodate the fact that IPOs come in waves. Within the framework of (2), one can
include the fact when holding the market, one is engaged in a dynamic strategy with timevarying allocations to IPOs. The returns to dynamic strategies are significantly affected by the
covariance between the returns and portfolio weight of IPOs.
A numerical example of the logical distinction is as follows. Suppose the risk free rate is
zero. At the beginning of year 1, suppose IPOs are one percent of the entire market, while at the
beginning of year 2, IPOs are ten percent of the market. Suppose the year 1 return for IPOs is 20
percent and for non-IPOs is 10 percent, while the year 2 return for IPOs is -10 percent and for
non-IPOs is -5 percent. The important feature of this example is that IPOs do relatively poorly
following “hot” markets where IPOs have larger weight. In this example, average calendar time
returns are 5 percent for IPOs and 2.5 for non-IPOs, so IPOs have average outperformance.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 2

IPOs have a large positive α, and IPOs and non-IPOs have identical Sharpe ratios of 0.33. Thus
statement (1) is false. But the average calendar time market return is 2.3 percent with a Sharpe
ratio of 0.29, and since both of these numbers are less than non-IPO values, statement (2) is true:
one would be better off shunning IPOs entirely despite their average outperformance, and
replacing one’s IPOs with non-IPO stock. A further statement about this example, which
previews some results of this paper, is that it would be even better for one’s Sharpe ratio to
substitute cash holdings (rather than non-IPOs) for IPOs holdings, since when IPOs have greater
weight non-IPOs have low returns.
Statement (1) is the traditional concern of an extensive literature on IPOs starting with
Ritter (1991). How to test hypotheses such as statement (1) is a hotly debated topic.1 Some
advocate using calendar time portfolios rather than event time (weighting each month equally
rather than weighting each observation equally) and value weighting rather than equal weighting
(within each month, weighting each stock’s return by its market capitalization). These two
procedures generally decrease the observed magnitude of mispricing. Loughran and Ritter
(1995, 2000) argue that calendar time returns obscure mispricing because they average over hot
markets (with high mispricing) and cold markets (with low mispricing).
Statement (1) is an interesting economic hypothesis to examine, but from the perspective
of an investor it is not the only relevant question to ask. This paper tests statement (2). I use
calendar time value weighted portfolios, but take value weighting a step further to examine how
it affects the ultimate value weighted portfolio, the market. In doing so, I am able to identify the
timing component of investing in new lists, and address in a natural way the “windows of
opportunity” hypothesis put forth in Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995, 2000).
The results show that is possible to beat the market, in terms of constructing a portfolio

Evaluating value weighting – Page 3

with a higher Sharpe ratio, by deviating from market weights. This deviation involves both
average weights that are different from market weights, and time-varying weights that are
different from market weights. Thus the benefit of shunning new lists comes both from avoiding
the average underperformance of new lists and avoiding the timing strategy pursued by the
aggregate market. Most of this benefit comes from the timing component. One can earn higher
profits at lower risk by being contrarian: when the market is investing a lot in new lists,
underweight new lists relative to the market. The strategy of completely shunning new lists is
mispriced by the 3-factor model of Fama and French (1993).
What do these results say about market efficiency? Testing for underperformance of
issuing firms is a joint test of market efficiency plus a specific asset pricing model. The
proponents of value weighting and the Fama French (1993) three-factor model have interpreted
previous failures to reject the null hypothesis as consistent with market efficiency. Thus by this
standard, the evidence presented here is evidence against market efficiency, at least along with
the joint hypothesis that the Fama French (1993) three-factor model is correct. Since the whole
basis of the analysis is market weights, one cannot dismiss this evidence as reflecting only a
small and economically unimportant part of the market.
However, it is not obvious that the profitability of contrarian strategies in this setting
really says much about the rationality of market participants. For example, virtually any story
involving rational firms should have firms issuing equity and stock prices rising when future
expected returns fall. Thus, by itself, the existence of market timing does not distinguish
between rational and irrational stories. What is certainly rejected is any story involving constant
expected returns on all stocks or the same expected returns on new and old lists.
The main contributions of this paper are first to present a general framework for

Evaluating value weighting – Page 4

understanding the economic significance of market timing for any arbitrary portfolio, and second
to estimate the importance of market timing for the specific case of new lists over the period of
1926-2001. This paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the quantitative framework for
identifying market timing. Section II examines the evidence for new lists, and shows the relative
importance of timing and fixed weight components. Section III discusses the benefits of
shunning new lists from the perspective of a mean variance investor, and shows the dynamic
interpretation of seemingly static optimization techniques. Section IV looks at the more general
case of net corporate issuance. Section V looks briefly at decomposing the market based on
value, growth, and size. Section VI presents conclusions.
I.

A framework for evaluating time-varying weights

This section describes a simple framework for identifying the contribution of asset class timing
for total market returns in the case of K assets. The body of the paper focuses on the case of two
assets only, so the math is even easier.
Consider K different value weighted portfolios with returns Rtk between the end of period
t-1 and t. Suppose one combines these portfolios into a single portfolio using value weights wk
for each asset, where the w’s sum to one. Value weights are based on market equity (ME) in the
previous period,
(1)

w kt ≡

ME tk−1
K

∑ ME
j =1

j
t −1

Call the market portfolio using value weights M. The returns on the market are:
(2)

K

RtM = ∑ wtj Rt j
j =1

Evaluating value weighting – Page 5

One can always rewrite the return on M as
(3)

K

K

K

j =1

j =1

j =1

RtM = ∑ wtj Rt j = ∑ w j Rt j + ∑ ( wtj − w j ) Rt j = FIXWEIGHTt +TIMINGt

using the sample average of the time-series of weights. The first term, FIXWEIGHT, is the
return one would get using fixed weights to combine the K different portfolios,
(4)

K

FIXWEIGHTt = ∑ w j Rt j
j =1

The second term, TIMING, is a differential return one would get from a strategy that deviates
from the fixed weights in order to hold varying weights.
(5)

K

TIMINGt = ∑ ( wtj − w j ) Rt j
j =1

This decomposition is similar to standard performance attribution for portfolio managers, for
example in Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), except that it uses market weights
instead of the weights of an individual portfolio manager.
Using these definitions and taking averages, one can write the mean return on a portfolio
with time-varying weights as a function of the mean returns on its constituent components and
on the way the weights covary with returns:
(6)

K

K

j =1

j =1

R M = FIXWEIGHT +TIMING = ∑ w j R j + ∑ cov ( w j , R j )

A. The effect of excluding some portfolios
One can use this framework to examine a specific economic hypothesis: what is the
benefit of including a particular set of assets in the market portfolio? Call this set “candidate”
portfolios. One can answer this question by calculating the returns that one would earn by
holding the market excluding this set of assets. Suppose one is interested in excluding portfolios

Evaluating value weighting – Page 6

1 through K-1 from the market, and just holding portfolio K. For example, if one is interested in
the effect of excluding new lists, one could calculate the returns that one could earn on a
portfolio of old lists (portfolio K), and compare that with the actual market portfolio including
new lists (portfolio M). What would be the benefit of including the candidate assets in the
market portfolio using value weights? The answer is simple: just take the difference between the
market portfolio and the market excluding the assets in question: RtM - RtK . Once one has
calculated market returns and portfolio K returns, one can look at their properties, for example
mean, variance, Sharpe ratio, α, etc.
This difference, RtM - RtK , is directly related to the framework of timing and fixed
weights. Since the portfolio weights have to add to one:
(7)

K-1

K-1

K-1

j =1

j =1

j =1

RtM - RtK = ∑ wtj ( Rt j - RtK ) =∑ w j ( Rt j - RtK ) + ∑ ( wtj − w j )( Rt j - RtK )

The average difference is
K-1

K-1

R M - R K = ∑ w j ( R j - R K ) + ∑ cov (w j , R j − R K )
j =1

(8)

j =1

K-1

K-1

j =1

j =1

= ∑ FIXED j + ∑ TIMING j
= FIXED + TIMING

This TIMING is the same as in equation (5). The variable FIXED is FIXWEIGHT minus
the return on portfolio K, and shows the differential return from holding the K different
portfolios in fixed weights rather than just holding portfolio K. FIXED shows the contribution
of average returns to the left hand side variable. The left hand side variable, R M - R K , is the
benefit in terms of average returns of including portfolios 1 through K-1 in the market portfolio
using value weights. If this number is negative, it shows that excluding the candidate portfolios

Evaluating value weighting – Page 7

raises average returns.
Thus excluding the candidate portfolios has two effects on average returns. The first is
that the candidate may have average returns that are different from the non-candidate. The
second is that by excluding the candidate, one is no longer involved in a strategy that changes the
weight of the candidate over time. The timing component is the focus of this paper.
B. Relation to other approaches
The approach here is somewhat different from related work. Another way of
understanding the timing contribution is to see its relation to standard forecasting regressions.
For candidate j, average timing is cov (w j , R j − R K ) . If one runs a forecasting regression of
R j − R K on wj (which is in the information set at time t-1), the coefficient in this regression is
cov (w j , R j − R K ) var (w j ) . Thus the timing component is just a rescaled coefficient from a
predictive regression. The difference from other forecasting regressions is that this regression
coefficient has a special interpretation. It reflects not some arbitrary forecasting variable, but the
specific choices made by the market. The rescaled regression coefficient is measured in
meaningful units that show the economic size of the forecasting relation.
The goal of this paper is to understand market weights and their dynamic properties. The
goal is not estimate optimal weights, optimal dynamic strategies, or the conditional meanvariance frontier. The optimal weights are of course interesting objects to study (as is done for
example by Pastor and Stambaugh (2000) for the cross-section of stocks and by Barberis (2000)
for the time series of stocks vs. bonds). Yet another approach is to look at the portfolios chosen
by specific subsets of agents, for example individual vs. institutions (as is done in Barber and
Odean (2001)). In contrast, the focus here is on value weights coming from the market,
representing the net positions of all equity investors.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 8

II.

New Lists

This paper examines new lists, defined as firms that newly appear in the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database. Stocks are added to the CRSP database when they
first list on a major exchange. This definition follows Fama and French (2001) in identifying a
historically long and broad sample of new lists. New lists proxy for, but are not identical to,
IPOs. After 1973, most new lists are IPOs; prior to 1973, most new lists are stocks that were
previously traded over the counter before being added to the New York Stock Exchange.
I examine new lists for three reasons. First, new lists are interesting in their own right.
They are similar to IPOS since listing reflects decisions made by firms based on market
conditions. Dharan and Ikenberry (1995) find that new lists earn low returns. Second, one can
construct a long time series of new lists going back to 1929. More data is always a good thing to
have for testing hypotheses: one wants more observations, and one wants samples in which the
independent variable has lots of variance. In the specific case of examining timing, one wants to
be able to observe periods in which the market weight in new lists varies a lot. As shown later, it
turns out that due to a wave of new lists in the late 1920’s, the 1920’s are a particularly important
and informative time. Third, the goal of this paper is to decompose the market returns as
commonly measured using the CRSP value weighted aggregate. To do this, one has to focus on
stocks that are in the CRSP database. Gompers and Lerner (2001) report that it is rare for recent
IPOs to list on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in the period 1935-1972, and to study
IPOs in the pre-1973 era they are forced to collect return data by hand since recent IPOs are not
in CRSP (since they do not study the 1920’s it is unclear how many of that wave of new lists
were IPOs). Since the goal of this paper is to decompose CRSP returns, it is obvious that recent
IPOs can have no effect on CRSP returns if they are not in CRSP.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 9

In general, then, new lists are a proxy for IPOs and IPO-like stocks. Before 1973 they are
mostly not IPOs but are similar to IPOs in that they have not previously traded on major
exchanges, and have done well enough to be added to the exchange. The decision to list on a
major exchange, like the decision to do an IPO, is a corporate event reflecting both the
information possessed by firm management and market conditions.
A. The sample
The sample includes everything that gets into the CRSP value weighted return series,
namely all securities on CRSP except American Depository Receipts. All stocks fall into two
categories: they are either new lists or old lists. Thus
(9)

RtM = (1 − wtLIST ) RtOLD + wtLIST RtLIST

A new list is any stock whose CRSP identifier PERMCO appears for the first time in CRSP, for
the first 36 months of its appearance, and which is not added as the result of a distribution of
some existing CRSP stock. Thus new lists include IPOs, carve-outs, and publicly traded firms
that move onto an exchange covered by CRSP, but exclude spin-offs. Any stock that is not a
new list is an old list. NYSE first appears in CRSP in December 1925, American Stock
Exchange (AMEX) in August 1962, and NASDAQ in January 1973; all stocks that enter in these
months on these exchanges are classified as old lists.
The sample period is January 1929 to December 2001. The top part of Table I shows
summary statistics for new lists in the 876 months of the sample. On average, new lists are about
five percent of the total value of the market, varying over time between one and 15 percent.
Figure 1 shows the time-series behavior of the new list weight. It is clear that 1929/1930 and
1999/2000 were unusual historical episodes (the two peaks are May 1930 and March 2000).
Researchers have studied waves of IPOs for many years. Ibbotson and Jaffe (1975) show

Evaluating value weighting – Page 10

“hot” IPO markets, defined as periods with high initial returns from buying at the offer price, are
accompanied by a large number of new issues. In contrast, my interest is in waves that
significantly affect the composition of the market portfolio, and returns using market prices not
offer prices.
Looking at returns after the initial day, Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995,
2000) find that IPO underperformance is larger when the number of IPOs is high. They
interpret this finding as consistent with windows of opportunity, where corporate insiders go
public when equity is overpriced (as would be predicted by Stein (1996), for example). Other
evidence is consistent with this hypothesis. Corporate managers certainly say they are trying to
time the market (Graham and Harvey (2001)). Contemporary observers also describe the waves
as opportunistic behavior by firms and underwriters. Benjamin Graham described the wave in
1929 as “a wholesale and disastrous relaxation of the standard of safety previously observed by
the reputable houses of issue” (Graham and Dodd (1934) p 9) and the smaller wave in 1968-69
as “unprecedented outpouring of issues of lowest quality, sold to the public at absurdly high
offering prices and in many cases pushed much higher by heedless speculation…the familiar
combination of greed, folly, and irresponsibility...” (Graham (1973) p. 142). These comments
may resonate for those who lived through the events of 1999/2000.
B. Results for new lists
The average returns in Table I show the main results of this paper. In the language of
Section I, the candidate portfolio is new lists. The total effect of including new lists on average
market returns is shown by the average value of RM - ROLD. New lists cause the average return
to fall by 1.7 basis points per month. 2 The t-statistic on this difference is 2.4. Another way of
saying this result is that a portfolio of old lists significantly outperforms the market by 1.7 basis

Evaluating value weighting – Page 11

points per month. This result tells us that excluding the candidate, new lists, has a statistically
significant effect on the average market return.
Is 1.7 basis points per month big or small? There are several ways of interpreting the
magnitude of the effect. First, since the average excess return on the market is about 61 basis
points per month, 1.7 basis points is three percent of the whole equity risk premium (similarly,
Section III shows that Sharpe ratios rise about four percent by holding only old lists).
Considering that new lists are only five percent of the market on average, a three percent
reduction in excess returns is sizeable. Second, it is useful to compare with pre-existing results
and a world of fixed weights. Ritter (1991) reports cumulative abnormal returns (IPO returns
minus matched firm returns) of -29 percent over 36 months. Under constant weights of 0.046,
the total effect on RM - ROLD would be -3.7 basis points per month. So of the total, controversial
amount of 3.7 basis points per month, I find about half when value weighting. Third, one can
compare the magnitude of this effect with other celebrated asset pricing patterns. Section V
looks at value and growth firms, and finds total effects (timing plus fixed weight) of 4.5 basis
points for value and 7.6 basis points for growth. Thus the new list effect has the same order of
magnitude as value or growth, though is somewhat smaller (due largely to the fact that new lists
are a smaller fraction of the market). In sum, then, 1.7 basis points does not look small.
One can split this 1.7 basis point effect into two components using equation (8). The
average value of FIXED is w LIST ( R LIST − R OLD ) and the average value of TIMING is
cov ( w LIST , R LIST − R OLD ) . Table I shows that 1.1 basis points are due to timing while 0.6 basis
points are due to fixed weights. Thus more than half the effect comes from timing. The timing
component has a t-statistic of about 3, while the fixed weight component is insignificant at
conventional levels.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 12

This result, that timing is significantly negative and accounts for most of the decrease in
market return, is the main contribution of this paper. The previous literature has focused on the
average value of FIXED, that is, whether new lists and old lists have different average returns
(after risk-adjusting). Table I shows only weak evidence that FIXED is negative (the next table
shows that risk-adjusting using multifactor models also gives weak evidence for FIXED). Table
I shows that most of the economic significance of new lists comes not from FIXED, but from
TIMING. To understand how an investor holding the market is hurt by new lists, one must
understand the dynamic way in which the market weights new lists. TIMING is strongly
negative, and as shown in the next two tables, is robust to different ways of measuring and risk
adjusting.
The bottom part of Table I shows correlations. The correlation between the new list
weight and differential returns on new minus old lists is -0.13. This negative correlation is
another measure of the negative covariation that drives the mean value of TIMING. As it turns
out, the new list weight is also negatively correlated with excess returns on new lists and on old
lists. Thus when new lists are a large fraction of the market, both new and old lists subsequently
have low returns, with new lists having lower returns than old.
C. Why different measures give different results
Different ways of posing the question lead to different results. The traditional approach
has been to look at the return on a portfolio of new lists and risk-adjust using matching firms,
using market returns, or using factor regressions. This subsection discusses why marketadjusting fails to capture timing. Later, section III.B discusses the issues involving α.
Table I shows that market adjusting new lists give weak results. New lists do not
significantly underperform the market on average, since the t-statistic on RLIST - RM is only 1.2

Evaluating value weighting – Page 13

(similarly, Fama and French (2001) find that market-adjusted new list returns are not
significantly different from zero).3
Why do RLIST - RM and RM – ROLD give such different answers? The effect of
subtracting the market return from the candidate portfolio is straightforward:
RtLIST - RtM = (1 − wtLIST )( RtLIST - RtOLD )

(10)
(11)

R LIST - R M =

1 − w LIST
FIXED − TIMING
w LIST

Market-adjusting the candidate just combines the two components in a different way. First,
when w is small it gives greater weight to the fixed weight component. Second, it gives the two
effects the opposite sign, so they tend to cancel out. Thus market-adjusted returns cannot tell the
whole story.
The fact that the fixed weight return and market-adjusted return on new lists are
insignificantly different from zero, but the timing component is not, shows the importance of
looking at new lists in the context of the market. Part of the debate over how to measure the
economic relevance of an asset class involves which methodology is most relevant for actual
investors. For example, Lyon, Barber, and Tsai (1999) argue that one should use buy-and-hold
returns (rather than monthly returns) because they “precisely measure investor experience.”
However, Table I gives a different insight on investor experience, since the net equity position of
all investors is the market. Looking at new lists in isolation, they have a mean return that is
certainly higher than t-bills and a healthy Sharpe ratio similar to the market. But looking at RM –
ROLD, it is clear an investor would be better (in terms of mean returns) by shunning new lists.
Previous results have looked at new list returns in the context of the whole market by either
market adjusting or by running CAPM regressions and showing α and β. But these techniques

Evaluating value weighting – Page 14

do not evaluate the dynamic strategy pursued by the market, and thus don’t put new list returns
in proper context.
D. Regression results
Table II contains regression results for new lists. For clarity it shows several different
ways of expressing the basic point, although as a result some columns contain redundant
information. Table II shows α from various factor models, showing risk adjusted returns. The
first model is the CAPM. The second is the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model, which
includes the excess market return, SMB (the return on small stocks minus big stocks) and the
HML (the return of high book-market stocks minus low book-market stocks). The last is a fourfactor model as in Carhart (1997) which adds a price momentum factor, UMD (the return of
stocks with high prior year returns minus stocks with low prior year returns).4 The table shows α
for the CAPM and the three-factor models, and shows the complete regression results for the
four-factor model. Table II also shows results splitting the sample approximately in half before
and after August 1962 (the date when AMEX firms enter CRSP).
Column’s (1) and (2) are traditional excess returns on the portfolio of old and new lists.
Column (1) shows that old lists have a positive α with respect to the market, the three-factor
model, and the four-factor model. The table shows these positive α’s are stable and significant
both before and after 1962. This is one way of seeing the basic result that one would be better
off shunning new lists. Shunning new lists is not a difficult strategy to pursue: it does not require
any costly information gathering or frequent trading. Investors just need to refrain from buying
new lists until 36 months have passed.
Column (2) shows excess returns for new lists. New lists have negative α’s, but only
strongly significant for the four-factor model. Based on these results alone, one would not think

Evaluating value weighting – Page 15

there is strong evidence that new lists are mispriced. It turns out, as shown in section III.B, that
α can reflect dynamic portfolio weights in unexpected ways. Looking at the factor loadings, it
appears that new list returns behave like small growth stocks with positive price momentum.
Column (5) shows market-adjusted returns on new lists. Since the market return is already on
the right hand side in all regressions, α in column (5) is identical to α in column (2). Again, the
market-adjusted raw return of -12 basis points is far from significant. In summary, by most
measures the underperformance of new lists is insignificant.
Column (3) shows the difference between market and old lists return. This statistically
significant difference of 1.7 basis points is the central measure of the cost of holding new lists
using market weights, and is the number that is decomposed in columns (6) and (7). The α’s is
of course identical to column (1), and show that the 1.7 basis point number is basically
unaffected by various risk corrections.
Column (4) shows the differential return approach of subtracting old lists from new lists.
This return differential of 14 basis points per month is insignificantly different from zero,
although the CAPM and four-factor α’s are more than two standard errors from zero.
Column (6) shows the timing component of column (3). In terms of mean return, the
timing component is 1.1 basis points per month, and the full samples α’s range from 1.2 to 0.9,
all significant. The strength of the timing results (the t-statistics are around three) contrasts with
the weakness of the fixed weight component shown in column (7) (the estimates in column (7)
are simply five percent of the estimates in column (4)). The robustness of TIMING shows that
the central result of this paper is not caused by measurable risk exposure or by a specific sample
period.
In summary, Table II shows that there is a significant cost to holding new lists, to the

Evaluating value weighting – Page 16

tune of 1.7 basis points per month for the investor holding the market. More than half of this
cost comes from the timing feature of holding new lists. The timing component is mispriced by
the CAPM, and three- and four-factor models, and is present in both halves of the sample period.
E. Robustness tests
Table III shows robustness tests. First, it looks at only common stock as is typical in
previous work. In calculating the two components, non-common stock gets discarded and does
not appear in the return series or in the weights (the right-hand-side factors are all calculated in
the regular way, however). This change has no effect. The main body of the paper includes noncommon stock because the point is to decompose the standard market return, which includes
non-common stock. Further, it is not clear why one would want to arbitrarily exclude other
classes of stock, such as closed end funds, from the analysis. If one is interested in the
hypothesis that new issues appear in response to mispricing, closed-end funds are valuable
evidence to examine. Indeed, relative mispricings, such as those found in closed end funds or
intercorporate holdings (as in Lamont and Thaler (2001)) are one of the few ex ante ways of
knowing whether an IPO is overpriced.5
Table III also looks at equal weighting instead of value weighting in calculating the
decomposition. Here the analysis decomposes returns for the equal weighted CRSP return
instead of the value weighted return, and the waves are in the number of new lists instead of the
market value of new lists. As is usual, equal weighting makes the effects bigger.
Table III next looks at a definition of timing that could be implemented in real time. The
timing portfolio previously used involves the average weights over the entire 1929-2001 sample
period, a number that could not be known in 1929. “Real timing” replaces the average weight
calculated over the entire period with a backward looking weight that uses the sample average up

Evaluating value weighting – Page 17

to month t (thus the number of observations used to compute this weight grows over time). This
series starts in 1934, so that a minimum of five years is available. The table shows that this
change has little effect, lowering mean timing from 1.1 to 0.8 basis points.
The last part of Table III shows the effect of different sample periods (in addition to the
subperiods shown in Tables II). First, it shows the effect of starting in 1973, when NASDAQ
firms get added to CRSP. After this date, most new lists are IPOs. The table shows that this
change makes mean TIMING higher, rising to 1.6 basis points (although standard errors also rise
substantially). Figure 2 is helpful in understanding the different periods. It shows that the timing
returns are highly variable at the beginning and end of the 1929-2001 period (not surprisingly,
given the higher portfolio weights at these points). The 1999/2000 period is particularly volatile,
and helps explain why the standard errors rise so much. In terms of the three-factor model,
Ritter and Welch (2002) find that the 1999/2000 period has an extreme effect on three-factor
regressions, and argue that one should be especially wary of three-factor α’s in this period.
To see whether the late 1990’s are driving the results, the last rows of Table III show the
effect of looking at 1973-1998. Here mean TIMING drops from 1.6 to 1.0, while the standard
error drops in half as the highly variable end period is excluded. Timing is strongly significant in
this subperiod as well.
In summary, the average value of the timing component of new lists is robust to alternate
sample periods and alternate methods of calculation.
F. Predictive ability of portfolio weights for returns
This subsection examines more traditional regression evidence on the predictive power of
new list portfolio weights for subsequent returns. As shown in Table I, both market excess
returns and differential returns between new and old lists are negatively correlated with the new

Evaluating value weighting – Page 18

list weight. To understand how this covariation is related to the timing component, it is
important to recognize that average TIMING is only non-zero if the portfolio weight covaries
with the differential between the two classes of stock. One can look at the two separate
components of timing:
(12)

TIMING = cov ( w LIST , R LIST − R OLD ) = cov ( w LIST , R LIST − R F ) − cov ( w LIST , ROLD − R F )
The fact that the average value of timing is the difference between these two covariances

reflects the fact that this timing component is not about timing the whole market. Rather, timing
reflects the ability of the weights to forecast differential returns. Put differently, timing can only
be non-zero if the weights have different forecasting ability for excess returns on new and old
lists.
The timing component thus reflects the fact that when holding the market, one has to sell
old lists in order to buy new lists. Since (as shown in Table I) returns on both old and new lists
are negatively correlated with the new list weight, these two covariances tend to offset each other
as in equation (12). The fact that one is buying new lists when they have low returns is offset by
the fact that one is selling old lists when they too have low returns. This effect makes it harder to
reject the null hypothesis that TIMING has mean zero.
The first column of Table IV examines the covariance between portfolio weights and
subsequent differential portfolio returns. It shows that the new list weight negatively forecasts
subsequent returns of new lists minus old lists.6 This regression coefficient is just a rescaled
TIMING average, as discussed in Section I.B. The rest of the columns in Table IV show how
the portfolio weights predict aggregate returns. This predictive power is logically distinct from
the predictive power for differential returns between new and old lists. The table shows that the
new list weight is a powerful forecaster of future returns, even in the presence of other variables

Evaluating value weighting – Page 19

such as scaled aggregate prices.
The first aggregate return regression shows that the new list weight is a significant
predictor of excess returns on the market. The next column shows a forecasting regression with
market excess returns on the left-hand-side and the price/dividend (P/D) ratio on the right hand
side, along with the T-bill yield. The P/D ratio does not do well, mostly because the last few
years of the sample were not kind to the forecasting relation. The second column shows that the
ratio of price to the last 10 years earnings, P/E10, does somewhat better (both these scaled price
variables come from Shiller’s web page).
The next two columns add the new list weight. This variable comes in strongly negative,
and drives the P/E10 variable out of significance. The results show that when the market is
overweight in new lists, market excess returns are subsequently low. These results suggest that
firms issue equity when expected returns on equity are low (or when equity prices are high).
The last two columns in Table IV look at annual forecasting regressions for market
excess returns. These regressions include the variable SHARE from Baker and Wurgler (2000).
Baker and Wurgler (2000) show that aggregate equity issuance negatively forecasts aggregate
stock returns, which they interpret as managers issuing equity when it is overpriced. Their
variable is the ratio of gross equity issues to the sum of gross equity issues and gross debt issues.
SHARE is a similar variable to the portfolio weights; both use the dollar amount of new issues
scaled by some other variable. They differ in that the portfolio weight scales by the value of the
market where SHARE scales by the value of financing (SHARE also uses issues for a single year
rather than the last three years). The first annual regression shows that both measures come in
negative and significant. The second shows that with the addition of P/E10 and the T-bill yield,
the coefficient on the new list portfolio weight falls and is less than two standard errors away

Evaluating value weighting – Page 20

from zero. Thus it appears that the new list weight combines information in the price level and in
SHARE, but does not add much new information (the new list weight has an annual correlation
of 0.39 with P/E10 and 0.20 with SHARE).
III.

An investment perspective on new lists and market timing

A. Benefits of shunning new lists
Tables I-II show that holding new lists results in lower mean returns, and that the
difference in returns (between the market and a portfolio that shuns new issue lists) has a
negative α. How much would a mean-variance investor benefit by shunning new lists? This
question cannot be answered by α because α is not designed to describe dynamic strategies.
Table V shows an investment perspective on new lists. This perspective examines
various different portfolios that investors might want to hold, instead of holding the market. The
top part of Table V shows some simple portfolio strategies, while the bottom part shows the
result from textbook portfolio optimization techniques. The first row in Table V shows that the
Sharpe ratio for the market during this period was 0.109 using monthly excess returns. The next
row shows that by substituting old for new lists, an investor can raise his mean return and lower
his standard deviation. In this sense, one can meaningfully say that a mean-variance optimizing
investor would be better off by doing the substitution. New lists are inferior to old lists.
A further question one could ask is: are new lists inferior to T-bills? The answer is yes.
The next row shows the result one would get by replacing new lists in the market with T-bills.
Again, this is dynamic strategy that holds different weights at different times. Table V shows
that an investor could boost his Sharpe ratio 7.3 percent higher than the market, using this simple
strategy. By doing the substitution, one is engaged in a contrarian strategy that underweights the
market when new issues are booming. It is bearish during waves of IPOs. The improved Sharpe

Evaluating value weighting – Page 21

ratio reflects the fact that wLIST forecasts negative returns on both old and new issues.
The next row shows the effect of substituting cash for new lists. Cash is defined as noninterest-bearing currency that has return zero. Even this primitive form of investment is superior
to new lists from the perspective of a mean-variance investor who is currently holding the
market. Thus it seems that by any reasonable benchmark, “investing in firms issuing stock is
hazardous to your wealth” as claimed by Loughran and Ritter (1995), at least for investors
looking to maximize their Sharpe ratios. To explain these low returns in a rational risk-based
equilibrium framework, one would need to find some reason that new issues are “safer” than
currency or are providing insurance to investors.
B. Understanding optimal portfolios
Although it is not immediately apparent, the dynamic nature of market weights is a
pervasive issue in empirical finance. An example is standard portfolio analysis when both the
market and other equity portfolios are being considered. Whenever one calculates optimal
portfolios weights for mean variance efficiency where one of the constituent portfolios is a
subset of another, one is implicitly constructing a dynamic strategy. The bottom part of Table V
shows portfolio weights generated using standard mean variance calculations based on the
sample period means, variances, and covariances,
Consider the meaning of the α of -0.197 for new lists versus the market, reported in Table
II. A well-known result from portfolio theory is that a negative α implies that one can construct
a portfolio with a higher Sharpe ratio than the market by combining a long position in the market
with a short position in the left hand side portfolio. Table V shows that this optimal combination
of new lists and the market happens to be 200 percent long in the market and 100 percent short in
new lists. Call these weights the “apparent” weights. This combination results in a higher

Evaluating value weighting – Page 22

Sharpe ratio of 0.128. On the face of it, this optimal portfolio looks like a static combination of
two portfolios. In fact, this portfolio is a dynamic strategy with a peculiar constraint. Since the
market is a weighted combination of old and new lists as in equation (9), the implied weights on
new and old lists are a function of the apparent weights. The constraint is that if the apparent
weight on new lists is a constant x, the implied weight on new lists must be x + (1-x) wtLIST .
Since x is 100 percent in this case, the implied weights are -1 + 2 wtLIST , and based on the fact that
average wtLIST is five percent, this portfolio has an average weight of -91 percent in new lists. In
order to get a constant of negative one in the implied weight, the optimizer is forced to put a
positive two in front of wtLIST . Thus instead of following a contrarian strategy of underweighting
new lists when they are a large fraction of the market, it is constrained to dynamically
overweight them. Thus a simple α actually embodies a convoluted compromise between
(productive) average underweighting and (counterproductive) timing.
The next row in Table V shows the optimal combination of old and new lists, without
using the market as one of the constituent portfolios. Here the optimizer is able to achieve a
constant weight of -92 percent in new lists, similar to the average weight before, but without
being forced to engage in a counterproductive timing strategy. Consequently, the Sharpe ratio
rises slightly.
The last row of Table V shows the optimal combination of three portfolios: the market,
old lists, and new lists. The optimizer now has two parameters (instead of one) to choose, and
consequently it can engineer a strategy that has both a low average weight in new lists and a
contrarian weighting during waves of new lists. The average weighting in new lists is -39
percent. The huge contrarian coefficient of -40.56 on the weight on new lists implies that when
new lists reach their peak of 15 percent of the market, the strategy has a weight of -460 percent
Evaluating value weighting – Page 23

in new lists. When new lists reach their low of one percent of the market, the strategy has a
weight of 107 percent in new lists. This ability to engage in productive timing boosts the Sharpe
ratio of this strategy to 0.156.
Thus the conclusions from Table V are that the market is far from the optimal portfolio
combining new and old lists. Going from the market to the optimal combination, the Sharpe
ratio increases from 0.109 to 0.156. As before, most of the benefit comes not from avoiding the
average underperformance but rather from avoiding (or doing the opposite of) the waves of new
lists. A static combination alone raises Sharpe ratios to only 0.128. To get the full benefit of the
optimal strategy, dynamic weightings are necessary.
IV.

Net corporate issuance

This section broadens the analysis to examine more generally all corporate events that
affect the composition of the market, not just new lists. An investor who is holding the market
portfolio has to respond to any event that changes the number of shares outstanding of a
particular old list stock. For example, he has to buy in response to seasoned equity offerings
(SEOs) and sell in response to repurchases. Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995) find
that firms repurchasing their own stock have high subsequent returns. Loughran and Ritter
(1995) find that firms doing SEOs have low subsequent returns. This evidence is consistent with
the idea that firms take advantage of overpricing to sell stock, and take advantage of
underpricing to buy stock back.
This section jointly examines these actions by looking at net new issues by corporations.
Net new issues are events that change the number of (split-adjusted) shares of the firm. In
addition to IPOs and new lists, share increasing events include SEOs, stock-financed
acquisitions, and exercise of stock options. Share decreasing events include open market

Evaluating value weighting – Page 24

repurchases and tender offers. All these events reflect conscious choices by firms, and might be
considered economically equivalent. For example, the number of shares increases when an
executive exercises options. Although this event does not involve the firm selling shares to the
public, it is economically equivalent to the case where the firm sells equity, gives the proceeds to
the executive, and the executive buys stock. In both cases value is being transferred from
existing shareholders to the executive, and in both cases the existing shareholders have their
stake diluted.

A. Change in the number of shares
The total capitalization of the market at any period t is the sum of listed stocks that were
not in the market 36 months ago, plus the sum of listed stocks that were. So far I have been
focusing on this distinction. I now further subdivide the market capitalization of old lists into
three portfolios: the market equity of old lists in proportion to their shares outstanding 36 months
(portfolio LAG), plus the market equity of firms in proportion to their newly added shares over
the past 36 months (portfolio PLUS) , minus the market equity of firms in proportion to their
decrease in shares over the past 36 months (portfolio MINUS). Let there be N old lists with split
adjusted shares outstanding of Q. Let ADD be a dummy variable equal to 1 if the number of
shares outstanding increases between t-36 and t. Then the entire market equity of old lists is:
Nt

Nt

Nt

i=1

i=1

ME OLD
= ∑ Pti Qit = ∑ Pti Qit-36 + ∑ Pti ( Qit -Qit-36 )
t
i=1

(13)

Nt

Nt

Nt

= ∑ Pti Qit-36 + ∑ Pti ( Qit -Qit-36 ) ADD t + ∑ Pti ( Qit -Qit-36 ) (1-ADD t )
i=1

= ME

i=1

LAG
t

+ ME

PLUS
t

i=1

+ ME

MINUS
t

The same stocks appear in both LAG and either PLUS or MINUS. MEMINUS is a
negative number that shows how much the total market equity of old lists has decreased due to
repurchases and other share decreasing events.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 25

Using these three portfolios, one can now decompose the market into four portfolios:
LIST, PLUS, MINUS, and LAG. The first three are the candidate portfolios that are collectively
net new issues. Thus the difference between market returns and returns on LAG are:
(14)

RtM − RtLAG =w tPLUS ( R tPLUS − RtLAG ) + w tMINUS ( R tMINUS − RtLAG ) + w tLIST ( R tLIST − RtLAG )

Thus wPLUS is the percent by which the total dollar value of the market is higher due to share
increases, while wMINUS is the percent by which it is lower due to share decreases (Daniel and
Titman (2001) study a related variable).
And one can decompose this further into three fixed weight returns and three timing
returns. The timing and fixed weight components for new lists is the same as before, except now
using portfolio LAG instead of portfolio OLD in the calculation. Portfolio LAG and OLD
contain exactly the same set of old lists, but using slightly different portfolio weights.
The returns in equation (14) are somewhat different from what one would calculate using
the traditional approach. A traditional value weighted calendar time return from a portfolio of
SEOs, for example, would consist of the same firms as PLUS, but with different portfolio
weights. The traditional return would weight each SEO firm according to its market equity.
Instead, PLUS weights each firm according to its market equity times the percent of the firm that
is newly issued. Thus a $1 billion stock that doubles its number of shares gets ten times the
weight of a $1 billion stock that issues ten percent more shares.
As with new lists, there are costs and benefits from using only CRSP share data to
identify net issuance, rather than traditional databases of SEOs and repurchases. The benefit is
that one can construct a very long time series going back to 1929. One cost is that one is forced
to lump together various different corporate events. Another cost is that this method might be
particularly prone to errors in the CRSP database. There is no doubt that shares outstanding data

Evaluating value weighting – Page 26

from CRSP contains numerous errors. In the course of this study I discovered numerous errors
(now corrected) in number of shares, mostly occurring in months surrounding stock splits or
distributions. Of course, this type of error affects any study involving market capitalization or
value weighting.

B. Empirical results
Net new issues are nine percent of the market on average, ranging from two percent to 27
percent. This number is the percent of the market that is new lists, plus the percent that has been
added by old lists, minus the percent that has been subtracted by old lists. Looking within net
new issues, the PLUS and LIST portfolio are both around five percent of the market on average,
with the MINUS portfolio about one percent of the market on average. Figure 3 shows the
portfolio weights of PLUS and MINUS. Comparing figures 1 and 3, it is clear that new lists and
additional shares issued by old lists have weights that move together over time, both peaking at
the end of the 1920’s and 1990’s (the correlation is 0.56). Similarly, Loughran and Ritter (1995)
show that the number of SEOs and the number of IPOs are positively correlated in the period
1970-1990. Reductions in shares are negligible until the 1980s (as documented by Bagwell and
Shoven (1989), repurchases became popular then).
Table VI show the timing and fixed weight components for net new issues and its three
parts. The total effect of net new issues is shown by RM – RLAG. The timing component for net
new issues is the sum of the three timing components for LIST, PLUS, and MINUS components,
and similarly for the fixed weight component.
Overall, shunning net new issues would increase mean returns by 3.5 basis points per
month, and this quantity is not substantially changed by risk adjustment using the various factor
models. Operationally, holding LAG rather than the market is easy to do and places low

Evaluating value weighting – Page 27

informational demands on investors. Just hold all stocks in proportion to the shares outstanding
36 months ago, rather than in proportion to shares outstanding today.
Of the 3.5 basis points, 2.2 are due to the fixed weight component and 1.3 are due to the
timing component. Most of this timing component comes from new lists, with the PLUS and
MINUS contributing almost nothing to the mean of the timing component. The timing
component is statistically indistinguishable from zero for PLUS and MINUS. Thus timing
appears important only for new lists, not for old lists doing net issuance. Similarly, Mitchell and
Stafford (2000) do not find much evidence in favor of a timing effect for SEOs, acquisitions, and
stock repurchases. In contrast, Loughran and Ritter (1995, 2000) find that underperformance of
SEOs is larger when the number of SEOs is high.
The PLUS and MINUS fixed weight components are statistically different from zero,
with the expected result that both types of corporate events reduce market returns. In terms of
fixed weight returns, all three portfolios contribute to lower market returns, with new lists
contributing seven basis points, share increases contributing 11 basis points, and share decreases
contributing three basis points. The fixed weight component is not much affected by the various
factor models and is stable over the two subperiods.
To summarize, almost all of the timing contribution comes from new lists. For share
increases and decreases, there is little evidence for timing, but ample evidence for fixed weight
returns causing a lower market return.
V.

Comparison to growth, value, and size

This section briefly examines growth, value, and size using the framework of this paper.
Setting aside the topic of new issues, it measures the impact of the market’s dynamic weighting
of stocks sorted into various categories. This measurement is useful both for comparing to new

Evaluating value weighting – Page 28

lists, and for testing whether these portfolios have time-varying expected returns. Before
discussing the specific results, it is useful to lay out what might be expected for the timing
component. If there are time-varying expected returns (perhaps due to temporary mispricing) on
different categories of assets, the timing effect should be negative. For example, by holding
growth stocks using market weights, investors are giving low weight to growth when it is cheap,
and high weight when it is expensive. According to this view, by leaning against the wind and
holding growth stocks in fixed weights one can earn higher return.
Table VII first looks at the effect of excluding growth stocks, defined as stocks in the
bottom 30 percent of book-market (B/M) using NYSE breakpoints. Book values come from an
updated version of the data in Davis, Fama, and French (2000), generously supplied by Ken
French. Growth stocks are 49 percent of the market on average. Excluding these stocks has a
surprisingly small effect. The portfolio excluding growth stocks has mean returns that are 8
basis points higher than the market. Neither this effect nor its timing and fixed weight
components are statistically distinguishable from zero. There is no evidence that the timing
component is different from zero using the various factor models.
Looking at value (the top 30 percent of B/M) rather than growth, there is again little
evidence for timing ability. Value stock are 17 percent of the market on average. They have
returns that are significantly higher than non-value stock returns. Last, looking at small stocks
(defined as firms in the bottom 30 percent of market capitalization using NYSE breakpoints),
there is a bit of evidence for timing in mean returns but not much after risk-adjusting using the
CAPM or the factor models.
In summary, although growth, value, and small firms all have timing components with
the expected negative sign, none of the timing effects are strongly significant. It appears that

Evaluating value weighting – Page 29

statistically significant timing is confined to new lists. Of course, this analysis uses no
conditioning information other than value weights. Other variables (for example the ratio of
market weights to book weights as in Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2001)) might produce
different results.
VI.

Conclusions

This paper presents a framework for understanding the contribution of particular asset
classes to market returns. The framework decomposes market returns into the returns due to the
average performance of asset classes and their average weight in the market, and the returns due
to the implicit dynamic strategy that the market takes in different asset classes. This framework
can be used for any asset classes with fluctuating weights. One cause of fluctuating weights is
waves of corporate events. For the specific case of new lists, the results show that waves of new
lists are negatively correlated with differential returns on new minus old lists. Most of the effect
of new lists on the total market comes from this timing component. Unlike other phenomena,
such as value, growth, or new share issues by existing firms, for new lists the timing component
is a central part of the story.
There are several benefits to this framework. First, it connects various disparate pieces of
information (such as average underperformance, waves, and predictive regressions for returns)
and shows how they fit together to affect the market portfolio. Second, it provides a measure of
the economic significance (as opposed to statistical significance) of timing. Third, it reveals the
perils of studying asset pricing phenomena in isolation. Looked at in isolation, the
underperformance of new lists is not terribly strong. Only in the context of the overall market
can one see the true costs of holding new lists. This context is necessary because it is not always
obvious how the dynamic nature of the market changes inferences about asset pricing.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 30

A. Interpretation of results
The fact that issuances are negatively correlated with future returns does not, by itself,
say much about the rationality of stock prices. If expected returns on equities fall relative to
other assets, one would expect to see firms issuing equity whether or not the stock market is
rational. This statement holds true for both differential returns and aggregate returns. Not only
do new lists do poorly when the market heavily weights new lists; old lists also do poorly.
It turns out that the portfolio weight that the market puts in new lists is a powerful
forecaster of aggregate market returns. One possible explanation is that when expected returns
fall, firms issue equity in order to invest in physical capital; consistent with this story, Lamont
(2000) shows that investment plans by corporations predict future excess stock returns. This
relation could reflect mispricing due to cognitive errors or sentiment. It could reflect changes in
rational risk premia. It could also have nothing to do with either mispricing or risk – perhaps
liquidity, taxes, or some other force is at work.
For example, suppose for some reason equities become more liquid. In that case, equities
will have a lower required rate of return (the illiquidity premium falls), and companies should
rationally respond by issuing more equity (replacing illiquid debt, perhaps). This paper provides
some support for this explanation, since new lists as a percent of the market in 1929-2001
corresponds to patterns of liquidity and turnover presented in Jones (2002) and Chordia, Roll,
and Subrahmanyam (2001). On the other hand, section III shows that from a Sharpe ratio
perspective investors would be better off holding currency, the most liquid of all assets, rather
than IPOs, so a liquidity explanation may be implausible. And of course, new issues could still
be overpriced even if they are more liquid (Baker and Stein (2001) provide a model where
liquidity and mispricing go together.)

Evaluating value weighting – Page 31

Thus additional evidence is necessary to discriminate between rational and irrational
stories. Various pieces of circumstantial evidence from the period 1999/2000 hint at a
mispricing explanation, particularly for technology IPOs. As shown in Figure 1, the period
1999/2000 was an important episode in financial history, and it is useful to study it closely
because it is a very well documented case of alleged mispricing. First, Lamont and Thaler
(2001) show that there were several technology IPOs in the period that were blatantly overpriced
relative to other securities, but that short sale constraints prevented arbitrageurs from correcting
this overpricing. Second, Ofek and Richardson (2002) show that various IPO-related anomalies,
such as predictable declines in prices around the ending of lockups and predictable rises around
the ending of the quiet period, were more severe for internet IPOs in this period. These
predictable returns are consistent with mispricing. Third, Loughran and Ritter (2002) document
that during this period, average first day IPO returns exceeded 60 percent, far higher than the
historical mean. It is not clear exactly how this fact fits in, but it is clear that one way for IPOs to
get overpriced is for their price to rise in the first day. Fourth, various hard-to-quantify
phenomena occurred in the IPO market during this period that seem best described by words
such as “mania,””irrational,”or “sentiment.” In February 2000, chaos erupted in the street of
Hong Kong. Huge crowds gathered around 10 different banks. The police were called in to
maintain order. Some branches closed their doors, while others extended their hours to
accommodate the impatient mob. A bank run? Sort of. But instead of fighting to get their
money out, these people were fighting to get their money in. They were applying to subscribe to
the IPO of a new Internet company. It seems unlikely these investors thought that the IPO had a
low expected return but were willing to hold it due to its high liquidity or low risk.
Any complete explanation for the timing phenomenon needs to address the comovement

Evaluating value weighting – Page 32

of several variables. Aggregate issuance, the level of aggregate stock prices, and aggregate
volume are all positively correlated over time. All three things peak in the late 1920’s and late
1990’s (with perhaps a lower middle peak in the late 1960’s). All three things are negatively
related to subsequent aggregate stock returns.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 33

Footnotes
1

See Barber and Lyon (1997), Brav (2000), Brav, Geczy and Gompers (2000), Brav and

Gompers (1997), Fama (1998), Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995), Kothari and
Warner (1997), Lyon, Barber, and Tsai (1999), Mitchell and Stafford (2000).
2

Average continuously compounded (log) returns for RM - ROLD are -0.019 with a t-statistic of

2.64, so this change makes the effect slightly stronger.
3

Here the definition of a new list is a firm newly listed in the past three years, where Fama and

French (2001) look at the first three years separately. Their approach has the drawback of
producing portfolios that contain very few stocks in some months, creating high volatility and
high standard errors.
4

The four factors come from Ken French’s web page. The momentum factor, UMD for up

minus down, is created by French and is slightly different from the one used by Carhart (1997).
5

Weiss (1989) and Peavey (1990) find that closed-end funds do poorly after their IPO. This

finding is consistent with the fact that they typically sell at a premium to their net asset value
initially (Klibanoff, Lamont, and Wizman (1998) mention an extreme example of the 92 percent
premium for the Taiwan fund two months after its inception). A piece of time series evidence
suggests another connection between IPOs and closed end funds: Lee, Shleifer and Thaler (1991)
find that IPO waves by operating companies correspond to times when closed end fund prices
are atypically high relative to NAV.
6

A concern in this regression (and more generally in the TIMING measure) is spurious

predictability. Shultz (2001) discusses the possibility of “pseudo market timing” creating
spurious predictability of returns using waves of issuance. A well known small sample bias,
discussed in Stambaugh (1999), exists in this situation due to persistence in the independent

Evaluating value weighting – Page 34

variable and covariance of shocks to new lists weights and new list returns. Using the formula
on page 273 of Campbell, Lo, and Mackinlay (1997), the bias is only -0.26, which is small
compared to the actual coefficient of 16.35.

Evaluating value weighting – Page 35

REFERENCES

Bagwell, Laurie Simon and John B. Shoven, 1989, Cash distributions to shareholders, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 3, 129-140.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeremy Stein, 2001, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, working
paper
Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, 1997, Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The
empirical power and specification of test statistics, Journal Of Financial Economics 43, 341-372.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, All that Glitters: The Effect of Attention on the
Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors, working paper
Barberis, Nicholas C., 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal of
Finance 55, 225-264.
Brav, Alon, 2000, Inference in long-horizon event studies: A Bayesian approach with application
to initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 55, 1979-2016.
Brav, Alon, Geczy, Christopher, and Gompers, Paul A., 2000, Is the abnormal return following
equity issuances anomalous?, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 209-249.
Brav, Alon, and Gompers, Paul A., 1997, Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of
initial public offerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed companies,
Journal of Finance 52, 1791-1821.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The econometrics of
financial markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Carhart Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 5782.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2001, Market Liquidity and
Trading Activity, Journal of Finance 56, 501-530.
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2001, The value spread,
working paper
Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, Market reaction to tangible and intangible
information, working paper
36

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.
Davis, James L, Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Characteristics, covariances,
and average returns: 1929 to 1997, Journal of Finance 55, 389-406
De Bondt, Werner F. M., and Richard M. Thaler, 1986, Does the stock market overreact?,
Journal of Finance 41, 793-807.
Dharan, Bala G., David L. Ikenberry, 1995, The Long-Run Negative Drift of Post-Listing
Stock Returns, Journal of Finance. 50, 1547-1574.
Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Journal of
Financial Economics 49, 283-306.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama and French, 2001, Newly listed firms; fundamentals, survival rates, and returns, CRSP
working paper 530.
Gompers, Paul A. and Josh Lerner, 2001, The really long-run performance of initial public
offerings: The pre-NASDAQ evidence, working paper
Graham, Benjamin, 1973, The Intelligent Investor, Harper & Row, New York.
Graham, Benjamin, and David Dodd, 1934, Security analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Graham, John R., and Campbell Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance:
Evidence from the Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.
Grossman, Sanford J., 1995, Dynamic asset allocation and the informational efficiency of
markets, Journal of Finance 50, 773-787.
Ibbotson, Roger G., and Jeffrey F. Jaffe, 1975, “Hot issue” markets, Journal of Finance 30,
1027-1042.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, The underreaction to open
market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.
Jones, Charles M., 2002, A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs, Columbia
University working paper.
37

Klibanoff, Peter, Owen Lamont, and Thierry A. Wizman, 1998, Investor reaction to salient news
in closed-end country funds, Journal of Finance 53, 673-699.
Kothari, S.P. , and Jerold B. Warner, 1997, Measuring long-horizon security price performance,
Journal Of Financial Economics 43, 301-339.
Lamont, Owen A., 2000, Investment plans and stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2719-2745.
Lamont, Owen A., and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in
tech stock carve-outs, NBER working paper 8302.
Lee, Charles M.C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the closedend fund puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75-109.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The New Issues Puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 2000, Uniformly least powerful tests of market efficiency,
Journal of Financial Economics 55, 361-389.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 2002, Why has IPO underpricing increased over time,
University of Florida working paper
Lyon, John D., Brad M. Barber, and Chih-ling Tsai, 1999, Improved methods for tests of longrun abnormal stock returns, Journal of Finance 54, 165-201.
Mitchell, Mark L., and Stafford, Erik, 2000, Managerial decisions and long-term stock price
performance, Journal of Business 73, 287-329.
Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson, 2002, Dotcom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock
prices, NYU working paper.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2000, Comparing asset pricing models: An investment
perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 335-381.
Peavey, John W., 1990, Returns on initial public offerings of closed-end funds, Review of
Financial Studies 3, 695-708.
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The Long-Run Performance Of Initial Public Offerings, Journal of Finance
46, 3-27.
Ritter, Jay and Ivo Welch, 2002, A review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,
Journal of Finance forthcoming
Schultz, Paul, 2001, Pseudo market timing and the long-run underperformance of IPOs,
working paper.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal Of Financial Economics 54,
38

375-421.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of
Business 69,
Weiss, Kathleen, 1989, The post-offering price performance of closed-end funds,
Financial Management 1989, 57-67.

39

Table I
Summary statistics for new lists
RM is the CRSP market return. RF is the t-bill portfolio return. ROLD is the return on old lists not newly
appearing in CRSP in the last 36 months. RLIST is the return on new lists newly appearing in CRSP in the
last 36 months. All returns are value weighted, monthly, in percent. wLIST is the portfolio weight of the
market in newly listed stocks, and has average value of w LIST over the entire sample period. FIXED is

w LIST ( RtLIST − RtOLD ) and TIMING is ( wtLIST − wLIST )( RtLIST − RtOLD ) . The sample period is January

1929 to December 2001.
Variable

Mean

RM - RF
ROLD - RF
RLIST - RF
RM - ROLD
RLIST - ROLD
RLIST - RM
TIMING
FIXED
wLIST

0.606
0.623
0.487
-0.017
-0.137
-0.119
-0.011
-0.006
0.046

t-stat on
mean
3.22
3.34
2.08
-2.37
-1.25
-1.16
-3.05
-1.25
52.46

Std. Dev.
5.567
5.531
6.940
0.216
3.231
3.039
0.107
0.149
0.026

Min

Max
-29.003
-28.441
-33.264
-2.279
-22.038
-20.300
-1.382
-1.016
0.009

38.174
38.057
43.679
1.833
21.743
20.128
0.934
1.002
0.147

Correlations
RM - RF ROLD - RF RLIST - RF RM - ROLD RLIST -ROLD RLIST - RM TIMING FIXED
ROLD - RF

0.999

RLIST - RF

0.905

0.890

RM - ROLD

0.186

0.148

0.533

RLIST - ROLD

0.233

0.200

0.625

0.893

RLIST - RM

0.234

0.202

0.626

0.878

1.000

TIMING

0.052

0.022

0.209

0.779

0.412

0.383

FIXED

0.233

0.200

0.625

0.893

1.000

1.000

0.412

-0.127

-0.121

-0.158

-0.174

-0.132

-0.128

-0.168

wLIST

40

-0.132

Table II
Regression results for new lists

ROLD - RF
(1)
Mean return
0.623
(0.187)
pre-62
0.520
(0.202)
post-62
0.745
(0.330)
CAPM α
0.022
(0.007)
3-factor α
0.016
(0.006)

RLIST - RF
(2)
0.487
(0.234)
0.374
(0.312)
0.619
(0.354)
-0.197
(0.100)
-0.128
(0.074)

RM - ROLD
(3)
-0.017
(0.007)
-0.019
(0.012)
-0.015
(0.006)
-0.022
(0.007)
-0.016
(0.006)

R-squared

0.021
(0.006)
0.995
(0.001)
-0.033
(0.002)
0.024
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.001)
0.999

-0.199
(0.076)
1.088
(0.015)
0.502
(0.023)
-0.314
(0.022)
0.065
(0.018)
0.904

-0.021
(0.006)
0.005
(0.001)
0.033
(0.002)
-0.024
(0.002)
0.004
(0.001)
0.451

-0.219
(0.080)
0.093
(0.015)
0.535
(0.024)
-0.338
(0.023)
0.069
(0.019)
0.504

4-factor α
pre-62
4-factor α
post-62

0.018
(0.008)
0.017
(0.006)

-0.164
(0.103)
-0.192
(0.099)

-0.018
(0.008)
-0.017
(0.006)

-0.182
(0.109)
-0.209
(0.103)

4-factor α
RM - RF
SMB
HML
UMD

41

RLIST-ROLD RLIST - RM
(4)
(5)
-0.137
-0.119
(0.109)
(0.103)
-0.146
-0.126
(0.178)
(0.167)
-0.126
-0.111
(0.113)
(0.108)
-0.219
-0.197
(0.107)
(0.100)
-0.144
-0.128
(0.078)
(0.074)

TIMING
(6)
-0.011
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.004)
-0.012
(0.004)
-0.009
(0.003)

FIXED
(7)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.004)

-0.199
(0.076)
0.088
(0.015)
0.502
(0.023)
-0.314
(0.022)
0.065
(0.018)
0.499

-0.010
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
0.008
(0.001)
-0.008
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.146

-0.010
(0.004)
0.004
(0.001)
0.025
(0.001)
-0.016
(0.001)
0.003
(0.001)
0.504

-0.164
(0.103)
-0.192
(0.099)

-0.009
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.004)

-0.008
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.005)

Table II
Notes
RM is the CRSP market return. RF is the t-bill portfolio return. ROLD is the return on old lists not
newly appearing in CRSP in the last 36 months. RLIST is the return on new lists newly appearing
in CRSP in the last 36 months. All returns are value weighted, monthly, in percent. wLIST is the
portfolio weight of the market in newly listed stocks, and has average value of w LIST over the
entire sample period. FIXED is w LIST ( RtLIST − RtOLD ) and TIMING is

(w

LIST
t

− wLIST )( RtLIST − RtOLD ) . The CAPM α is the intercept term from a regression on RM - RF.

The three-factor α is the intercept term from a regression on the three variables of Fama and
French (1993), including the excess market return, SMB (the return on small stocks minus big
stocks) and the HML (the return of high B/M stocks minus low B/M stocks). The four-factor
model adds UMD, a momentum factor reflecting the return of stocks with high prior year returns
minus stocks with low prior year returns. Pre-1962 is prior to August 1962. Post-1962 is after
July 1962. The table shows four-factor loadings as well as α. The sample period is January 1929
to December 2001. Standard errors in parentheses.

42

Table III
Robustness tests for timing
The table shows the average value of TIMING and its α’s for different specifications and time
periods. RM is the CRSP market return. RF is the t-bill portfolio return. ROLD is the return on old
lists not newly appearing in CRSP in the last 36 months. RLIST is the return on new lists newly
appearing in CRSP in the last 36 months. All returns are value weighted, monthly, in percent.
wLIST is the portfolio weight of the market in newly listed stocks, and has average value of
wLIST over the entire sample period. TIMING is ( wtLIST − wLIST )( RtLIST − RtOLD ) . The CAPM α
is the intercept term from a regression on RM - RF. The three-factor α is the intercept term from a
regression on the three variables of Fama and French (1993), including the excess market return,
SMB (the return on small stocks minus big stocks) and the HML (the return of high B/M stocks
minus low B/M stocks). The four-factor model adds UMD, a momentum factor reflecting the
return of stocks with high prior year returns minus stocks with low prior year returns. “Common
stock only” uses only stock with CRSP share code 10 or 11 in the calculation of the old and new
list portfolios returns and weights. “Equal weighted” replaces all value weights with equal
weights. “Real timing” uses average weights calculated as the average of all weights up to
month t, provided at least 5 years of data are available. For common stock only and equal
weighted, the sample period is January 1929 to December 2001. For all regressions, the factors
on the right hand side are calculated in the regular way. Standard errors in parentheses.

Mean return CAPM α 3-factor α 4-factor α
Common Stock Only

-0.011
(0.004)

-0.012
(0.004)

-0.009
(0.004)

-0.011
(0.004)

Equal weighted

-0.018
(0.006)

-0.023
(0.006)

-0.023
(0.006)

-0.022
(0.006)

Real timing, 1934:2-2001:12

-0.008
(0.004)

-0.009
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.007
(0.004)

Benchmark definition, 1973:1 - 2001:12

-0.016
(0.008)

-0.017
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.012
(0.007)

Benchmark definition, 1973:1 - 1998:12

-0.010
(0.004)

-0.009
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

43

Table IV
Predictive power of new list portfolio weight for returns
Forecasting regressions of returns on portfolio weights. The dependent variable is RLIST – ROLD in the first
column and RM - RF in the other columns. ROLD is the return on old lists, a portfolio of stocks that have
not newly appeared in CRSP in the last 36 months. RLIST is the return on new lists, a portfolio of stocks
that have newly appeared in CRSP in the last 36 months. wLIST is the portfolio weight of the market in
newly listed stocks. RM - RF is the excess return on the CRSP value weighted market. P/D is the ratio of
current price to past year dividends for the S&P Composite index. P/E10 is the market ratio of current
price to average earnings per share over the past 10 years, for the S&P Composite index. BILLYIELD is
the t-bill yield. SHARE is the equity share over the past year, calculated as gross equity issues divided by
gross equity issues plus gross debt issues. All returns are value weighted, monthly, in percent. For
monthly regressions the sample period is January 1929 to December 2001. For annual regressions (the
last two columns only) the sample period is 1929 to 2000. Regressions include a constant term, not
shown. Standard errors in parentheses.
RLIST – ROLD
wLIST

-16.353
(4.167)

P/D
P/E10
BILLYIELD
SHARE
R-squared

0.017

-------------------------------------- RM - RF -------------------------------------Annual
Annual
-27.177
-25.577 -23.127 -250.853 -154.698
(7.185)
(7.515) (8.015) (91.075) (98.260)
-0.018
-0.004
(0.013)
(0.014)
-0.062
-0.025
-0.761
(0.026)
(0.029)
(0.334)
-10.331 -12.100 -10.126 -10.807
-36.014
(5.804) (5.674) (5.769) (5.668)
(63.241)
-63.343
-72.641
(21.206) (21.808)
0.016

0.007

0.012

44

0.020

0.021

0.230

0.290

Table V
Sharpe ratios and portfolio weights
The table shows Sharpe ratios and portfolio weights for different portfolios. RM is the CRSP market
return. RF is the t-bill portfolio return. ROLD is the value weighted return on a portfolio of stocks that have
not newly appeared in CRSP in the last 36 months. wLIST is the portfolio weight of the market in newly
listed stocks. “Substitute t-bills for new lists” is the return (1- wLIST)(ROLD - RF). “Substitute t-bills for
cash” is the return (1- wLIST)ROLD - RF. “Apparent weights” are (seemingly static) portfolio weights

produced by a standard mean variance optimizer using means, variances, and covariances from
the full sample period. “Implied weights” are the (possibly time-varying) portfolio weights in
new and old lists implied by the apparent weights. The sample period is January 1929 to
December 2001.

Mean Std
return dev

-- Apparent Weights -Sharpe ROLD RLIST RM
Ratio

--------- Implied Weights --------ROLD
RLIST

Simple portfolios
RM- RF

0.606

5.567 0.109

1 − wtLIST

wtLIST

0.623

5.531 0.113

1

0

Substitute
t-bills for
new lists 0.612

1 − wtLIST

0

5.232 0.117

1 − wtLIST

0

2.00 - 2.00 wtLIST

-1.00 + 2.00 wtLIST

1.92

-0.92

-0.48 + 40.56 wtLIST

1.48 - 40.56 wtLIST

ROLD -RF

Substitute
cash for
new lists 0.597

5.233 0.114

Optimal portfolios
RLIST,
RM

0.726

5.688 0.128

RLIST,
ROLD

0.748

5.728 0.131

1.92

-0.92

RLIST,
ROLD,
RM

1.124

7.194 0.156

40.08

1.48

-1.00

2.00

-40.56

45

Table VI
Regression results for net new issues

M

R –R
Mean return

LAG

--Net new issues---PLUS---MINUS---LIST-TIM
FIXED TIM
FIXED TIM FIXED TIM FIXED

-0.035
(0.010)
-0.043
(0.016)
-0.026
(0.009)
-0.041
(0.010)
-0.033
(0.007)

-0.013
(0.005)
-0.018
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.004)

-0.022
(0.007)
-0.025
(0.011)
-0.018
(0.008)
-0.027
(0.007)
-0.022
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)

-0.011
(0.003)
-0.013
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.013
(0.003)
-0.013
(0.002)

0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)

-0.003
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)

-0.011
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.004)
-0.012
(0.004)
-0.010
(0.003)

-0.007
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.004)

R-squared

-0.035
(0.008)
0.007
(0.001)
0.041
(0.002)
-0.034
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.439

-0.012
(0.005)
0.001
(0.001)
0.010
(0.001)
-0.011
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.147

-0.023
(0.005)
0.005
(0.001)
0.031
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.471

-0.001
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.066

-0.010
(0.003)
0.002
(0.000)
0.008
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.188

0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.123

-0.002
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.137

-0.011
(0.004)
0.001
(0.001)
0.008
(0.001)
-0.009
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.148

-0.011
(0.004)
0.004
(0.001)
0.025
(0.001)
-0.016
(0.001)
0.003
(0.001)
0.505

4-factor α
pre-62
4-factor α
post-62

-0.035
(0.011)
-0.027
(0.008)

-0.011
(0.007)
-0.007
(0.006)

-0.024 -0.002 -0.012 0.000 -0.002 -0.010
(0.007) (0.002) (0.003) (0.001) (0.001) (0.005)
-0.020
0.000 -0.009 0.000 -0.001 -0.008
(0.007) (0.003) (0.005) (0.001) (0.002) (0.004)

-0.009
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.005)

pre-62
post-62
CAPM α
3-factor α

4-factor α
RM - RF
SMB
HML
UMD

46

Table VI
Notes
RM is the CRSP market return. RF is the t-bill portfolio return. RLAG is the return on a portfolio
of stocks not newly appearing in CRSP in the last 36 months, using value weights calculated
with the number of shares outstanding 36 months ago. RLIST is the return on new lists, a
portfolio of stocks newly appearing in CRSP in the last 36 months. RPLUS is the return on shares
added in the last 36 months by firms that were on CRSP 36 months ago, using value weights
calculated with the number of shares that have been added. RMINUS is the return on shares
subtracted in the last 36 months by firms that were on CRSP 36 months ago, using value weights
calculated with the number of shares that have been subtracted. All returns are value weighted,
monthly, in percent. All calculations using shares are split-adjusted. wLIST is the portfolio
weight of the market in newly listed stocks, and has average value of w LIST over the entire sample
period. For new lists, FIXED is w LIST ( RtLIST − RtLAG ) and TIMING is

(w

LIST
t

− wLIST )( RtLIST − RtLAG ) . The weights, fixed weight returns, and timing returns are

calculated similarly for PLUS and MINUS. For “net new issues,” the FIXED component is the
sum of the three LIST, PLUS, and MINUS components, and similarly for TIMING. The CAPM
α is the intercept term from a regression on RM - RF. The three-factor α is the intercept term
from a regression on the three variables of Fama and French (1993), including the excess market
return, SMB (the return on small stocks minus big stocks) and the HML (the return of high B/M
stocks minus low B/M stocks). The four-factor model adds UMD, a momentum factor reflecting
the return of stocks with high prior year returns minus stocks with low prior year returns. The
table shows four-factor loadings as well as α. Pre-1962 is prior to August 1962. Post-1962 is
after July 1962. The sample period is January 1929 to December 2001. Standard errors in
parentheses.

47

Table VII
Value and size
RGROWTH is the value weighted portfolio of all firms that are in the top 30 percent of stocks sorted
on market/book ratios. RVALUE is the value weighted portfolio of all firms that are in the bottom
30 percent of stocks sorted on market/book ratios. RSMALL is a value weighted portfolio of all
firms that are in the bottom 30 percent of stocks sorted on market capitalization. REX_GROWTH,
REX_VALUE , and REX_SMALL are the complements. wGROWTH is the portfolio weight of the market
in firms in the top 30 percent sorted on market/book. FIXEDGROWTH is
wGROWTH ( RtGROWTH − RtEX _ GROWTH ) and TIMGROWTH is

(w

GROWTH
t

− wGROWTH )( RtGROWTH − RtEX _ GROWTH ) , and similarly for value and small. The CAPM α

is the intercept term from a regression on RM - RF. The three-factor α is the intercept term from a
regression on the three variables of Fama and French (1993), including the excess market return,
SMB (the return on small stocks minus big stocks) and the HML (the return of high B/M stocks
minus low B/M stocks). The four-factor model adds UMD, a momentum factor reflecting the
return of stocks with high prior year returns minus stocks with low prior year returns. The
sample period is January 1929 to June 2001. Standard errors in parentheses.
Mean return Mean weight CAPM α 3-factor α 4-factor α
R –R
-0.076
0.488
-0.045
0.056
0.065
(0.046)
(0.045)
(0.026)
(0.027)
GROWTH
-0.014
-0.002
0.010
0.003
TIM
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
GROWTH
FIXED
-0.062
-0.043
0.046
0.061
(0.040)
(0.040)
(0.023)
(0.024)
M

EX_GROWTH

RM – REX_VALUE
TIMVALUE
FIXEDVALUE

RM – REX_SMALL
TIMSMALL
FIXEDSMALL

0.045
(0.015)
-0.012
(0.009)
0.057
(0.019)

0.165

0.036
(0.015)
0.000
(0.008)
0.036
(0.018)

0.002
(0.008)
0.013
(0.007)
-0.011
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.009)
0.001
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.007)

0.005
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.004)
0.013
(0.006)

0.038

0.001
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.004)
0.004
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.002)

48

Figure 1
Fraction of market that is new list in past 36 months, 1929 - 2001

Weight

.147236

.008837
1930

1940

1950

1960

Year

1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 2: TIMING, 1929 – 2001

Return

.933549

-1.3825
1930

1940

1950

1960

Year

49

Figure 3: Fraction of market that is plus or minus in past 36 months, 1929- 2001
w_PLUS

w_MINUS

.145607

-.039141
1930

1940

1950

1960

Year

1970

50

1980

1990

2000

