                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ROLE OF THE FAMILY IN IMMIGRANTS’ LABOR-MARKET ACTIVITY:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES


                                          Francine D. Blau
                                         Lawrence M. Kahn
                                          Joan Y. Moriarty
                                         Andre Portela Souza


                                         Working Paper 9051
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9051


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




Draft. Comments welcome. Portions of this paper were written while Blau and Kahn were Visiting Scholars
at the Russell Sage Foundation, to which they are grateful for research support.The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Joan Y. Moriarty and Andre Portela Souza. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of the Family in Immigrants’ Labor-Market Activity:
Evidence from the United States
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Joan Y. Moriarty and Andre Portela Souza
NBER Working Paper No. 9051
July 2002
JEL No. J1, J2, J3



                                             ABSTRACT

        We use Census of Population microdata for 1980 and 1990 to examine the labor supply and
wages of immigrant husbands and wives in the United States in a family context. Earlier research by
Baker and Benjamin (1997) posits a family investment model in which, upon arrival, immigrant husbands
invest in their human capital while immigrant wives work to provide the family with liquidity during this
period. Consistent with this model, they find for Canada that immigrant wives work longer hours upon
arrival than comparable natives, but, with time in Canada, they are eventually overtaken by native wives.
In contrast, we find that, among immigrants to the United States, both husbands and wives work and earn
less than comparable natives upon arrival, with similar shortfalls for men and women. Further, both
immigrant husbands and wives have similar, positive assimilation profiles in wages and labor supply and
eventually overtake both the wages and the labor supply of comparable natives.




Francine D. Blau                                        Lawrence M. Kahn
School of Industrial and                                School of Industrial and
Labor Relations                                         Labor Relations
Cornell University                                      Cornell University
265 Ives Hall                                           264 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901                                   Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
NBER and CESifo                                         and CESifo

Joan Y. Moriarty                                        Andre Portela Souza
School of Industrial and                                University of Sao Paulo
Labor Relations                                         Faculdade de Economia, Administracao e
Cornell University                                      Contabilidade
ILR Graduate Student Mailboxes                          Av. Professor Luciano Gualberto, 908
Ives Hall                                               Cidade Universitaria, Predio FEA 1
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901                                   Sao Paulo, SP 05508-900 Brazil
I. Introduction
       Most research on the labor market outcomes of immigrants has studied the behavior of

individuals, focusing primarily on the wage assimilation process, or the excess returns to

experience which immigrants obtain in their destination country's labor market (e.g., Barry R.

Chiswick, 1978; George J. Borjas, 1985). Recently, however, attention has been directed to

analyzing immigrant labor market outcomes in a family context, an approach which combines

information about an individual’s own labor market opportunities and the family context in

which labor market decisions take place. In a recent paper in this Review, Michael Baker and

Dwayne Benjamin (1997) evaluate alternative explanations for the observed labor supply

patterns of Canadian immigrants in the 1986-91 period. Specifically, when immigrant husbands

arrive in Canada, they typically work less than comparable natives; however, immigrant wives

work more than natives, other things equal. With assimilation, the labor supply of immigrant

husbands eventually catches up to that of natives, while immigrant wives’ labor supply falls

relative to comparable natives and is ultimately overtaken by that of natives.

       The authors take these patterns to be most consistent with a family investment model. In

this scenario, upon arrival, husbands invest in their human capital, while wives work to provide

the family with liquidity during this investment period. With increased time in Canada,

husbands’ labor supply increases rapidly due to their growing skills in the Canadian labor

market, while wives’ labor supply falls off in part because they originally took “dead-end” jobs

upon arrival in order to finance their husbands’ investments in human capital. Interestingly,

although this fact goes uncommented upon, their estimated wage equations do not support their

model—they find similar rates of wage assimilation for husbands and wives. This does not

match their story of dead-end jobs for wives and large human capital investments of their

husbands.

       An alternative possible explanation examined by the authors involves a simple price

model in which the observed labor supply patterns reflect labor supply responses to each

spouse’s wages. For example, the initially high but eventually falling level of wives’ labor
supply (relative to comparable natives) could be a response to their husbands’ initially low, but

rising, wages. While this reasoning, like the family investment model, is broadly consistent with

the data, the authors conclude that the simple price model cannot be the entire explanation since,

in order to explain the full labor supply patterns of immigrants, it would require unrealistically

high labor supply elasticities, and, further, that the assimilation patterns noted above remain even

when wages of husband and wife are controlled for. The authors then go on to present a variety

of evidence that is consistent with wives in immigrant families in Canada financing their

husbands’ human capital investments early in their stay in Canada.

         In this paper, we use microdata from the U.S. Census of Population for 1980 and 1990 to

examine whether these patterns characterize the experience of immigrants in the United States.

While Baker and Benjamin cite studies by Harriet Orcutt Duleep and Seth Sanders (1993) and

David A. McPherson and James B. Stewart (1989) for the United States that obtain results which

they characterize as consistent with their Canadian findings, these studies are based on a single

cross-section of data. As Borjas (1985) showed, if the unmeasured characteristics of cohorts of

immigrants are changing over time, as appears to be the case in the U.S., such studies may

produce biased estimates of immigrant assimilation effects. This problem may be mitigated by

employing more than one nationally representative cross-section as we do here and as Baker and

Benjamin did in their analysis of Canada.1

         In contrast to the patterns which Baker and Benjamin (1997) found for Canada, we find

that, among immigrants to the United States, both husbands and wives work less than

comparable natives upon arrival. Further, both immigrant husbands and wives have positive

assimilation profiles in labor supply and eventually overtake the labor supply of comparable

natives. Both the male and female immigrant hours shortfalls upon arrival and the positive

assimilation profiles for men and women have similar magnitudes. It thus appears that in the

United States the labor supply patterns of immigrant husbands and wives similarly reflect
1
  There may however be biases in this "synthetic cohort" approach as well. The chief concern is an alteration in the
unmeasured composition of the group over the intervening period due say to the return migration of immigrants, or
in our case movements into and out of the currently married category. We return to this point below.


                                                         2
assimilation into the new country’s market. Our results suggest that investment is indeed

important, but that, in sharp contrast to the family investment model, both spouses seem to invest

primarily in their own human capital rather than their spouse’s. In this respect our findings are

consistent with a long line of research on the growth in married women's labor supply in the

United States which suggests that married women’s labor supply decisions are more responsive

to their own labor market opportunities than to their husband’s income (e.g., Jacob Mincer 1962;

Claudia Goldin 1990; and Chinhui Juhn and Kevin M. Murphy 1997). Finally, our paper has

significance for the Economics of Gender. In the Baker and Benjamin (1997) model, married

women are clearly “secondary earners” in the immigrant family. Our results for the U.S. suggest

more similar economic behavior of men and women within the immigrant family in that they are

both investing in their own human capital.

       Our results imply that the extent to which the family investment model applies to

immigrants may vary depending on such factors as the composition of the immigrant group and

conditions in the receiving country. While Baker and Benjamin (1997) have obtained some

evidence suggesting that the model may hold in Canada, we have found that the model does not

explain immigrant behavior in the United States. Similar studies of other countries need to be

done in order to determine whether Canada or the United States is an exceptional case.

However, our results do imply that the family investment model is inadequate for at least one

major immigrant-receiving country, the United States.




II. The Labor Supply and Wage Assimilation Patterns of Married Immigrants in the

United States

       A. Basic Results

       We examine the labor market assimilation patterns of married U.S. immigrants using a

pooled sample of married couples from the 5% Public Use Samples of the 1980 and 1990

Censuses. These include native couples, immigrant couples, and “mixed couples” (i.e., those


                                                 3
with one immigrant and one native spouse). The Census is particularly suitable for analyzing

immigrant outcomes because of its large sample size (while immigration has been increasing

rapidly, immigrants remained a relatively small proportion of population in 1980 and 1990) and

its information on race and ethnicity, as well as on the source countries of immigrants. In order

to focus on differences between outcomes in the United States and Canada, we follow the

specifications and sample restrictions in Baker and Benjamin’s (1997) Canadian study as closely

as possible.2 The entire 5% sample is used for couples including immigrants, nonwhites, and

Hispanics, but a random sample was employed for couples where both spouses were native

whites.3 In all the analyses reported below, observations are weighted to represent the U.S.
population. Our weighting also takes into account Census sampling weights which are available

for 1990 but not provided by the Census for 1980. Results were very similar when we ran

unweighted regressions.

         To analyze labor supply, we estimate the following equation on the pooled sample of

married immigrants and married natives separately for wives and husbands:



(1)               Hit = B′Xit + ΣcγWc + ΣcγHc + a1YSMWit + a2(YSMWit)2 + b1YSMHit

                                                                                   + b2(YSMHit)2 + kt + uit,



where for individual i in year t (t=1980 or 1990), H is annual hours worked in the previous year

(usual weekly hours * weeks worked, including those who did not work outside the home), γWc

and γHc are immigrant cohort-of-arrival effects referring to cohort c for wives and husbands,

respectively, YSMW and YSMH are years since migration for immigrant wives and immigrant


2
  Following Baker and Benjamin, we restrict the sample to those couples in which both members are aged 16-64
and exclude the self-employed and individuals with positive wage and salary income but implausible values of
wages (in our case, less than $1 or greater than $250 in 1989 dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditures
deflator). Also, as is standard in research examining immigrant outcomes in the United States or using U.S. Census
data to study wages, we exclude natives born abroad, at sea or in U.S. territories, individuals who are in the military,
and those with allocated wage and salary income. Note that this is a sample of married couples. Thus, if one
member of the couple did not meet the sample inclusion restrictions, both were excluded.
3
  This sample corresponded to 2/1000 of the U.S. population.


                                                           4
husbands, respectively, but equal 0 for natives, k is a common year effect, X is a vector of

control variables to be discussed shortly, and u is an error term.

        In equation (1), immigrants and natives are pooled. We define the cohort of arrival

dummy variables (whose coefficients are the γs) to include each possible arrival cohort as coded

in the Census: 1985-89, 1980-84, 1975-79, 1970-74, 1965-69, 1960-64, 1950-59, and pre-1950.

Thus the sum of the wife (husband) cohort dummies in the wife (husband) labor supply equation

would be identical to an immigrant dummy variable, which therefore is not separately included

in (1). The equation allows each spouse’s arrival cohort (if either spouse is an immigrant) to

affect the labor supply behavior of both spouses. In addition, the years since migration (YSMW

and YSMH) variables allow us to estimate assimilation profiles with respect to the individual's

own time in the U.S. as well as his or her spouse’s time, if either spouse is an immigrant.4 The
pooled sample across two Census years and the assumption of a common time effect for

immigrants and natives together allow us to separately identify immigrant cohort and

assimilation effects (Borjas, 1985).5

        The combination of the cohort dummies and the assimilation effects allows us to

completely characterize immigrant labor supply over time starting with arrival in the U.S. of any

arrival cohort relative to that of natives, controlling for the X variables and the time effect. The

X variables include quadratics in age for both the husband and wife, years of schooling for both

husband and wife, English language ability indicators (speaking English “well,” “not well” or

“not at all”, with native English speakers as the omitted category) for both husband and wife,

number of children, a dummy variable for the presence of children less than six years old, three

race/ethnicity dummy variables for husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, and Hispanic, with

white non-Hispanic the omitted category), a metropolitan area dummy variable, and regional

4
  Following Borjas (1995), we calculated the years since migration variables by evaluating the categorical period of
immigration variables at the midpoints of the indicated intervals and used 40 years in 1980 and 50 years in 1990 for
the open-ended category (before 1950).
5
  Of course, the common time effect may not hold to the extent that immigrants have different skill levels from
natives. In our context, this factor could produce problems comparing the U.S. and Canada to the extent that
immigrants’ relative skill levels differ in the two countries. This point is pursued further below.


                                                         5
dummy variables to account for the nine Census regions. Other than the control for

race/ethnicity, the specification is very similar to that of Baker and Benjamin (1997), and

omitting these variables from our equations did not affect the basic results.6

        Log-wage equations had a similar form to (1) except that, following Baker and Benjamin

(1997), no spouse cohort or assimilation variables were included. These were omitted by the

authors in order to focus on individuals’ own determinants of wage growth, while the labor

supply equations emphasize family considerations.7 Wages were defined as the previous year’s

wage and salary income divided by (weeks worked * usual weekly work hours) and were

expressed in 1989 dollars.

        Table 1a contains basic regression results for work hours and wages from reduced form

models. Overall, in contrast to Baker and Benjamin’s (1997) Canadian results, we obtain similar

wage and labor supply assimilation patterns for immigrant husbands and wives in the U.S.

Consider first the results for the labor supply equation for wives. We find that the coefficients

on the years since migration (YSM) and cohort variables are similarly signed to the results

obtained for Canada by Baker and Benjamin; however, there are some crucial differences in their

magnitudes. As in the case of Canada, the annual hours of immigrant women increase with

wife’s own time in the U.S. (through 30.3 years)8 and decrease with her husband's. However,
while the coefficient on wife’s own YSM is similar in magnitude to the coefficient estimated for

Canada, the effect for her husband’s YSM is small and insignificant. Similarly, while the impact

of a woman's own cohort variables are all negative and of her husband's positive (with one

exception), estimated husband's cohort effects are considerably smaller in magnitude in the U.S.

than in Canada. Signs are also similar for the YSM and cohort variables of immigrant husbands

in the U.S. and Canada. Both own and wives’ cohort effects are negative; and immigrant
6
  Baker and Benjamin (1997) were unable to include controls for race and ethnicity in their analysis because this
information was not available in their data, the 1986 and 1991 Canadian Survey of Consumer Finances.
7
  While we recognize that the family investment model implies that spouse’s time in the U.S. affects one’s own
human capital, we use Baker and Benjamin’s (1997) specification for comparability. Note that, following Baker
and Benjamin, we include spouse’s time in the U.S. and cohort variables when we examine results for immigrant
and mixed families separately below. Inclusion of these variables does not alter our findings.
8
  Mean YSM of immigrant wives is 16.344.


                                                         6
husbands are found to increase their hours worked with both their own YSM (through 33.0

years) and their wives’ YSM (through 30.4 years).9 As in the case of Canada, own effects are

larger than cross effects, although cross effects are found to be a bit larger in the U.S. than in

Canada.

          The net effects of the estimated YSM and cohort effects on the hours assimilation

profiles of immigrant wives and husbands are illustrated in Table 1b for immigrant couples

where both the wife and the husband arrived between 1975 and 1979. Results are qualitatively

similar for other cohorts. Relative to natives with similar characteristics, we find that immigrant

wives supply 212.7 fewer hours upon arrival (i.e. –264.592 + 51.897); and immigrant husbands

389.7 fewer hours. The assimilation effects for men and women both imply rising annual hours

worked relative to comparable natives with time in the U.S., with immigrant wives overtaking

native-born wives after 10-15 years, and immigrant husbands surpass native-born husbands after

about 15 years. The hours assimilation profile is concave for both groups.

          The U.S.-Canada comparison is clarified in Figure 1 which shows the hours assimilation

profiles summarized in Table 1b for the U.S. and analogous results for Canada derived from

Baker and Benjamin (1997). We focus on hypothetical immigrant married couples that migrated

at roughly the same time, where the base immigration entry cohort is assumed to be 1975-79 for

the U.S. and 1976-80 for Canada. The Figure shows that our results for immigrant husbands are

similar to those obtained for Canada by Baker and Benjamin; however, our results differ sharply

for immigrant wives. Their results imply that, in Canada, immigrant wives work more than

comparable natives upon arrival but that hours converge smoothly until reaching parity after 30

years. In contrast, as noted, immigrant wives in the U.S. initially have lower hours but

eventually surpass hours of comparable natives. Note also the qualitatively similar profiles for

immigrant husbands and wives in the U.S.

          To assess the magnitudes of the assimilation and cohort entry effects for immigrant

husbands and wives in the United States, recall that the dependent variable is annual hours
9
    Mean YSM of immigrant husbands is 16.902.


                                                  7
worked.10 In our pooled sample, the weighted means for annual hours (including those not

employed) averaged 1038.3 for wives and 1961.0 for husbands.11 If we convert the parameter

values into elasticities evaluated at these means using the results in Table 1b for the 1975-79

cohort, we find that the labor supply behavior of immigrant husbands and wives relative to

comparable natives is very similar, both at arrival and over time in the U.S. At arrival, wives

work 20.5% less than the average, all else equal, while husbands work 19.9% less. Over the next

25 years, immigrant wives increase their labor supply relative to comparable natives by 28.1% of

the sample average, while immigrant husbands raise theirs by 26.4%.

        The results in Table 1a indicate that, in the U.S., wage assimilation profiles are also

similar for immigrant husbands and wives. Evaluating these results for the 1975/79 cohort in

Table 1c shows that both groups start 12-15% below comparable natives. But, after 25 years,

immigrant wives have moved up 18.9%, while immigrant husbands’ wages have increased

19.4% relative to comparable natives. Like the hours profiles (at least considered as elasticities),

the log wage profiles for husbands and wives display similar concavity. Interestingly, Figure 2

shows that our wage results are similar to those of Baker and Benjamin (1997) in that they also

find similar wage assimilation profiles for immigrant husbands and wives. This suggests that

some investment activity by both husbands and wives in their own human capital occurs in both

countries. Moreover, the similarity of the wage assimilation profiles for husbands and wives in

Canada (and our own findings for the U.S.) does not suggest that women are taking dead-end

jobs to finance their husbands’ human capital investments. And, although wages increase

considerably more rapidly with time in the receiving country for immigrant husbands in Canada

than in the U.S., the same is true for immigrant wives.12 This suggests that the steeper slope of


10
   We use hours instead of log hours because we retain those with zero hours (i.e., the non-employed) in the
analysis.
11
   Annual work hours were 7-12% higher among natives than immigrants. For example, annual work hours
averaged 934.4 hours for wives and 1844.8 hours for husbands among immigrants; and 1048.1 for wives and
1971.14 for husbands among natives. Because the means for immigrants and natives are fairly close, we would
obtain similar qualitative conclusions about elasticities using immigrant, native or pooled means.
12
   Evaluated at the mean YSM in the U.S. of 16.623, the return to an additional year in the receiving country is
.0063 for wives and .0070 for husbands in the U.S., and .0140 for wives and .0124 for husbands in Canada.


                                                         8
immigrant husbands’ wage profiles in Canada compared to the U.S. is not necessarily due to the

financing of their human capital investments by their wives.13

         In Table 2, we present structural labor supply equations where we include own and

spouse’s wages or estimated wage offers, as well as the couple’s asset income, to see whether

responses to these variables can account for the assimilation patterns which we observe in Tables

1a and b. Following Baker and Benjamin (1997) and Juhn and Murphy (1997), we impute wage

offers to those without jobs by predicting log wages from a regression on a sample of those who

worked less than 20 weeks in the previous year (estimated separately by gender).14 Table 2

shows ordinary least squares (OLS) and two stage least squares (2SLS) results, where in the

latter, following Baker and Benjamin, own and spouse’s wage offers are instrumented using the

gender-specific decile in which one’s wage offer (actual or predicted in the case of non-workers)

falls. This instrumental variable procedure can potentially correct for measurement error in the

wage variables, since error is likely to be much less frequent in measuring wage decile than

actual wages.15

13
   It is possible that the assumption of a common time effect for immigrants and natives has a larger negative effect
on immigrants’ wage assimilation profiles in the U.S. than in Canada. Specifically, according to Borjas (1993),
immigrants are less skilled relative to natives in the U.S. than in Canada. Further, it appears that the fortunes of the
less-skilled generally declined by more in the U.S. than in Canada in the 1980s (Richard B. Freeman and Karen
Needels, 1993). Then if, as is necessary to account for immigrant cohort effects, we assume a common time effect,
this may cause us to understate true immigrant assimilation profiles by more in the U.S. than in Canada. That is, the
more negative immigrant time effect in the U.S. becomes a less steeply sloped assimilation profile in a model that
forces a common time effect (this is similar to the argument made by Robert J. LaLonde and Robert H. Topel
(1992) in assessing male immigrant wage assimilation in the U.S. in the 1980s). While a similar point may apply to
the hours analyses as well, these relative biases cannot explain the divergent profiles for Canadian and U.S.
immigrant wives shown in Figure 1. If anything, true U.S. immigrant women’s employment assimilation profiles
are even more positively sloped relative to those in Canada than Figure 1 indicates.
14
   This regression included the respondent’s age, age squared, own and spouse’s education, a metropolitan area
indicator, regional dummies, a year effect, race/ethnicity, and own cohort dummies for immigrants. This
specification is similar to Baker and Benjamin’s, except for our inclusion of cohort dummies for immigrants (made
possible by our larger sample size) and the addition of race. Due to an insufficient number of immigrants in the
sample of individuals working less than 20 weeks, Baker and Benjamin obtain cohort effects from wage regressions
using the sample of all working individuals. As noted above, Baker and Benjamin omit race/ethnicity from their
analyses because it was not available in their data; recall that omitting race/ethnicity did not affect our results.
15
   While it is true that measurement error in wage deciles is less frequent than in actual levels, the consequences of
making an error in denoting one’s decile are likely to be greater than the consequences of a small measurement error
in actual wage levels. For example, wrongly classifying a 9th decile worker as an 8th decile earner implies an error
as large in log points as the difference between log wages in the 9th vs. the 8th deciles. Thus, the wage decile
instrument may not adequately correct for measurement error in actual wages. Note that whatever the merit of this
instrument, the OLS and 2SLS results in Table 2 are very similar.


                                                           9
        The key findings in Table 2 are that, even controlling for wages, there are comparable

positive hours assimilation profiles for immigrant husbands and wives. And, among immigrant

couples in the same cohort, both husbands and wives are estimated to start out below comparable

natives in work hours, controlling for wages, family asset income, period and the control

variables. In contrast, using a similar specification, Baker and Benjamin continue to find that,

among families that immigrated together, wives start out working more than comparable natives,

but have negative assimilation profiles. They take their results to imply that simple labor supply

models cannot account for their data. Our results similarly suggest that a simple labor supply

model cannot account for our findings, but in the case of the U.S. it appears that the primary

pattern is for both immigrant wives and husbands to invest in their own human capital. We note

however that one interpretation of our results, as well as those of Baker and Benjamin, is that

time in the U.S. provides additional information about labor market opportunities, even

controlling for wages.16
        A final point meriting comment in results presented in Tables 1a and 2 is the estimated

positive effect of wife’s YSM on husband’s labor supply in all the models estimated. As noted

above, Baker and Benjamin obtain the same result but in their case there is a ready interpretation

for this finding. Wives are found to scale back their labor supply with time in Canada and hence

it makes sense that husband's labor supply is increasing in wife's YSM. How can we explain our

result in the face of rising wife’s labor supply and wages with own YSM? It is possible that this

positive coefficient is the result of greater information that the wife brings to her partner with

additional time in the U.S., thus furthering his assimilation process. However, if that is the case,


16
   Note that, in addition to the YSM variables, a number of the control variables, including husband’s and wife’s
education and presence of children, may capture some of the effects of wages on labor supply. For the wives’
results in Table 2, the coefficient on wife’s own log wage (WW) is smaller in absolute value than the coefficient on
husband’s log wage (WH) in both the OLS and 2SLS regressions. This is counter to expectations based on the labor
supply literature cited above in which wives were found to be more responsive to their own wage opportunities than
to their husband’s income. However, when we estimated more conventional models we found the expected results.
For example, when the models in Table 2 were reestimated continuing to include the YSM and immigrant cohort
variables but omitting own and husband’s education and presence of children, the estimated coefficients and
standard errors were 338.969 (2.303) for WW and –236.5 (2.149) for WH in the OLS specification and 504.777
(3.402) for WW and –334.854 (3.563) for WH in the 2SLS specification.


                                                        10
we would expect to find a similar positive effect of husband’s YSM on wife’s labor supply. The

fact that we find no evidence of this might be taken as indirect evidence in support of the family

investment model. That is, it may be that the positive information effect of husband’s YSM on

wife's hours is offset by the wife’s reduction in her labor supply as her husband accumulates

human capital and no longer needs her contribution to family liquidity. However, if wives

undertake such a role to some extent in the U.S., our evidence strongly suggests that the

dominant pattern for immigrant husbands and wives is a simple process of human capital

accumulation: both husbands and wives start with low wages and low hours but both have

positive assimilation profiles, and the magnitudes of these effects are similar for husbands and

wives.

         Further evidence on the family investment model is provided in Tables 3 and 4 which

show results for the labor supply and wages separately for wives and husbands in immigrant

families (i.e. where both spouses are immigrants) and mixed families (i.e. where only one spouse

is an immigrant).17 This analysis follows that of Baker and Benjamin who reasoned that a mixed
family would be less liquidity constrained than an immigrant family. They found that immigrant

wives in mixed families behaved much less according to the family investment model than those

in immigrant families. Specifically, immigrant wives in mixed families worked less than

comparable natives upon arrival in Canada but had a positive assimilation profile, while

immigrant wives in immigrant families generally worked more than comparable natives upon

arrival, but had negative assimilation profiles.

         In contrast to Baker and Benjamin, the results for the U.S. shown in Table 3 indicate that

immigrant wives in both types of family work significantly less than comparable natives upon

arrival and both have significantly positively sloped hours assimilation profiles. The hours

shortfall at arrival relative to natives is generally smaller in mixed than in immigrant families,

and the hours assimilation profile is more steeply sloped for wives in immigrant than in mixed

17
  These results are estimated in regression equations specified as in (1), which include separate assimilation and
cohort variables for immigrant husbands and wives in immigrant and mixed families.


                                                         11
families. These two contrasts could reflect a lower initial level of human capital and labor

market knowledge among immigrant wives in immigrant than in mixed families. This

interpretation is bolstered by the wage results in Table 3. Specifically, while immigrant wives in

both types of families start below comparable natives, the effects are much smaller in absolute

value in mixed families, and the wage assimilation profile is much flatter in mixed families as

well. The findings in Table 3 are not consistent with the idea that immigrant wives in immigrant

families behave more according to the family investment model than those in mixed families.

       Table 4 shows that the same patterns characterize immigrant husbands as immigrant

wives in mixed versus immigrant families. For both husbands and wives, being married to a

native is generally associated with a higher initial level of hours and wages and less steeply

sloped assimilation profiles than being married to an immigrant. Indeed, perhaps surprisingly,

we show no evidence of wage assimilation for immigrant husbands in mixed families—we return

to this point below.

       Table 5 shows results for some direct measures of husband’s human capital investment

and wife’s role in financing this investment. First, the table shows that, upon arrival, immigrant

husbands in immigrant families are more likely to be in school than comparable natives, but over

time, this difference decays. This matches Baker and Benjamin’s findings for Canada and

suggests front-loading of immigrant husband’s human capital investment upon arrival in the

United States. While this is consistent with the family investment model, such front-loading

would of course also be predicted by human capital models applied to individual investment

behavior (Becker, 1975). The latter seems a better explanation of our results in that, in contrast

to Baker and Benjamin, we find similar results for immigrant husbands in mixed families, while

for Canada, they found that husbands in mixed families were usually less likely to attend school

than natives and had positive school attendance assimilation profiles. Moreover, again in




                                                 12
contrast to the results for Canada, we find no evidence that wives’ assimilation drives the excess

enrollment decrease of men in immigrant families.18

         Evidence on childbirth patterns can also shed light on the role of wives in financing their

husbands’ school attendance. If immigrant wives in immigrant families are more likely to be

performing this role than those in mixed families, then we expect the latter to front-load their

childbearing to a greater degree than the former and indeed Baker and Benjamin found evidence

that this was the case in Canada. However, the results in Table 5 are not consistent with this

scenario. Specifically, relative to natives, the presence of young children (a proxy for recent

childbearing) appears to be more front-loaded for immigrant than for mixed families. While

husbands are clearly investing in human capital relatively intensively upon arrival, there is little

evidence that wives in immigrant families are financing this activity by postponing

childbearing.19


         B. Alternative Specifications: Age at Immigration and Region-of-Origin Effects



         Up to now we have attempted to replicate as closely as possible Baker and Benjamin’s

specifications and have found that, in contrast to their results for Canada, immigrant wives in the

United States appear to follow similar human capital accumulation patterns relative to natives as

their husbands. In this section, we determine whether these results hold up to alternative

specifications. We first consider issues relating to the age at which individuals migrated to the

U.S., and second, whether our results could be explained by region-of-origin effects, which were

not included in (1).

18
   The individual husband and wife YSM (and YSM2) effects are roughly similar in magnitude though none are
significant. The net YSM (and YSM2) effects are however significant and consistent with a reduction in school
attendance with years in the U.S. (through 19.5 years).
19
   In an examination of immigrant-native differences in total fertility (i.e., children ever born), Blau (1992) found
evidence for the 1970-80 period, that women’s fertility tended to be disrupted by immigration. That is, upon
arrival, immigrant women had fewer children than otherwise similar natives but that children increased relative to
similar natives with time in the U.S. The results in Table 5 suggest the possibility that this pattern may no longer
hold although it is possible that the positive coefficient on most of the cohort variables for presence of young
children reflects an attempt by immigrants whose fertility has been disrupted to attain their desired family size.


                                                          13
        Regarding the impact of age at migration, in our full sample of immigrants, some will

have arrived in the U.S. as children and will have attained age 16, and therefore eligibility for

our sample, some time between 1980 and 1990. While equation (1) relies on within-cohort

changes to estimate assimilation effects, we do not observe a true within-cohort change in labor

supply for those who recently arrived as children because they are not in the 1980 sample. More

generally, results including those migrating to the U.S. as children may be misleading to some

extent since they are more like Americans when they reach adulthood than those migrating as

adults. To address these issues, following Rachel M. Friedberg (1993) and Borjas (1995), we

have re-estimated all of our models on a sample of immigrants who migrated to the U.S. at age

18 or older.20
        Representative results for the adult immigrant sample are shown in Tables 6 and 7, and

are similar in most respects to the corresponding Tables 3 and 4 for the sample including all

immigrants. Specifically, immigrant wives and immigrant husbands who came to the U.S. when

they were at least 18 both work less than comparable natives upon arrival, regardless of whether

they are in an immigrant family or a mixed family. The effects are stronger for immigrant

families than mixed families among men, while the relative magnitude of cohort of arrival

effects for women between immigrant and mixed families are ambiguous.21 Moreover,

immigrant husbands and wives in both types of families have positively sloped hours

assimilation profiles, with stronger effects for immigrant families than mixed families.

        Regarding wages, Table 6 shows that immigrant wives who came to the U.S. as adults

have significantly positively sloped assimilation profiles regardless of family type, with a steeper

slope for those in immigrant than in mixed families. Moreover, immigrant wives in immigrant

families usually start with lower wages relative to comparable natives than those in mixed

families. These findings are very similar to those in Table 3, although we now find stronger

20
   To implement this sample selection, we evaluated the categorical period of immigration variables as in our
computation of the YSM variables.
21
   For some cohorts, the cohort dummies are more negative for wives in immigrant families, while, for other
cohorts, the effects are more negative for wives in mixed families.


                                                        14
evidence of positive wage assimilation in mixed families. Immigrant husbands who came to the

U.S. as adults now have wage patterns that are similar across the immigrant and mixed families

(Table 7). Specifically, they start with low wages and have positively sloped assimilation

profiles, and these effects are of similar magnitude across the two family types. It is possible

that restricting the sample to adults has led to improved estimates of the wage profile for

husbands and wives in mixed families because the latter may be more likely to include child

immigrants. But, overall, our conclusion that wives appear to be investing in a similar manner to

husbands (all relative to natives) is valid even restricting the immigrant sample to those who

migrated as adults.

        One possible reason for the differences we have obtained in the behavior of immigrant

families in the U.S. compared to Baker and Benjamin’s findings for Canada is that the U.S. and

Canadian immigrants tend to come from different source countries and there may be behavioral

differences associated with country of origin.22 For example, it is possible that female
immigrants to the U.S. come from areas where women are more prone to invest in their own

human capital than female immigrants to Canada. To investigate this possibility, we estimated

the labor supply model in equation (1) and the associated wage equation separately for

immigrants from each major world region. The regions were: Europe, North America, South

America, Central America, the Caribbean, Africa, Asia, and Oceania, where region was defined

by the focal individual (i.e. wife or husband).

        Our region-by-region series of regressions of immigrants versus natives showed results

very similar to those in Table 1. First, husbands and wives who migrated at the same time had

positively sloped, concave hours assimilation profiles for both husbands and wives within a

region. Second, both husbands and wives within a region usually showed positive wage

assimilation profiles.23 Finally, in almost every case, both husbands and wives started below
22
   For example, European immigrants are a larger share of the total in Canada than in the U.S. For further evidence
on U.S.-Canadian differences in source countries, see Borjas (1993). Since Baker and Benjamin’s data did not
include information on source country, they were unable to examine region-of-origin effects.
23
   Exceptions were negatively-sloped profiles for husbands and wives from Central America and husbands from
Oceania.


                                                        15
comparable natives upon arrival in the U.S. with respect to hours and wages.24 Since our basic

findings characterize almost all cohorts for every region, even if immigrants to the United States

came from the same regions in the same proportions as those in Canada, we would have obtained

results similar to the ones presented here in Table 1.25



        C. Qualifications and Possible Explanations



        The results we have presented suggest that for the United States, immigrant husbands and

wives appear to invest similarly in their own human capital with time in the U.S. Our results are

not consistent with the family investment model, and contrast strongly with Baker and

Benjamin’s (1997) evidence in support of that model for Canada. However, there are some

potential problems with the data and the empirical analysis that potentially apply to both studies

which deserve serious consideration.

        First, with the exception of recent arrivals, in neither the Canadian nor the U.S. data are

we able to observe marital status at the time of arrival in the receiving country. Hypothetical

assimilation profiles for married couples are constructed on the assumption that all currently-

observed married couples were married to each other for their entire stay in the U.S. or in

Canada. To the extent that this assumption does not hold, the inferences made about

assimilation profiles may be incorrect. Essentially, the problem is that the composition of the

married populations may shift over time.26 However, it should be pointed out that for those in


24
   There were three exceptions: Central America where, for some cohorts, husbands and wives worked more or
earned more on arrival than comparable natives, and for other cohorts, they earned or worked less; wives from the
Caribbean who had some positive and some negative hours arrival effects for different cohorts; and both husbands
and wives from North America who had some positive and some negative wage arrival effects for different cohorts.
25
   We also re-estimated the labor supply and wage equations including a full set of husband and wife country-of-
origin dummy variables. There were 87 country dummies, resulting in a total of 174 additional variables included
in the labor supply equations and 87 in the wage equations. The results for the cohort and assimilation variables
were very similar to those in Table 1a.
26
   Some well-known longitudinal data sets such as the National Longitudinal Surveys or the Michigan Panel Study
of Income Dynamics allow one to observe marital status over time. However, concerns about sample size and the
representativeness of the immigrant subsamples in these data files reduce their usefulness for our purposes
compared to the Census.


                                                       16
the most recent cohort, we do observe marital status close to the time of entry in the receiving

country.27 Thus, our basic finding that U.S. immigrant men and women start out with work hours

below that of comparable natives, and by similar percentages, is likely to be accurate, as are

Baker and Benjamin’s (1997) findings that Canadian immigrant wives start out with hours

greater than comparable native wives’ and that immigrant husbands begin with hours below

those of comparable native husbands. Moreover, a related study by Edward Funkhouser (2000)

found that both male and female immigrants to the United States initially have lower

employment rates then natives, but that employment rates tend to converge after 6-10 years in

the country. While he did not look explicitly at the family context (i.e., did not focus on married

women or examine the impact of spouse's characteristics), Funkhouser’s findings provide us

with some confidence that the assimilation pattern which we observe for married immigrant

women is not due to selection into the currently married category.

        Second, as we have seen, Baker and Benjamin estimated structural labor supply models

to assess the simple labor supply hypothesis as an alternative to the family investment model in

explaining the hours assimilation profiles they estimated. One can, however, question the

estimation strategy for these labor supply models. In particular, the authors do not take account

of the endogeneity of husband’s and wife’s wages which is implied by the human capital

investment and family investment models,28 and they also treat asset income (which is clearly

affected by wages) as exogenous. Thus, the true magnitudes of the wage elasticities and the

assimilation profiles controlling for wages may be different from those estimated by Baker and

Benjamin for Canada and those that we estimated for the U.S. However, Baker and Benjamin

make the reasonable argument that in order for the labor supply model to explain their reduced

form assimilation patterns, the required elasticities would be implausibly high in absolute value.

Thus, the likelihood that an appropriate treatment of these endogeneities (with suitable

27
   There may be some individuals who move into or out of the married category during this brief time interval, but
this is likely to be a fairly small group.
28
   Recall that wages are instrumented by wage decile to account for measurement error, a procedure that does not
take into account these sources of endogeneity.


                                                        17
instruments) would lead to labor supply elasticities that could completely explain the Canadian

hours assimilation patterns is small.

         In our case, we find in reduced form analyses for immigrants to the U.S. that husbands

and wives have similar hours and similar wage assimilation profiles (Table 1). For labor supply

responses to completely explain the reduced form results in Table 1, the following labor supply

elasticities (evaluated at the sample mean hours and time in the U.S.) are required: own wage

elasticities of 0.878 for husbands and 1.703 for wives; cross wage elasticities for 0.332 for

husbands and -0.525 for wives.29 The required own wage elasticities are larger than those

reported in Richard Blundell and Thomas MaCurdy’s (1999) review of labor supply studies.

These ranged from -0.25 to 0.25 for men with most studies showing an elasticity of less than 0.1

in absolute value and .05 to 2.03 for married women, with 16 of the 17 studies cited having an

elasticity of 1.18 or below. Regarding the cross-elasticities, the positive required value for men

(.332) is counter to the vast majority of studies showing negative income effects for men

(Blundell and MaCurdy 1999). For women, the required cross-elasticity of -0.525 is larger in

absolute value than the income effect in every study cited by Blundell and MaCurdy, the vast

majority of which ranged from -0.1 to -0.3.30 Thus, as was the case for Canada, the pure labor
supply model implies parameter values that are implausible and thus is unlikely to be the full

explanation for the hours profiles of U.S. immigrants.

         We also note that for the family investment model to have any explanatory power in

Canada, it is necessary for the labor supply model to explain less than the full pattern of

immigrant wives’ labor supply there—i.e. the negative hours assimilation profile. And Baker

and Benjamin do indeed conclude that this is the case. In the U.S., the labor supply model also

explains less than the full pattern of immigrant wives’ labor supply assimilation. However, in

29
   These elasticities are computed as (∂ln(Hours)/∂ln(YSM))/(∂ln(Wages)/∂ln(YSM)).
30
   The required cross-wage elasticity of -0.525 for women is the same as the required income elasticity if all of the
family’s income is earned by the husband. If the wife is working or if there is nonlabor income, then a cross-wage
elasticity of -0.525 implies an income elasticity even larger in absolute value, since a given percentage change in the
husband’s wage entails a smaller percentage change in family income, which is the denominator of the income
elasticity.


                                                          18
this case, the hours assimilation profile is positively sloped. The fact that wives’ hours

assimilation profiles are more steeply sloped than may be explained by the response to own and

spouse wages is counter to the family investment model. Only if conventional labor supply

parameters predicted a steeper than observed hours assimilation profile for immigrant women in

the U.S. could we say that the assimilation profile of immigrant wives in the U.S. is what would

be expected based on the family investment model. And of course we find exactly the opposite.

       If simple labor supply models are not the entire explanation for Baker and Benjamin’s

(1997) Canadian hours assimilation and wage profiles and those we have found for the U.S.,

what can explain the differences between immigrant labor supply patterns in the two countries?

First, we note that although U.S. immigration policy is more tilted toward admitting immigrants

with low skills than Canadian policy, this difference is unlikely to explain our results.

Specifically, Borjas (1993) finds that the relative skills of immigrants coming from the same

country are similar in Canada and the U.S., implying that the overall difference in skills of

immigrants in the two countries is entirely due to country of origin. Since we find similar results

for each region of origin, different immigrant skill levels are not likely to explain the differences

between our results and those of Baker and Benjamin.

       Second, Baker and Benjamin used a 1986-91 window to identify their immigrant

assimilation profiles and cohort effects, while we used a 1980-90 window. On the one hand, a

shorter window means that there are fewer unmeasured effects that may change over time than a

longer window. On the other hand, the closer the end points of one’s interval (i.e., the shorter

the period), the more like a single cross-section one’s data becomes, limiting one’s ability to

separately identify cohort and assimilation effects. In any case, this difference in the data may

help to explain our results. Note that we have used the Census rather than other microdata bases

such as the Current Population Survey because the Census has far more observations on

immigrants.

       Third, Canada has greater union coverage and much more generous social insurance

programs than the United States (David Card and Freeman, 1993). While it is not obvious how


                                                 19
these differences could explain why the family investment model appears to work better in

Canada than in the U.S., there could be a connection between such institutional features of the

economy and immigrant behavior.

         Finally, we note that our tabulations based on the 1994-96 International Adult Literacy

Survey (IALS) microdata, ever-married immigrant women were more likely to be currently

widowed or divorced both absolutely and relative to natives in the U.S. than in Canada.31

Specifically, among 16-65 year old ever-married native women, the percentage currently married

was 79.1% in the U.S. and 81.6% in Canada; however, among ever-married immigrant women,

72.4% were currently married in the U.S., compared to 83.0% in Canada. These differences

were not explained by relative age, schooling or adult literacy differences between immigrants in

Canada and those in the U.S. (Blau, Kahn, Moriarty and Souza, 2000). Thus, immigrant

women’s marriages in the U.S. are overall more fragile than those in Canada. It is possible that

the greater anticipated likelihood of being on one’s own in the U.S. leads women to invest in

their own human capital to a greater degree than immigrant women in Canada.32 Of course,
immigrant wives and husbands investing in their own human capital to a similar extent in the

U.S. and following a family investment model in Canada could be the cause of, rather than a

response to, the observed differences in marital stability.



III. Conclusions



         This paper has examined the wage and labor supply assimilation patterns of immigrant

husbands and wives in the United States in 1980 and 1990. We find that, upon arrival in the

U.S., both immigrant husbands and wives earn and work less than comparable natives, with

comparable shortfalls for men and women. However, with time in the U.S., the wage rates and

31
   The IALS is the result of an international cooperative effort; for a further description. For a description, see
OECD (1998).
32
   For evidence of the impact of divorce rates on married women’s labor force supply, see William R. Johnson and
Jonathan Skinner (1986).


                                                         20
work hours of both immigrant husbands and wives increase to a similar extent and eventually

overtake those of comparable natives. It thus appears that husbands and wives are investing

equally in their human capital.

       These patterns for women contrast sharply with those of Baker and Benjamin (1997) for

Canada over the 1986-91 period. They found that, upon arrival in Canada, immigrant wives

worked more than natives but that this advantage declined with time in the country. Immigrant

husbands, however, had the same pattern we found for the U.S.: they started below natives in

their labor supply but eventually caught up. These results were interpreted as consistent with a

family investment model in which immigrant wives initially work to finance their husbands’

human capital investments but then reduce their labor force commitment (relative to comparable

natives) when this investment is completed.

       Our results for the United States give little support for the family investment model and

suggest that the primary pattern in the U.S. is for both immigrant wives and husbands to invest in

their own human capital. The broader significance of our findings is that the extent to which the

family investment model prevails for immigrants is likely to vary with the composition of the

immigrant group and the circumstances in the receiving country. We have found that for at least

one major country, the United States, this model is inadequate to explain immigrant assimilation

patterns.




                                                21
                                         References

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin, “The Role of the Family in Immigrants’ Labor-Market
       Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations,” American Economic Review 87
       (September 1997): 705-727.

Becker, Gary S., Human Capital (New York: Columbia University Press, 1975).

Blau, Francine D., "The Fertility of Immigrant Women: Evidence from High-Fertility Source
       Countries," in George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the Work
       Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas (Chicago IL:
       University Of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 93-133.

Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Joan Moriarty, and Andre Souza, "The Role of the
       Family in Immigrants’ Labor-Market Activity: Evidence from the United States,”
       Working Paper, Cornell University, September 2000.

Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
      Approaches,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
      Volume 3A (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999), pp. 1559-1695.

Borjas, George J., “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants,”
        Journal of Labor Economics 3 (October 1985): 463-489.

Borjas, George J., "Immigration Policy, National Origin, and Immigrant Skills: a Comparison of
        Canada and the United States," in David Card and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Small
        Differences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and United
        States (Chicago IL: University Of Chicago Press, 1993), pp. 21-43.

Borjas, George J., “Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Happened to
        Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (April 1995): 201-
        245.

Card, David and Richard B. Freeman, Small Differences That Matter (Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, 1993).

Chiswick, Barry R., "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign Born Men,"
      Journal of Political Economy 86 (October 1978): 897-921.

Duleep, Harriet Orcutt and Seth Sanders, “The Decision to Work by Married Immigrant
      Women,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46 (July 1993): 677-690.

Freeman, Richard B., and Karen Needels, “Skill Differentials in Canada in an Era of Rising
      Labor Market Inequality,” in David Card and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Small
      Differences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and United
      States (Chicago IL: University Of Chicago Press, 1993), pp. 45-67.

Friedberg, Rachel M., “Immigration and the Labor Market,” Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT, 1993.

Funkhouser, Edward, "Convergence in Employment Rates of Immigrants," in George J. Borjas,
      ed., Issues in the Economics of Immigration (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      2000), pp. 143-184.
Johnson, William R. and Jonathan Skinner, “Labor Supply and Marital Separation,” American
      Economic Review, 76 (June 1986): 455–69.

Juhn, Chinhui and Kevin M. Murphy, “Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply,” Journal of
       Labor Economics 15 (January 1997): 72-97.

Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap: an Economic History of American Women
       (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).

LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel, “The Assimilation of Immigrants in the U.S. Labor
      Market,” in George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the Work
      Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas (Chicago IL:
      University Of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 67-92.

MacPherson, David A. and James B. Stewart, “The Labor Force Participation and Earnings
     Profiles of Married Immigrant Females,” Quarterly Review of Economics and Business
     29 (Autumn 1989): 57-72.

Mincer, Jacob. "Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in H. Gregg Lewis, ed., Aspects
      of Labor Economics, Universities-National Bureau Committee for Economic Research
      (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962).

OECD, Human Capital Investment: An International Comparison (Paris: OECD, 1998).




                                             23
                                                                      Figure 1: Hours Profiles for Immigrant Families Relative to Native Families


                                                    300

                                                                WIVES: CANADA
                                                    200
Annual Hours Difference: Immigrants Minus Natives




                                                    100



                                                      0
                                                            0                 5                10                  15                  20                 25   30


                                                    -100
                                                            WIVES: USA

                                                    -200

                                                           HUSBANDS: CANADA
                                                    -300


                                                                HUSBANDS: USA
                                                    -400



                                                    -500
                                                                                  Years Since Migration for Immigrants (assumed to be zero for natives)
                                                             Figure 2: Log Wage Profiles for Immigrant Families Relative to Native Families

                                                0.2




                                                0.1
Log Wage Difference: Immigrants Minus Natives




                                                  0
                                                       0                5                10                   15                   20                25   30

                                                           WIVES: USA

                                                -0.1

                                                            HUSBANDS: USA
                                                                                              HUSBANDS: CANADA
                                                             WIVES: CANADA
                                                -0.2




                                                -0.3




                                                -0.4
                                                                             Years Since Migration for Immigrants (assumed to be zero for natives)
                                Table 1a - Assimilation Profiles of Hours and Wages

                                              Hours                                         Log Wages
   Independent                  Wives                    Husbands                    Wives           Husbands
     Variable                 Coeff. Std. Err.           Coeff. Std. Err.         Coeff. Std. Err. Coeff. Std. Err.

YSM, wife (x100 for
log wage)                    25.207         2.170         9.473       1.845       1.1410       0.1300
     2
YSM , wife (x100
for log wage)                 -0.416        0.036        -0.156       0.031      -0.0154       0.0024
YSM, husband
(x100 for log wage)           -2.054        2.233       24.323        1.898                               0.9950       0.1040
     2
YSM , husband
(x100 for log wage)          -0.043        0.036        -0.368        0.031                               -0.0088      0.0019
IM8589, wife               -609.353       16.314       -80.765       13.839      -0.2731       0.0113
IM8084, wife               -251.208       19.873       -95.234       16.879      -0.1630       0.0133
IM7579, wife               -264.592       19.893      -122.841       16.939      -0.1153       0.0125
IM7074, wife               -180.993       25.203       -78.472       21.457      -0.0788       0.0151
IM6569, wife               -244.220       30.786       -94.549       26.197      -0.0946       0.0182
IM6064, wife               -317.414       34.934       -98.459       29.722      -0.1353       0.0208
IM5059, wife               -340.645       38.254      -108.739       32.548      -0.1612       0.0227
IM50p, wife                -291.181       43.982       -97.112       37.423      -0.1604       0.0280
IM8589, husband             -29.006       17.597      -422.652       14.904                              -0.2120       0.0090
IM8084, husband              38.110       20.186      -217.384       17.117                              -0.1792       0.0106
IM7579, husband              51.897       20.730      -266.833       17.647                              -0.1513       0.0099
IM7074, husband              96.004       26.129      -214.143       22.238                              -0.1058       0.0122
IM6569, husband             119.961       32.070      -277.808       27.281                              -0.1111       0.0148
IM6064, husband              78.190       36.606      -307.492       31.133                              -0.1238       0.0170
IM5059, husband             118.211       40.228      -317.708       34.208                              -0.1676       0.0184
IM50p, husband              186.885       45.971      -312.185       39.088                              -0.2257       0.0223
R2                            0.153                      0.126                    0.176                    0.229
Sample Size                 650,266                    650,258                  435,356                  594,440


Note: Additional controls for all equations include quadratics in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both
husband and wife, English skill indicators for both husband and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of
children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for both husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a
metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables, and a year dummy.
     Table 1b: Immigrant-Native Differences in Hours for Husbands and Wives in the 1975/79 Cohort

                     Net        Net               Immigrant-Native Difference Evaluated at YSM =
Group                YSM       YSM2       0          5        10          15       20       25         30

Wives                23.154     -0.459 -212.696   -108.394     -27.025   31.411   66.914   79.484   69.121
                     (1.831)   (0.035) (16.645)    (11.928)   (11.626) (14.037) (16.972) (19.673) (22.172)

Husbands             33.796     -0.524 -389.674   -233.793    -104.110    -0.625   76.664 127.754 152.647
                     (1.558)   (0.030) (14.175)    (10.150)     (9.875) (11.918) (14.411) (16.709) (18.838)


Notes: Based on regression results reported in Table 1a evaluated assuming husbands and wives are in the same
                                                                  2
arrival cohort; ie., the coefficients on own and spouse's YSM, YSM and IM7579 are summed.
     Table 1c: Immigrant-Native Differences in Wages for Husbands and Wives in the 1975/79 Cohort

                                                    Immigrant-Native Difference Evaluated at YSM =
                                     2
Group                YSM       YSM         0           5        10          15       20       25          30

Wives                  1.141    -0.015   -11.527      -6.206     -1.652     2.134      5.152     7.403     8.886
                     (0.130)   (0.002)    (1.245)    (0.871)    (0.795)   (0.938)    (1.138)   (1.328)   (1.500)

Husbands               0.995    -0.009   -15.132     -10.377     -6.062    -2.186      1.250     4.246     6.803
                     (0.104)   (0.002)    (0.987)     (0.691)   (0.640)   (0.764)    (0.932)   (1.089)   (1.232)


Notes: Based on regression results reported in Table 1a; wage effects and standard
errors have been multiplied by 100.
                      Table 2 - Labor Supply Equations Including Wage and Income Variables

                                   Wife's Annual Hours                                  Husband's Annual Hours
     Independent                OLS                 2SLS                               OLS                2SLS
       Variable              Coeff. Std. Err.    Coeff. Std. Err.                   Coeff. Std. Err.  Coeff. Std. Err.

Log (wife wage)            228.207        2.364      325.547        3.787         -13.944        2.025      -67.321        3.239
Log (husband wage)        -231.135        2.116     -360.818        3.690        -201.031        1.812     -135.717        3.150
Asset income                -0.008        0.000       -0.007        0.000          -0.002        0.000       -0.002        0.000
YSM, wife                   24.767        2.135       24.628        2.143          10.051        1.827       10.144        1.830
     2
YSM , wife                  -0.401        0.035       -0.395        0.036          -0.158        0.030       -0.161        0.030
YSM, husband                -0.814        2.197       -0.141        2.206          25.922        1.879       25.601        1.882
     2
YSM , husband               -0.048        0.036       -0.052        0.036          -0.383        0.031       -0.381        0.031
IM8589, wife              -568.967       16.059     -551.172       16.132         -88.542       13.708      -98.436       13.738
IM8084, wife              -243.437       19.554     -240.986       19.630        -104.014       16.713     -105.643       16.737
IM7579, wife              -263.405       19.573     -263.544       19.649        -131.590       16.772     -131.742       16.796
IM7074, wife              -191.417       24.798     -196.777       24.893         -85.858       21.245      -83.150       21.275
IM6569, wife              -251.773       30.290     -255.780       30.406        -101.737       25.938      -99.753       25.975
IM6064, wife              -322.160       34.372     -325.109       34.503        -107.715       29.429     -106.421       29.470
IM5059, wife              -345.041       37.639     -348.663       37.783        -122.279       32.227     -120.713       32.273
IM50p, wife               -299.962       43.274     -307.058       43.440        -115.040       37.053     -111.609       37.106
IM8589, husband            -71.885       17.319      -94.265       17.394        -463.298       14.761     -451.964       14.790
IM8084, husband              6.870       19.863       -9.996       19.943        -246.665       16.950     -238.305       16.977
IM7579, husband             20.996       20.398        4.190       20.480        -293.742       17.474     -285.333       17.502
IM7074, husband             75.490       25.708       64.338       25.808        -230.325       22.019     -224.730       22.050
IM6569, husband             98.866       31.555       88.010       31.676        -295.146       27.012     -289.689       27.051
IM6064, husband             56.450       36.018       45.576       36.156        -325.790       30.826     -320.325       30.870
IM5059, husband             88.738       39.581       73.365       39.734        -343.048       33.870     -335.410       33.919
IM50p, husband             149.303       45.232      128.256       45.408        -344.859       38.703     -334.385       38.759
R2                            0.180                     0.175                       0.143                     0.131
Sample Size                650,266                   650,266                      650,258                   650,258


Note: Additional controls for all equations include quadratics in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both
husband and wife, English skill indicators for both husband and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of
children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for both husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a
metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables, and a year dummy. Two-stage least-squares
(2SLS) estimates use the decile of husband's and wife's wage as instruments for the husband's and wife's log-wages.
                                          Table 3: Immigrant Wives' Assimilation and Cohort Profiles by Family Type

A. Assimilation Profiles:
                                      Annual Hours                                                                               Log wages
                 Immigrant family                        Mixed Family                                     Immigrant family                        Mixed Family
                    Coeff.  Std. Err.                    Coeff.  Std. Err.                                   Coeff.  Std. Err.                    Coeff.  Std. Err.
YSM, wife          61.072      5.830                      6.396     1.884                                  0.02309   0.00485                    0.00011    0.00154
YSM2, wife         -0.791      0.068                     -0.120     0.041                                -0.00031    0.00006                    0.00002    0.00003
YSM, husb         -34.613      5.832                      2.584     2.079                                -0.00882    0.00484                    0.00265    0.00163
YSM2, husb          0.194      0.066                     -0.048     0.046                                  0.00005   0.00005                   -0.00002    0.00004
YSM, net           26.459      1.911                                                                       0.01427   0.00159
YSM2, net          -0.597      0.043                                                                     -0.00026    0.00004

B. Cohort Profiles:
                                             Annual Hours                                                                Log wages
                Both immigrants in        Immigrant wife and         Native wife and        Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and          Native wife and
                   same cohort              native husband         immigrant husband           same cohort             native husband          immigrant husband
                   Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.      Coeff.    Std. Err.      Coeff.     Std. Err.      Coeff.   Std. Err.
IM8589           -631.996       15.506    -476.796       29.030    -117.705       33.256    -0.29394     0.01404     -0.17346      0.02302     -0.03013    0.00023
IM8084           -208.937       19.884    -179.724       31.413     -54.065       32.103    -0.17543     0.01618     -0.08049      0.02431     -0.00896    0.00023
IM7579           -202.970       16.689    -174.166       23.647     -86.942       25.818    -0.10534     0.01446     -0.06152      0.01916     -0.03327    0.00019
IM7074            -60.489       21.068     -89.243       24.957     -62.705       28.266    -0.06077     0.01723     -0.00377      0.02012      0.01858    0.00022
IM6569            -98.964       24.765     -87.253       26.908     -32.700       31.273    -0.07502     0.02021      0.01029      0.02164      0.02000    0.00024
IM6064           -203.834       28.487    -101.328       27.140     -61.307       31.413    -0.10624     0.02332     -0.00592      0.02201      0.02006    0.00024
IM5059           -149.228       27.817     -89.780       21.518     -51.171       23.510    -0.07048     0.02347     -0.03333      0.01785     -0.01833    0.00019

                                                                                      2
Note: To obtain net YSM effects the coefficients on own and spouse's YSM and YSM are summed giving the effect for an immigrant whose spouse is in the
same cohort. Additional controls for all equations include quadratics in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both husband and wife, English skill
indicators for both husband and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for both
husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables, and a year dummy.
                                       Table 4: Immigrant Husbands' Assimilation and Cohort Profiles by Family Type

A. Assimilation Profiles:
                                       Annual Hours                                                                               Log wages
                  Immigrant family                      Mixed Family                                       Immigrant family                        Mixed Family
                  Coeff.     Std. Err.                 Coeff.   Std. Err.                                 Coeff.      Std. Err.                 Coeff.     Std. Err.
YSM, wife          -12.238      4.942                     5.326    1.605                                  -0.00476    0.00368                   -0.00083    0.00120
YSM2, wife          -0.020      0.058                    -0.103    0.035                                    0.00004   0.00004                    0.00004    0.00003
YSM, husb           41.519      4.944                     7.359    1.769                                    0.01164   0.00369                   -0.00047    0.00132
YSM2, husb          -0.539      0.056                    -0.133    0.039                                  -0.00012    0.00004                    0.00004    0.00003
YSM, net            29.282      1.627                                                                       0.00688   0.00123
YSM2, net           -0.560      0.037                                                                     -0.00008    0.00003

B. Cohort Profiles:
                                             Annual Hours                                                                 Log wages
                 Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and          Native wife and        Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and          Native wife and
                    same cohort             native husband          immigrant husband           same cohort             native husband          immigrant husband
                    Coeff.    Std. Err.      Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.      Coeff.    Std. Err.      Coeff.     Std. Err.      Coeff.   Std. Err.
IM8589            -483.752      13.143      -91.295       24.708    -374.356       28.066    -0.19449     0.01018     -0.05483      0.01805     -0.21324    0.02103
IM8084            -265.364      16.889      -67.113       26.768    -107.121       27.093    -0.16135     0.01266     -0.02105      0.01957     -0.08417    0.01983
IM7579            -341.801      14.216     -109.895       20.133    -144.199       21.952    -0.12541     0.01084     -0.01459      0.01484     -0.07709    0.01620
IM7074            -210.013      17.941      -65.830       21.258     -90.018       24.034    -0.06260     0.01337      0.00872      0.01569     -0.00611    0.01767
IM6569            -264.470      21.087      -70.221       22.935     -83.325       26.584    -0.05035     0.01575      0.01654      0.01703      0.03028    0.01958
IM6064            -262.723      24.261      -54.264       23.133     -86.779       26.681    -0.04781     0.01812      0.01347      0.01724      0.03717    0.01970
IM5059            -204.817      23.692      -58.494       18.333     -72.431       20.001    -0.04857     0.01788     -0.00715      0.01386      0.00926    0.01495

                                                                                      2
Note: To obtain net YSM effects the coefficients on own and spouse's YSM and YSM are summed giving the effect for an immigrant whose spouse is in the
same cohort. Additional controls for all equations include quadratics in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both husband and wife, English skill
indicators for both husband and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for both
husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables, and a year dummy.
                    Table 5: Pooled Results Allowing Differential Effects Across Family Types


A. Assimilation Profiles:

                         Husband's School Attendance                             Presence of Young Children
                    Immigrant family            Mixed Family            Immigrant family            Mixed Family
                    Coeff.   Std. Err.       Coeff.    Std. Err.        Coeff.   Std. Err.         Coeff.    Std. Err.
YSM, wife            -0.0614    0.1470        -0.0085     0.0478         -0.1160    0.2630           -0.0268    0.0852
YSM2, wife            0.0019    0.0017        -0.0001     0.0011          0.0035    0.0031            0.0013    0.0019
YSM, husb            -0.0479    0.1470        -0.1350     0.0527         -0.0155    0.2630            0.4000    0.0940
YSM2, husb            0.0009    0.0017         0.0035     0.0012         -0.0026    0.0030           -0.0081    0.0021
YSM, net             -0.1093    0.0484                                   -0.1315    0.0866
YSM2, net             0.0028    0.0011                                    0.0009    0.0020

B. Cohort Profiles:

                         Husband's School Attendance                             Presence of Young Children
                  Both immigrants in          Native wife and           Both immigrants in         Immigrant wife and
                     same cohort            immigrant husband              same cohort               native husband
                      Coeff.    Std. Err.      Coeff.      Std. Err.       Coeff.      Std. Err.      Coeff.     Std. Err.
IM8589                0.1080      0.0039       0.0930        0.0084       -0.0086        0.0069      -0.0618       0.0131
IM8084                0.0678      0.0050       0.0740        0.0081        0.1150        0.0090       0.1038       0.0142
IM7579                0.0610      0.0042       0.0602        0.0065        0.0808        0.0075       0.0082       0.0107
IM7074                0.0215      0.0053       0.0365        0.0072        0.1003        0.0095       0.0326       0.0113
IM6569                0.0173      0.0063       0.0204        0.0079        0.0370        0.0112      -0.0075       0.0122
IM6064                0.0154      0.0072       0.0220        0.0079       -0.0019        0.0129      -0.0197       0.0123
IM5059                0.0133      0.0071       0.0192        0.0060        0.0237        0.0126      -0.0186       0.0097

a
    Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100 in the school attendance regressions.

                                                                                      2
Note: To obtain net YSM effects the coefficients on own and spouse's YSM and YSM are summed giving the effect for
an immigrant whose spouse is in the same cohort. Additional controls for husband's school attendance include quadratics
in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both husband and wife, English skill indicators for both husband
and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for
both husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables,
and a year dummy. Controls are the same for the presence of young children regression except that number of children
and the dummy variable for presence of children under 6 years old are excluded.
                               Table 6: Immigrant Wives' Assimilation and Cohort Profiles by Family Type, Adult Immigrants

A. Assimilation Profiles:
                                       Annual Hours                                                                               Log wages
                  Immigrant family                      Mixed Family                                       Immigrant family                       Mixed Family
                  Coeff.     Std. Err.                 Coeff.   Std. Err.                                 Coeff.      Std. Err.                 Coeff.    Std. Err.
YSM, wife           86.751      8.760                   26.730     5.025                                     0.0304    0.0073                     0.0083   0.0044
YSM2, wife          -1.436      0.160                    -0.593    0.127                                    -0.0004    0.0001                    -0.0002   0.0001
YSM, husb          -37.964      8.904                     7.354    5.663                                    -0.0096    0.0074                     0.0058   0.0043
YSM2, husb           0.105      0.149                    -0.126    0.142                                  -0.00004     0.0001                    -0.0001   0.0001
YSM, net            48.787      3.421                                                                        0.0208    0.0029
YSM2, net           -1.330      0.102                                                                       -0.0004    0.0001

B. Cohort Profiles:
                                             Annual Hours                                                                 Log wages
                 Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and          Native wife and        Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and          Native wife and
                    same cohort             native husband          immigrant husband           same cohort             native husband          immigrant husband
                    Coeff.    Std. Err.      Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.      Std. Err.     Coeff.    Std. Err.
IM8589            -689.347      18.836     -531.465       33.934    -127.477       39.334     -0.3129       0.0171     -0.1972        0.0273     -0.0317      0.0278
IM8084            -316.862      28.406     -305.311       46.088     -62.981       49.881     -0.2228       0.0234     -0.1367        0.0379     -0.0129      0.0367
IM7579            -298.483      22.864     -318.469       37.433    -115.751       41.869     -0.1492       0.0202     -0.1256        0.0328     -0.0486      0.0314
IM7074            -164.630      30.180     -265.245       46.174     -99.326       52.657     -0.1218       0.0247     -0.1032        0.0400     -0.0099      0.0402
IM6569            -227.597      35.106     -314.079       53.029    -115.789       62.431     -0.1427       0.0285     -0.0961        0.0455     -0.0208      0.0478
IM6064            -292.667      39.459     -350.232       53.897    -108.325       64.809     -0.1839       0.0320     -0.1342        0.0462     -0.0162      0.0497
IM5059            -253.824      42.097     -348.395       53.394     -92.855       60.710     -0.1482       0.0352     -0.1713        0.0471     -0.0409      0.0480

                                                                                      2
Note: To obtain net YSM effects the coefficients on own and spouse's YSM and YSM are summed giving the effect for an immigrant whose spouse is in the
same cohort. Additional controls for all equations include quadratics in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both husband and wife, English skill
indicators for both husband and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for both
husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables, and a year dummy. Immigrants who came
to the US as children and their spouses are excluded.
                             Table 7: Immigrant Husbands' Assimilation and Cohort Profiles by Family Type, Adult Immigrants

A. Assimilation Profiles:
                                       Annual Hours                                                                              Log wages
                  Immigrant family                      Mixed Family                                      Immigrant family                       Mixed Family
                  Coeff.     Std. Err.                 Coeff.   Std. Err.                                 Coeff.     Std. Err.                 Coeff.    Std. Err.
YSM, wife          -16.714      7.420                   19.710     4.256                                   -0.0047    0.0055                     0.0068   0.0033
YSM2, wife          -0.209      0.137                    -0.464    0.107                                    0.0002    0.0001                    -0.0002   0.0001
YSM, husb           70.889      7.541                   33.291     4.813                                    0.0150    0.0056                     0.0098   0.0038
YSM2, husb          -1.057      0.127                    -0.773    0.121                                   -0.0003    0.0001                    -0.0002   0.0001
YSM, net            54.176      2.903                                                                       0.0103    0.0023
YSM2, net           -1.267      0.086                                                                      -0.0001 0.000001

B. Cohort Profiles:
                                             Annual Hours                                                                 Log wages
                 Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and          Native wife and        Both immigrants in       Immigrant wife and         Native wife and
                    same cohort             native husband          immigrant husband           same cohort             native husband         immigrant husband
                    Coeff.    Std. Err.      Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.
IM8589            -554.264      15.961     -121.565       28.847    -450.709       33.181     -0.2042       0.0125     -0.0725       0.0213     -0.2423       0.0251
IM8084            -430.509      24.110     -150.934       39.156    -281.037       42.163     -0.2159       0.0184     -0.0714       0.0294     -0.1538       0.0319
IM7579            -469.900      19.444     -196.844       31.790    -327.287       35.640     -0.1734       0.0151     -0.0686       0.0242     -0.1524       0.0273
IM7074            -366.149      25.650     -177.271       39.183    -312.392       44.791     -0.1219       0.0194     -0.0634       0.0299     -0.1053       0.0342
IM6569            -425.442      29.838     -207.426       45.001    -338.467       53.061     -0.1079       0.0225     -0.0702       0.0344     -0.0679       0.0405
IM6064            -397.055      33.565     -184.813       45.751    -274.212       55.054     -0.1144       0.0253     -0.0850       0.0351     -0.0582       0.0420
IM5059            -367.675      35.806     -175.768       45.279    -252.403       51.632     -0.1258       0.0271     -0.1059       0.0351     -0.0840       0.0403

                                                                                      2
Note: To obtain net YSM effects the coefficients on own and spouse's YSM and YSM are summed giving the effect for an immigrant whose spouse is in the
same cohort. Additional controls for all equations include quadratics in age for both husband and wife, years of schooling of both husband and wife, English skill
indicators for both husband and wife, number of children, a dummy variable for presence of children under 6 years old, race and ethnicity dummies for both
husband and wife (black, other nonwhite, Hispanic), a metropolitan area dummy variable, regional dummy variables, and a year dummy. Immigrants who came
to the US as children and their spouses are excluded.
