                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         USING MARKET VALUATION TO ASSESS PUBLIC SCHOOL SPENDING


                                             Lisa Barrow
                                          Cecilia Elena Rouse


                                          Working Paper 9054
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9054


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002

We thank Roland Bénabou, Ben Bernanke, David Card, Anne Case, Jonas Fisher, Jonathan Gruber, Jeff
Kling, Alan Krueger, Caroline Hoxby, Abigail Payne, Thomas Romer, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Daniel
Sullivan for helpful conversations, and seminar participants at the American Education Finance Association
meetings, Cornell University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Hunter College, the Joint Center for
Poverty Research at the University of Chicago, the John F. Kennedy School of Government, the meeting of
the MacArthur Research Network on Inequality and Economic Performance in Cambridge, MA 1999, the
Children Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the National Center for Education
Statistics Data Conference, Princeton University, and the World Congress of the Econometric Society for
insightful comments and suggestions. We also thank Olivier Deschenes, Jonathan Moore, Daniel Fernholz,
Melissa Goodwin, Yvonne Peeples, Jeff Wilder and particularly Kimberly Sked for outstanding research
assistance. Barrow thanks the National Science Foundation, and Rouse thanks the Mellon Foundation for
financial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and are not necessarily those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. All errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Lisa Barrow and Cecilia Elena Rouse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Using Market Valuation to Assess Public School Spending
Lisa Barrow and Cecilia Elena Rouse
NBER Working Paper No. 9054
July 2002
JEL No. I2, H4



                                               ABSTRACT

        In this paper we use a “market-based” approach to examine whether increased school
expenditures are valued by potential residents and whether the current level of public school provision
is inefficient. We do so by employing an instrumental variables strategy to estimate the effect of state
education aid on residential property values. We find evidence that, on net, additional state aid is valued
by potential residents and that school districts do not appear to overspend on education. We also find that
school districts may overspend in areas in which residents are poor or less educated, in large districts, and
in districts with higher shares of rental property. One interpretation of these results is that increased
competition has the potential to reduce overspending on public schools in some areas.




Lisa Barrow                                                        Cecilia Elena Rouse
Economic Research Department                                       Woodrow Wilson School
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                                    Robertson Hall
230 South LaSalle Street                                           Princeton University
Chicago, IL 60604                                                  Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
lbarrow@frbchi.org                                                 and NBER
                                                                   rouse@princeton.edu
I.     Introduction

        An enduring question in education policy is whether spending additional resources on schools

improves student outcomes. Some researchers point to evidence that schooling inputs, such as lower

pupil-teacher ratios, longer school terms, and more qualified teachers, improve test scores and wages

(e.g., Card and Krueger (1992), Angrist and Lavy (1999), Achilles and Finn (1990), and Krueger

(1999)). Others point to research that suggests that improvements in school inputs, and expenditures

in particular, do not result in higher student achievement (e.g., Betts (1995), Hanushek (1986), and

Hanushek, Rivkin, and Taylor (1996)). Many of these researchers also argue that teachers unions

and bloated bureaucracies inhibit improved schooling inputs from generating better outputs resulting

in inefficiency in public school provision (Chubb and Moe, 1990; Hoxby, 1996). Thus, it is the

inefficiency in public school provision that interferes with additional spending improving student

outcomes. The typical approach in the existing literature is to estimate directly the relationship

between schooling expenditures and student outputs, such as test scores or eventual wages.

However, the importance of test scores to adult outcomes is unclear, and it is rare to be able to link

schooling inputs to later outcomes because of the cost and difficulty in implementing long

longitudinal surveys and the unreliability of asking retrospective information on schooling inputs in

labor market surveys.

        An alternative approach to analyzing whether schools effectively use additional expenditures

is to consider whether the market appears to value the spending, such as by examining the

relationship between school spending and property values. In the United States, the provision of

elementary and secondary education is largely determined at the local level.1 Therefore, if


        1
          In the U.S. only 7 percent of public primary and secondary school revenues are provided by the
federal government, while states and local governments contribute approximately 45 percent each (Digest
of Education Statistics, 1996). The balance is funded by private sources.
                                                                                                       2

individuals make residential choices based on their preferences for schooling, then property values

should reflect how schooling in a particular area is valued by potential residents.2 Consider the

situation in which a district receives an additional dollar from an outside source (to be elaborated

below). If this additional dollar spent by the district improves school outcomes, then it should result

in an increase in property values. In contrast, if this additional dollar does not result in better

schools, then it should not result in an increase in property values.

        An advantage of this approach is that it permits an assessment of the value of school

spending using a more contemporaneous measure of (at least the perception of) the provision of

schooling. In addition, one can assess whether schools receiving the additional revenue are

inefficient in their provision of education by testing whether a one dollar increase in outside funding

generates a (properly discounted) one dollar increase in housing values. On the one hand, as

established by Tiebout (1956), if individuals choose their residence based on the provision of public

goods, then the optimal level of such public goods should be provided.3 Therefore, by this argument,

the provision of schooling in the United States may well be efficient because schools compete with

one another through the residential housing market. This form of competition insures both allocative

and productive efficiency as parents who would like a different kind or bundle of schooling can

choose a different neighborhood, as can those who do not believe that the quality of schooling merits

their tax dollars.

        On the other hand, there are several obstacles that may prevent the majority of school districts


        2
         For evidence that households with children choose where to live based in part on school quality,
see Barrow (forthcoming) and Black (1999).
        3
        Tiebout (1956) relies on several assumptions including full mobility, a large number of
communities, unrestricted employment opportunities, and an optimal community size.
                                                                                                            3

from achieving the optimal level of schooling. First, because it is costly to move, parents may not

be perfectly mobile or have perfect information about localities and the provision of education. In

particular, low-income families may not be able to choose to move out of the inner-city in order to

reside in a district providing their preferred level of education. In addition, a Tiebout equilibrium

requires that parents have a choice of different kinds of communities. Over the past 20 years many

states have centralized education finance to improve the equity in the provision of schooling (Kenny

and Schmidt, 1994), housing discrimination limits the choices of some individuals (e.g., Yinger,

1998), and choices are more limited in communities with only a few school districts. Each of these

factors would limit the ability of parents to choose their preferred provision of schooling.

        In this paper we adopt this “market-based” approach to examine both whether additional

spending on schools appears to increase school outputs, as perceived by the housing market, and

whether public schools are inefficient. Because most of the debate surrounding school finance in

the U.S. is implicitly about whether current spending is too high,4 we focus on testing whether the

current level of public school provision is inefficiently high. We consider efficiency in the situation

in which local school spending continues to be (primarily) financed by a property tax as occurs in

the majority of school districts in the U.S. In this case, housing choices may be distorted by the

property tax. Nevertheless, if families have the option of choosing to send their children to the


        4
          For example, many who argue that the public provision of schooling in the U.S. is likely inefficient
note that during the 1963-64 school year the government spent $2,609 per pupil (in 1995 dollars), compared
to $6,459 per pupil spent during 1995-96, an increase of over 147 percent (Digest of Education Statistics,
1996), without comparable increases in student achievement. Further, many argue that despite the fact that
the U.S. ranks fourth and third in spending per pupil for primary and secondary education, respectively,
(Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators, 1998), it ranks much lower in standardized tests of mathematics
and science knowledge, particularly at the secondary level (Pursuing Excellence: A Study of U.S. Fourth-
Grade Mathematics and Science Achievement in International Context, 1998; Pursuing Excellence: A Study
of U.S. Twelfth-Grade Mathematics and Science Achievement in International Context, 1998).
                                                                                                             4

school of their choice, communities may still achieve the second-best schooling optimum. Therefore,

we test for whether the current level of school spending is efficient conditional on the inefficiency

induced by the property tax.5

        In order to evaluate effectively the question of the efficiency of school spending, we have

assembled a rich and unique set of data on school districts. Our data sources consist of both original

data collected from state tax and education agencies as well as various Census data. We find

evidence that, on net, additional school spending leads to increased property values suggesting that

additional expenditures may improve student outcomes. In addition, we find that, on net, the current

level of funding of public school districts is not inefficiently high. That said, we find evidence of

differences in the valuation of spending across school districts. Particularly, we find that school

districts may overspend in large school districts, in primarily rental property districts, and in areas

in which residents are poor or less educated. One interpretation of these results is that increased

competition has the potential to reduce overspending on public schools in some areas.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section II outlines the theoretical model upon

which we base our statistical tests for the efficiency of school spending, section III explains our

empirical strategy, section IV describes our data, section V contains our results and section VI

concludes.



II.     A (Highly) Stylized Model of Public Good Valuation


        5
          Alternatively one could consider the case where under a full school choice program, either property
taxes are not used to finance schooling or the school property tax rates are fully-equalized thereby severing
the link between the local property taxes raised and the schooling provided. In this case, if families have the
option of choosing to send their children to any school, their housing choices will not be distorted by the
financing of that education. See, for example, Epple, Zelenitz, and Visscher (1978).
                                                                                                          5

A.      Basic Model

        Our market-based approach for assessing public school spending is based on Brueckner’s bid-

rent model of property value determination (1979, 1982, 1983).6 The result derived from this model

is that efficient public good provision occurs at the level that maximizes aggregate property value.

The model relies on some strong assumptions, and we address potential violations of these

assumptions below.

        In the bid-rent model of the housing market, consumers are assumed to have identical

preferences, and their utility depends on the level of schooling provided, E; other local public goods,

G; housing units, H; and the numeraire good, B. All residents in a community consume the same

level of the public goods, E and G.7 Costless mobility is assumed such that consumers with the same

level of income must achieve the same utility level.8 As a result, house prices (rents) adjust to insure

that residents are indifferent between different houses.9 Formally this means that a resident with

income 3 achieves utility h(3) and her consumption bundle must satisfy,


                                        U ( E , G , H , B ) = h( I ).                                   (1)




        6
        Other attempts to test for efficiency in the public provision of schooling include Barlow (1970) and
Bergstrom et al. (1988).
        7
          We assume there are no externalities across communities. Boskin (1972) argues that due to such
externalities, mobility may not lead to the optimal provision of public goods if local governments compete
through their tax and expenditure policies. In particular, public goods that redistribute among constituents
may be under-provided and those that increase the value of property over-provided. Although mobility will
lead to allocative inefficiencies, it will continue to induce productive efficiency.
        8
          We could also allow for heterogenous preferences in which case residents with the same
preferences and income would have to achieve the same level of utility.
        9
          One can think of “rent” as either the price of owning a house or of renting because in equilibrium
an individual should be indifferent between owning and renting a property.
                                                                                                     6

This equality is guaranteed since if a consumer could achieve a higher utility elsewhere, she would

move. As a result, such disparities are arbitraged away. A resident’s budget constraint can be written

as B+R=3, where R represents the rent paid for housing and the price of B is normalized to 1. Then,

R must satisfy


                                     U ( E , G , H , I − R) = h( I ).                              (2)


This equation determines the bid-rent function,

                                          R = R( E , G , H ; I ) .                                  (3)

The bid-rent function specifies the rent necessary to equalize an individual’s utility across differing



                                                       U E ( E , G, H , I − R)
                              RE ( E , G , H ; I ) =                                                (4)
                                                       U B ( E , G, H , I − R)


residences. Differentiating equation (3) with respect to E gives

where subscripts denote partial derivatives. Equation (4) shows that the required change in the rent

resulting from a change in E is equal to the marginal rate of substitution between education and the

numeraire good, B. Similarly, the required change in the rent resulting from a change in G is equal

to the marginal rate of substitution between the other public goods and B.

       Next, assume that local revenues for schooling are financed exclusively by a residential

property tax rate, tE, and the other public goods by a residential property tax, tG. The property tax

rates are applied to both land and improvements to ensure that the choice of housing-factor inputs



                                                R − ( t E + t G ) ⋅ Pi
                                         Pi =                                                       (5)
                                                          δ
                                                                                                        7

is not distorted. Letting * be the discount rate, the value of an individual house i is,

which rearranged gives,

                                                 R( E , G , Hi ; I i )
                                         Pi =                            .                             (6)
                                                   δ + t E + tG




The aggregate value of housing property is defined as the sum of the individual property values

within a community,

                                         N          N      (
                                                         R E , G , Hi ; I i   )
                                   P=    ∑     Pi = ∑
                                                           δ + t E + tG
                                                                                  ,                    (7)
                                         i=1       i=1



where N is the number of houses in the community.

        Assuming that the state contributes an amount, S, to local school districts (the local

community fully finances the other public goods, G, for simplicity), the community budget constraint

is,

                            ( t E + t G ) ⋅ P = CE ( E , N ) − S + CG( G, N ) ,                       (8)

                          1 N                                                      
                     P=      ∑
                          δ  i=1
                                   (               )
                                  R E , G , Hi ; I i − CE ( E , N ) + S − CG( G, N ) .
                                                                                    
                                                                                                       (9)



where CE and CG are the (convex) cost functions for E and G. The fact that cost is a function of the

community size, N, reflects potential congestion costs.10 Combining equations (7) and (8) gives,

Aggregate property values are a function of the aggregate rents, state aid, the discount rate, and the




        10
           Note that for simplicity in notation we have allowed the community size in terms of congestion
costs to equal the number of housing units. In fact, one might think total population or number of school-
aged children, in the case of education, is a more appropriate measure for potential congestion.
                                                                                                      8

production costs of education and the other public goods.11 Differentiating equation (9) with respect

to the state aid and assuming that changes in state money for education have no effect on the

provision of other public goods, i.e. MG/MS = 0, yields


                        ∂P 1  N                                     ∂E 1
                        ∂S δ  i = 1
                                        (            )
                          =  ∑ RE E , G , Hi ; I i − CE E ( E , N )   +
                                                                     ∂S δ
                                                                                                   (10)




where, as shown in equation (4), RE is equal to the marginal rate of substitution between education

and the numeraire good, B.         As a result, equation (10) establishes that MP/MS =1/* when the

“Samuelson condition” for the optimal provision of education is satisfied, i.e., the sum of the

marginal rates of substitution between education and the numeraire equals the marginal cost of

providing education. (A similar condition holds for all other public goods as well.) Assuming that

R is a strictly concave function of E and G and that CE is convex in E and G, it follows that P in

equation (9) is strictly concave in E and G. As a result, aggregate property value reaches a global

maximum at values of E and G where the Samuelson condition holds, ceteris paribus. Thus, one can

determine whether education is under-provided or over-provided relative to the property value

maximizing level as MP/MS =>< 1/*. Note that under- or over-provision of education may result either

from productive or allocative inefficiencies. One might conclude that education is being over-

provided in a district in which the “right” level of education is being provided but the district is not

cost minimizing. Alternatively the district may be productively efficient but not provide the property

value-maximizing level of education.

        Because the null hypothesis of the coefficient of interest, that on state school aid, depends


        11
             We discuss adding business property to the model below.
                                                                                                             9

on the discount rate, we use two rates in constructing our hypothesis tests regarding school

efficiency: 7.33 percent which is the average real 30-year conventional mortgage rate from 1980-

1990 and the lower risk return of 5.24 percent which is the average real 30-year Treasure bond yield

from 1980-1990.12 In addition, we adjust these discount rates for the average marginal U.S. (income)

tax rates between 1979 and 1989.13



B.        Discussion of Assumptions and Omissions

          The result above derives from a number of rather strong assumptions and omissions that may

not hold in reality. For example, the model assumes that households can move without cost, that

changes in state aid are perceived as permanent changes, and that the provision of public goods other

than education are unaffected by changes in state funds for public schooling. In addition, the

theoretical model omits the role of commercial property.                 In this section we discuss the

reasonableness of these assumptions and their likely effects on interpretation of the results that

follow.



          1.     Costless Mobility

          Costless mobility insures that equation (1) holds, that is, households with the same income



          12
          The nominal mortgage rate is from the Federal Home Mortgage Corporation (obtained from the
Federal Reserve Board of Governors – http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/releases/h15/data/a/cm.txt ). The nominal
30-year Treasury bond yield (constant maturity) is from the U.S. Treasure Department (obtained from the
Federal Reserve Board of Governors – http://www.bog.frb.fed.us/releases/H15/data/a/tcm30y.txt ) We use
the personal consumption expenditure price index to calculate the real rates.
          13
           We calculate the marginal tax rate for 1979 to 1989 using the average income in the our sample
for 1980 and inflating to current dollars for the subsequent years. The marginal tax rate we use is the average
of these tax rates over the 11 years. This average marginal tax rate is 26.7%.
                                                                                                     10

achieve the same utility level because if a household could achieve a higher utility elsewhere, it

would move. We have attempted to incorporate costs of moving into the model in two ways. First,

we considered the case of a household facing the following consideration: remain in community 1

or move to community 2. If there is only one period, then the household on the margin of moving

will be indifferent between moving and staying. We represent this by amending equation (2) as,



                   U ( E1 , G1 , H1 , I − R1 ) = U ( E 2 , G2 , H2 , I − R2 − k ) = h( I ).         (2N)



where Ej, Gj, Hj, and Rj represent the amenities and rent in community j (where j=1,2) and k

represents the fixed cost of moving. In this case, equation (9) still holds (i.e., one would test for

efficiency by testing whether MP/MS =1/*) because the moving costs do not change the marginal cost

and benefit of education.

        More generally, however, one may be concerned that households in poor neighborhoods have

fewer options (which could be thought of as extremely high mobility costs). In this case, as in all

districts, as long as there are some households moving into and out of the district (i.e., there is some

market determining prices), then the market price for those houses should reflect the valuation that

potential homeowners put on the amenities in the district. And, in districts in which households have

less mobility (such as low-income districts), we might expect that education (and other public goods)

is not provided efficiently.



        2.     Permanent changes in state aid

        An implicit assumption of the above model is that changes in state aid for education are
                                                                                                  11

permanent. If instead changes in state aid were transitory, we would expect them to have a much

smaller impact on property values. However, the formulas that determine the level of state education

aid tend to change slowly over time such that changes in state aid are likely to be viewed as

permanent by districts. In addition, many districts (67 percent in 1977 and 48 percent in 1990) are

covered by “hold harmless” provisions which minimize the amount that districts can lose due to

policy changes, property value growth, or decreases in enrollment. On balance it seems reasonable

to assume that changes in state aid are viewed as permanent. We note, however, that to the extent

that they are viewed as more transitory our coefficient of interest will tend toward zero.



       3.      MG/MS ' 0

       A third assumption is that state spending on education does not affect the provision of other

public goods. From the standpoint of basic economic theory this assumption seems unrealistic since

funding is fungible, and if a district receives aid from the state, the equivalent to an increase in

income, then the share devoted to education should be equal to the marginal propensity to spend out

of income (which would be about 5-10 cents on the dollar) (Hines and Thaler, 1995). If we modify

equation (10) to relax the assumption that MG/MS ' 0, we have,


∂P 1  N                                     ∂E 1  N                                     ∂G 1
∂S δ  i = 1
               (           )
  =  ∑ RE E , G , Hi ; I i − CE E ( E , N )             (            )
                                                +  ∑ RG E , G , Hi ; I i − CE G ( E , N )
                                             ∂S δ  i = 1
                                                                                              + (10N)
                                                                                           ∂S δ



where RG is equal to the marginal rate of substitution between other public goods and the numeraire

good, B. In this case, the conclusions we may draw from the test that MP/MS=1/* are somewhat

ambiguous.
                                                                                                         12

        First, we may conclude that districts appear to be spending efficiently, but in reality they are

not. This occurs if the first term (representing the marginal rate of substitution between education

and B net of marginal cost) is completely offset by the second term (representing the marginal rate

of substitution between the other public good and B net of marginal cost). As a theoretical

possibility, this could only occur if, on average, districts over-provide education and under-provide

other public goods (or vice versa). While we have been unable to find any empirical evidence on

this issue, it seems more likely that if districts over-provide one public good they likely over-provide

the others as well.14 In this case, our estimated coefficients will be upward or downward biased such

that we will reject efficiency although the size of the inefficiency will be exaggerated. A second

possibility is that education is provided efficiently (such that the first term does equal zero), but that

other public goods are not provided efficiently.15 In this case, even if MG/MS is small, a large

inefficiency in the provision of other public goods may cause us to find evidence of inefficiency in

education where there is none.

        We believe the assumption that MG/MS = 0 is not unrealistic in our case because we limit our

analysis to independent school districts, about 92 percent of all elementary and secondary school

districts in the U.S. (1992 Census of Governments, Government Finances). Independent school

districts, as defined by the Census of Governments, are fiscally and administratively independent of

other government entities, such as townships and counties, and thus are considered governments



        14
          That said, our review of the literature suggests that there is little evidence of systematic over-
provision of any public goods (See Brueckner, 1979; Deller, 1990; and Taylor, 1995).
        15
          Of course, if one is willing to assume that other public goods are provided efficiently, then
equation (10N) becomes equation (10) again because the Samuelson condition is met for the other public
goods so that the second piece of equation (10N) equals zero even when MG/MS ú 0.
                                                                                                       13

themselves. Dependent school districts, on the other hand, are dependent on a “parent” government.

Consequently, the parent government of a dependent school district has the ability to shift public

expenditure among various public goods, whereas independent districts provide education and are

unable to spend revenues on public goods other than education. As a result, any aid received by an

independent district from the state either must be spent on the provision of education or rebated back

to residents in the form of a tax rate reduction. Thus, it is only indirectly that increased state aid may

lead to an increase in the provision of other public goods in the county or township in which the

school district is situated (because the reduction in school taxes can be off-set by an increase in taxes

to fund other public goods).

        To assess the extent of this indirect effect of state school aid on public goods other than

education, we examined the relationship between county-level expenditures and state aid for

education. Aggregating the school-level data for independent school districts to the county level,

we found that the relationship between county expenditures per pupil and state aid per pupil was

negative, but not statistically significant. In contrast, when we aggregated to the county level using

only districts dependent on a parent government, we found a positive and statistically significant

relationship between county expenditures per pupil and state aid per pupil.16 Thus, MG/MS ' 0 seems

to hold empirically for the independent school districts examined in this paper while MG/MS > 0

seems to apply to dependent districts that can more easily shift expenditures between budget

categories.




        16
          We examined the county expenditure per pupil and state school aid per pupil relationship in a
regression parallel to the school expenditure regression in column (1) of Table 5. These results are not
presented here but are available from the authors on request.
                                                                                                      14

        4.      Business Property

        Finally, the model specified above omits business property from consideration.                To

understand the effect of such an omission on our results, consider the case in which we assume that

the value of business property only enters the model through the budget constraint and both

residential and business property are taxed. Again assuming MG/MS ' 0, equation (10) becomes:



                   ∂P 1 N                                            ∂E α
                      =  ∑ RE ( E , G , H i ; I i ) − αCEE ( E , N )   +                         (10O)
                   ∂ S δ  i =1                                       ∂S δ


where " is the residential share of total property value.17 Thus, at the efficient level of education

provision, the first part of equation (10O) no longer equals zero: in fact, it is now positive (as long

as " ú 0). This positive effect on MP/MS is partially offset by the effect of " on the second term, but

the net effect is indeterminate. What we can say is that this problem is minimized in heavily

residential areas where " is close to one. In addition, it is still clear that MP/MS < 0 implies that too

much is being spent on public education.

        Empirically, we do not include business property in our estimation because data are not

available for most states. However, when we include it (along with other types of property, such as

personal property) for the (few) states for which we have the data, it has not changed the estimated

coefficients substantially. As a result, we conclude that our treatment of commercial property is

unlikely to have a large effect on our conclusions about education spending.




        17
          In 1986, approximately 61 percent of gross assessed valuation was due to residential (nonfarm)
property (1987 Census of Governments, Taxable Property Values).
                                                                                                             15

III.    Empirical Framework

        Based on the theoretical framework, we estimate the following reduced-form equation,




                 Pjcst = α 0 + X jcstα1 + H jcst α 2 + Wcstα 3 + β S jcst + ξ j + ε jcst                   (11)




where Pjcst is the aggregate house value per pupil in school district j, in county c, in state s, and year

t, Xjcst are a set of demographic characteristics about the district’s population, Hjcst are characteristics

of the housing stock of the district, Wcst are county characteristics, and Sjcst is state revenue per pupil

for education spending. >j is a district fixed-effect and gjcst is a normally distributed random error

term.18 $ is a coefficient that represents the efficiency of school district spending on education.

        By far the most difficult empirical challenge to overcome is to control for all characteristics

that are correlated with state schooling revenue and housing values as omitted factors may bias the

results.19 In the 1970's many states relied on categorical aid to fund education. During this time,

state revenue was primarily determined by a flat grant per pupil or by a flat grant in which the pupil

count was weighted by the characteristics of the students in each school district (such as grade level,

special education needs, and transportation). Between the 1970's and the 1990's many states changed

their formulas in order to equalize education funding across rich and poor districts. Many of the



        18
           Note that we do not control for school tax rates in this equation. We do not do so for three reasons.
First, in controlling for the tax rate, we would not allow the district to reoptimize school financing in
response to the change in state aid. Second, tax rates are not explicitly in the theoretical model. And third,
when we do so it does not make a difference to results.
        19
             See Rubinfeld (1987) for a discussion of the empirical challenges of testing the Tiebout model.
                                                                                                            16

formulas now incorporate the wealth of the district (the total assessed valuation per pupil), such that

property-rich districts receive less state aid while property-poor districts receive more.20 As a result,

while the relationship between district state funding per pupil and district assessed valuation per

pupil was relatively flat in 1980, the relationship has gotten more negatively sloped in 1990 for states

that have made “equalizing” changes to their state financing formulas.21

        Figures 1a and 1b depict predicted total state aid per pupil in 1980 and 1990 versus aggregate

house values per pupil in 1980 for Colorado and West Virginia.22 Each graph also includes

regression fitted values from regressing predicted total state aid per pupil in each year on aggregate

house values per pupil in 1980. Colorado, in Figure 1a, is a good example of a state in which state

school aid was made more equalizing. In 1980, the slope of the regression fitted line is relatively

flat while in 1990 the slope of the regression fitted line is more negative indicating that property-poor

districts are getting more aid per pupil than wealthier districts. While West Virginia (Figure 1b)

adopted a more generous school financing formula in 1990, as evidenced by the upward shift in the

regression fitted line in 1990, the state did not adopt a formula that increased the degree of

equalization between 1980 and 1990. This is evidenced by the slope of the regression fitted lines



        20
          This is a very broad generalization. See Card and Payne (1997), Evans, Murray, and Schwab
(1997), Hoxby (1998), and Murray, Evans, and Schwab (1998) for more details on state financing plans.
        21
           We have attempted to model which states change their financing formulas and which states adopt
more or less equalizing formulas. We did so by aggregating our data to the state level and estimating binary
and multinominal logit models. While we found some evidence that the average state household income
and/or property values (either the levels or distribution) may partially determine state behavior, the evidence
was neither overwhelming nor systematic. A more in-depth political economy approach would be quite
useful for this literature.
        22
          In these figures, both 1980 and 1990 state aid are predicted from the state school financing
formulas using the characteristics of the districts in 1980. Figures from all states are available from the
authors on request.
                                                                                                          17

remaining relatively similar. West Virginia’s school financing formula generates some equalization,

however, as can be seen by the negative relationship between predicted state aid per pupil and

aggregate house values per pupil. (Also see Card and Payne (1997).)

        Because moving toward greater equalization is likely to result in districts with declining

property values receiving greater increases in state aid per pupil, we expect that the coefficient

estimate on changes in state aid will be negatively biased. We attempt to address this potential

problem in three ways. First, we control for a variety of district and county characteristics that may

be correlated with education provision and district property values. For example, we include

demographic characteristics of the district as well as the county crime rates. These measures vary

over time as well. Second, we focus on estimates that contain school district fixed-effects (which

we implement through first-differenced equations). This allows us to parcel out any time-invariant

features of districts that may be correlated with state education revenues and house values (such as

distance to employment centers, climate, and relatively stable characteristics about the student and

local populations).

        Third, we instrument for changes in state education revenue with changes in the state school

financing formulas. To construct our instrument, we first programmed each state’s financing

formulas in effect in 1978-79 and 1990-91. We then calculate the amount of both the “basic” state

aid and the “total” state aid that each district should have received according to our computer

programs in 1980 and 1990.23 “Total” state aid includes “basic” state aid (usually the foundation


        23
          We predict the amount of state aid that each district receives according to the formulas as
described in the Public School Finance Programs series from 1978 and 1990. In some states we also
supplemented these descriptions of the formulas with additional information from the states or from the state
statute when necessary. We used total assessed valuations by district nationwide in 1980 and 1990 (which
we collected) to determine the amount of state aid. The correlation between our prediction of total state aid
                                                                                                               18

amount) plus some additional components such as aid for special and vocational education. In order

to minimize the effect of changing district characteristics on our calculations of the 1990 state aid,

we estimate the amount of state aid in 1990 using the formulas from 1990 and the district

characteristics in 1980. (The estimated amount of state aid in 1980 is constructed using the 1980

formulas and the district characteristics in 1980.) We refer to this instrument as the “predicted state

aid.”24 The disadvantage of the predicted state aid instrumental variables strategy is that it relies on

the assumption that the changes in district housing values are not correlated with district

characteristics in 1980 (which we use to construct the instrumental variable). To the extent that

(residual) changes from 1980 to 1990 housing values are correlated with district characteristics in

1980, the instrumental variables results may be inconsistent.25


and the actual level of state aid is 0.39 in 1980 and 0.54 in 1990 if the 1990 district characteristics are used
and 0.33 if 1980 district characteristics are used.
        24
           Unlike instrumental variables used in many recent works (see Card (1995) for some examples),
we do not have a priori reason to think that our instrument will affect certain districts more than others. Our
instrumental variable is designed to recover changes in state school finance formulas which affect all
districts. However, to examine more carefully which districts are affected by the instrument, we generated
densities of actual and predicted state aid by the various district and household characteristics examined in
Section V. B of the paper. We found that for the various by-groups (that represent district characteristics)
the actual and predicted state aid densities lie on top of one another and that there was little or no difference
in the graphs by the level of the district characteristic in question. Therefore, we believe that the
identification is coming from the entire distribution.
        25
           To assess these results, we have also constructed instrumental variables by predicting state aid
using “synthetically” constructed districts. For each district, we predict the logarithm of property value per
pupil (as used in the school financing formulas) from a regression on a set of household characteristics from
our data. We construct distance in predicted log property value per pupil for each district and take a
weighted average of the characteristics of the 100 nearest districts (outside of the district’s own state) to form
a “synthetic” district for each district (the inverse of the distance measures are used as weights). This
synthetic 1980 data is then used to predict state aid in both 1980 and 1990. We refer to these instrumental
variables as “synthetically predicted state aid” and present results comparing the two instruments in
Appendix Table I. (This approach is similar to the simulated instruments in Currie and Gruber (1996).) In
general, the results generated using the synthetically predicted state aid are similar to those using the
predicted state aid, suggesting that any potential bias in our preferred instrument may not significantly
change the results. We do not highlight the synthetic instrument in the text of the paper because the
                                                                                                             19

        We also note that our strategy is to include an array of district and county characteristics to

proxy for the district’s underlying cost function for education, rather than to control directly for

education costs. We do so for two reasons. First, education costs (as opposed to expenditures) are

inherently more difficult to observe, and second, if we use education expenditure as a proxy for local

education cost, we do not have a strategy for addressing the endogeneity of local education

expenditure in addition to state aid. Many state school financing formulas calculate a total amount

of school financing “need” for each district based on pupil counts in the district. One common

feature of this portion of the formulas is to assign different weights to different types of pupils in

generating a total pupil count. More specifically, the formulas give more weight to pupils that are

more costly to educate, such as students with special education needs. As a consequence, this feature

of the formulas will induce some positive correlation between local education costs and state aid.

Given that state aid is negatively correlated with property values, our IV estimates may be downward

biased to the extent to which we have not properly proxied for local education costs.



IV.     Data

        For most of our empirical analysis we use data from the 1980 and 1990 decennial census

school district data files, the 1977 and 1987 Census of Governments, and the USA Counties 1996

CD-ROM. In order to generate our instrumental variables, we have also merged these data with data

we collected on tax rates and the total assessed valuation (adjusted to market value both by the

statutory assessment ratio and assessment-to-sales ratios where possible) by school district from


instrument has some serious limitations that derive from the fact that states rely differently on property taxes
relative to other forms of taxes and from the fact that with non-linear formulas issues of scale can
significantly alter the predicted state aid in ways that make it difficult to assess the results.
                                                                                                                20

1980 and 1990.26 The unit of observation is an independent school district. As a result, we drop all

school districts from the following states – Alaska, District of Columbia, Hawaii, Maryland, North

Carolina, and Virginia – in which there are no independent districts. We also lose most districts in

Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Tennessee in which the majority of school districts

are dependent on a parent government.

        We also limit the sample to unified school districts that did not change between 1980 and

1990 (that is, they did not merge or split apart).27 We exclude districts in California because we could

not obtain property value data with which to model the school financing formulas. We also exclude

school districts with zero enrollment in either 1980 or 1990, and those for whom we are missing data

on our instruments and aggregate property values. The final analysis sample includes 9,079

observations, about 92 percent of all independent, unified school districts and 61 percent of all

elementary and/or secondary districts in existence in 1991 based on the 1992 datafile from the

Census of Government Finances.28


        26
           Note, however, that the dependent variable in our regressions–aggregate residential property values
per pupil–is from the 1980 and 1990 decennial censuses. This measure of aggregate property value for a
school district equals the sum of aggregate owner-occupied house values and an estimate of the asset value
of the rental property derived from aggregate gross rent.
        27
            We limit the sample to unified school districts to avoid double counting students for the same
property valuation. Specifically, consider two areas one of which has an elementary district with a high
school district and the other of which has a unified district. Assume the total property valuation and total
number of pupils (aged 5-18) is the same in both. The per pupil valuation will be larger in each of the two
districts in the first area relative to the second. Further, the local school tax rates will differ since each area
is raising revenues for different numbers and types of schools. That said, we have conducted the analysis
using elementary and secondary as well as unified school districts with little difference. Because the unified
district analysis is conceptually cleaner, we only present those results. Limiting the sample to unified school
districts means losing all school districts in Montana and more than one-half of the school districts in
Arizona, Illinois, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, and Vermont. The results using the larger sample
are available from the authors on request.
        28
             A more detailed description of the data are available from the authors upon request.
                                                                                                     21

        Means of selected school district characteristics in 1980 and 1990 are presented in Table 1.

On average, aggregate house values per pupil increased by 46 percent between 1980 and 1990. State

aid per pupil also increased from 1980 to 1990 (63 percent) arising from both increases in total state

aid as well as declining enrollment over the time period.



V.      Empirical Analysis

A.      Ordinary Least Squares Estimation (OLS)

        In Table 2 we present ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of the relationship between the

change in aggregate residential property value per pupil and the change in state aid for education per

pupil. The results from a simple bivariate regression are presented in column (1); the remaining two

columns sequentially add district and then county characteristics and Census division indicators. We

estimate a negative and statistically significant relationship between property values and state aid per

pupil in column (1) reflecting the redistributive intent of state education aid.

        The estimates in column (2) include the first-differences and 1980 levels for a quadratic in

average household income, the percentage of the population with at least 16 years of education, the

percentage of the population that is unemployed, the percentage of housing units that are owner

occupied, the percentage of housing units that are vacant, the percentage of occupied housing units

that were built more than 10 years ago, the percentage of the population that moved into their house

less than 10 years ago, the percentage of the population over 55 years of age, the percentage of

children enrolled in private schools, total housing units in the district, and public school district

enrollment. In column (3) we also add indicators for the district’s Census division and the 1980-

1990 change and the 1980 levels of the FBI’s serious crime index, the percentage of voters that voted
                                                                                                         22

for the republican candidate in the most recent presidential election, the percentage of voters that

voted for the democratic candidate in the most recent presidential election, the percentage of the

county employees that are union members, and the percentage of workers employed in

manufacturing.29 We expect that the coefficient estimates on changes in state aid per pupil will

increase when the additional covariates are included.

        As expected, the estimate in column (2) increases such that we estimate a one dollar increase

in state aid will increase property values by 10.5 dollars, an effect that is statistically significant. The

effect decreases slightly to 8.7 dollars in column (3) when we add the county and Census division

variables. Note, however, that these estimates are significantly different from 18.61 (corresponding

to a discount rate of 0.0733 adjusted by the marginal tax rate) and 26.03 (corresponding to a discount

rate of 0.0524 adjusted by the marginal tax rate), the range of estimates we would expect if districts

were spending efficiently. As a result, based on the OLS results, one would conclude that although

the increased expenditures appear to be valued in the housing market, school districts are not

generating the increase in property values consistent with property value maximization since a one

dollar increase in their state education aid does not generate a (properly discounted) one dollar

increase in property values.



B.      Instrumental Variables (IV) Estimation

        1.      Overall

        Because it is likely that the OLS coefficient estimates on state aid per pupil are negatively


        29
          We also include dummy variables indicating whether there are missing values for the percentage
of households that moved into their house less than 10 years ago, the FBI crime index, and the percentage
of county workers who are organized.
                                                                                                      23

biased because most states have moved to “more equalizing” state financing formulas, we instrument

for changes in state aid with changes in “predicted state aid,” an instrument that holds the school

districts’ characteristics constant at their 1980 levels. The first-stage estimates of the relationship

between observed changes in state aid per pupil and the instrumental variables are presented in Table

3. Column (1) shows the relationship when we predict “basic” state aid; column (2) shows the

relationship when we predict “total” state aid. Both instruments are significantly correlated with

observed changes in state aid per pupil as reflected in the F-statistics (Bound, Jaeger, and Baker,

1995; Staiger and Stock, 1997). A one dollar increase in predicted aid is associated with

approximately a 9 cent increase in actual state aid, controlling for district and county characteristics.

        The IV estimates are presented in Table 4; the estimates in column (1) use the change in

predicted basic state aid and those in column (2) use the change in predicted total state aid. We

continue to control for the district and county characteristics as well as Census divisions as described

in the text and shown in column (3) of Table 2. The magnitudes of the IV estimates are remarkably

similar across the two calculations of state aid. A one dollar increase in state aid increases aggregate

housing values per pupil between $19 and $20. These results suggest that increases in state aid

increase property values which reflects that potential residents value the education expenditure.

        We also report the p-values for the test of the null hypothesis that districts are spending

education money efficiently, i.e., that the coefficient on state aid equals 18.61 or 26.03. In only one

case (column (2) with the lower discount rate) might we conclude that the districts were

overspending (the p-value is 0.054), thus, we conclude that there is no strong evidence of massive

overspending by school districts on net.

        An important question is whether increases in state aid truly translate into increases in
                                                                                                              24

education provision at the district level for our inferences about the efficiency of school expenditures

only hold if *E/*S ú 0 (see equation (10)). To provide some evidence on how the additional state

aid is spent, we study the relationship between state aid and district total expenditures on education,

local school property tax rates, and local revenues for education. We estimate instrumental variables

models identical to those in Table 4 except for the dependent variable. The results, in Table 5,

suggest that changes in state aid for education increase education expenditure, decrease school

district tax rates, and decrease total local revenue for public schools.30 The results from estimating

the effect of changes in state aid on total education expenditures are presented in column (1).31 A

$1 increase in state aid per pupil increases total expenditures per pupil by approximately 60 cents.

These results suggest that education provision responds to changes in state aid, i.e. *E/*S ú 0, such

that our estimate of the effect of changes in state aid per pupil on changes in aggregate house values

per pupil leads to inferences about efficiency.

        The results presented in columns (2) and (3) suggest that school districts may use some of

the increase in state aid per pupil to decrease their own tax burden. In column (2) we show that a



        30
           We have also explored the effect of changes in state aid on education inputs and outcomes, namely,
district pupil-teacher ratios and high school dropout rates. We find a small, negative, and statistically
insignificant effect of state aid on district pupil-teacher ratios and a small positive and statistically
insignificant effect on dropout rates.
        31
            There is some difficulty in consistently defining total education expenditure over time. We define
district total expenditure on education as the sum of current expenditure (as defined by Murray, Evans, and
Schwab (1998)), intergovernmental expenditure, construction expenditure, expenditure on other capital, and
interest on debt. If we limit expenditure to current expenditure only and re-estimate column (1) we find that
a $1 increase in state aid per pupil leads to about a 54 cent increase in current expenditure per pupil. The
smaller coefficient estimate is not surprising given that current expenditure is less than total expenditure, and
the result suggests that our coefficient estimate might be even closer to one if we could accurately account
for all expenditures. Note that in Table 5 we use a smaller sample because of missing data in the dependent
variable in column (2); the results in columns (1) and (3) are nearly identical when we use the full analysis
sample.
                                                                                                               25

one dollar increase in state aid per pupil is associated with a decrease in school district property tax

rates by 8-9 cents per $10,000 of aggregate property value. Increasing property values over the

decade may explain some of the decline in tax rates. However, the results in column (3) suggest that

districts reduced their tax rates by enough to decrease their local contribution to public schools; a

$1 increase in state aid per pupil is associated with a 15-17 cent decline in total local revenue per

pupil.



         2.      Differences by School District Characteristics

         The previous section tested for whether state aid translates into property value increases, on

net. This aggregate estimate, however, may mask important differences. A natural implication of

the theoretical framework is that areas with better performing markets should be more efficient. For

example, because households with greater income have more schooling options (as they can afford

to consider a wider range of school districts in which to reside and can more easily afford private

schools), we expect that school spending in wealthier areas should be more efficient. Similarly,

characteristics of school districts (e.g., the degree of competition or size) may affect the efficiency

of school spending. Therefore, in this last section we consider whether the relationship between state

aid and property values varies by household and district characteristics.32

         We begin by asking whether property values in wealthier and more educated public school

districts are more responsive (positively) to changes in state aid. To do so we divide districts (using

their characteristics in 1980) into quintiles based on the average household income and the


         32
           In Tables 6a and 6b we restrict the effects of the other covariates to be the same across the districts
and only interact state education revenues with the demographic or district characteristic in question. We also
interact the instruments with these categories.
                                                                                                          26

proportion of householders who do not have a high school degree. We classify those in the lowest

quintile as being “low income” or having “low education” and those in the highest quintile as being

“high income” or having “high education.”33 The average income of districts classified as “low

income” is $28,973; the average for those classified as “high income” is $55,526. The average

proportion of householders with less than a high school education in “less educated” districts is

about 50 percent, whereas only 17 percent of householders in “highly educated” districts have less

than a high school education.

        In the upper-panel of Table 6a, we estimate the results by income. The results in both

columns (1) and (2) suggest that low income districts could increase aggregate property values by

decreasing spending on public schools since each additional dollar of state aid raises property values

by less than the properly discounted value of the additional spending. We also find that the difference

in the effect of state aid on property values between low and high income communities is statistically

significant. The estimates reported in the middle panel allow for variation by the education level of

the community. Again we find that districts in less-educated communities more likely overspend

on public schooling than those in high education communities.

        Finally in the bottom panel of Table 6a we differentiate schools by whether housing in the

school district is primarily owner or renter occupied. Eighty-four percent of housing units in “owner-

occupied” districts are occupied by owners. “Renter-occupied” districts have only 52 percent of

housing units owner occupied. Assuming that owner-occupation of housing provides another proxy


        33
           Because the definitions for many of the categorizations in Tables 6a and 6b are inherently
arbitrary, we adopted the rule of defining the categories based on the 20th and 80th percentiles (when
weighted). The exception is the categorization of districts into “competitive” or “not competitive” using the
county Herfindahl-Hirschman Index. The results are not generally sensitive to small changes in these cut-off
choices.
                                                                                                    27

for resources, we expect that districts with a low percentage of owner-occupied housing may be less

efficient than those in owner-occupied districts. The results suggest that school district efficiency

does, indeed, vary by the percent of housing in a district that is owner occupied. Compared to largely

owner-occupied districts, districts with high rental rates appear to overspend on public schooling.

       Overall, it appears that districts with poorer and less educated residents overspend on schools

relative to wealthier and more highly educated districts. Note that the difference in coefficient

estimates between the wealthier and poorer districts reflects differences in the relative values of the

marginal rates of substitution between education and other goods and the marginal costs of providing

education. One potential factor driving these differences may be lack of mobility. The restricted

mobility may arise because of a lack of income, restricted access to credit markets, or discrimination.

Alternatively, if one believes that districts with poorer and wealthier (or more and less educated)

residents have similar marginal rates of substitution between education and other goods, then the

difference may reflect an inherently higher marginal cost of providing education in the poorer

districts. For example, the presence of peer effects may lower the cost of schooling production in

wealthier or highly educated communities relative to less advantaged communities (Bénabou, 1993).

       In Table 6b we conduct a similar exercise for district characteristics. In the top panel of

Table 6b we test for differential efficiency by the level of public school competition, as measured

by the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI).           Researchers argue that an HHI based on the

concentration of enrollment in a geographic area reflects the market power of public schools in the

area and therefore the degree of “choice” that parents may have (Borland and Howsen, 1992; Hoxby,

1994). Thus, we would expect that districts with less market power would be more efficient than
                                                                                                                 28

those in less competitive areas. The HHI ranges from 0 to 1.34 Districts in areas with only a few large

school districts will have values close to 1 as the districts monopolize student enrollments; districts

with lower values face more competitive pressure. We base our HHI on the concentration of public

school enrollments in the county. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) guidelines for horizontal

mergers define markets with HHIs below 0.10 as unconcentrated, HHIs from 0.10 to 0.18 as

moderately concentrated, and HHIs above 0.18 as highly concentrated. Using these guidelines, 74

percent of our school districts are in highly concentrated markets. However, the FTC guidelines

were not written for school districts, which must exist in all counties, and will therefore generate

markets that are more concentrated than the typical product market. As a result, we use a more

moderate definition of concentration and divide the districts into those that are somewhat

competitive (HHI<0.15, approximately 20 percent of our sample), those that are monopolistic

(HHI>0.46, approximately 34 percent of the sample), and those in between.35

        The results in the top panel of Table 6b suggest that property values in areas that face little

or no competition increase less in response to a change in state aid than districts facing a relatively

competitive market. At the same time, however, we cannot reject that districts facing little

competition are efficient.36 Note, as well, that the property value response to changes in the spending

        34
           The HHI is defined for each market as the sum of the squares of the market shares of all
participants. In this case, we define market share as the proportion of county public school enrollment in
                                                                                         J
each district and sum the squares of these proportions for each county, i.e., HHI = ∑ S 2jc where Sjc is district
                                                                                        j =1

j’s share of county c’s total enrollment.
        35
           That said, if we use the FTC guidelines for defining degree of competition, our results are
qualitatively similar.
        36
           The results by the Herfindahl-Hirshman Index of the district cannot solely be explained by
urban/rural differences. When we estimate the results by the competitive pressure felt by the district
separately for rural and suburban school districts, the qualitative results that districts facing little competition
                                                                                                                  29

practices of school districts in not-competitive areas is significantly different from the response to

practices of those that face the most competition. These results partly contrast to the those in the

previous table in that we would not conclude that those districts facing the least competition as

measured by the Herfindahl-Hirshmann Index are overspending, although the gap between districts

remains.37

        Next we examine the effect of school district size. Undoubtedly there is an optimal size for

school districts as small districts may not be able to reach an efficient scale in the production of

education and large districts may be beyond the efficient scale. The concern in education policy

today is that large districts, such as those in New York City and Chicago, are so large that

administration and bureaucracy absorb resources that efficiency would dictate should be directed

towards instruction. Further, in these areas residents have fewer choices among public school

districts. Thus, in the lower panel of Table 6b we test for differences in efficiency by district size.

Using both sets of instruments, we find there is a significant difference between small and large

districts suggesting that large districts are more likely to overspend than small districts. The results

are consistent with the idea that smaller districts perform better than large districts; however, we

cannot exactly identify the mechanism driving the efficiency difference.

        The results in Tables 6a and 6b suggest that school districts in areas with poorer and less



are inefficient also remain. Similarly, the results by the Herfindahl-Hirshman Index do not appear to be
affected by the size of the county since if we control for the number of square kilometers in the county the
results are nearly identical.
        37
           These results are partially consistent with Grosskopf, Hayes, Taylor, and Weber (1999) who find
that school districts in metropolitan areas in Texas are increasingly allocatively inefficient with increases in
market concentration when the HHI exceeds 0.27. If we define high Herfindahl districts as those with HHIs
in excess of 0.27, we also find that districts facing little competition are less efficient than all other districts,
particularly when judged with a lower discount rate.
                                                                                                           30

educated residents spend less efficiently than school districts with wealthier and highly educated

residents and that large and largely renter-occupied districts are less efficient than smaller and more

heavily owner-occupied districts. We do not find strong evidence that schools districts that face a

lot of competition (as measured by a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index) are more efficient than districts

that face little or no competition. While the results that address efficiency by level of competition

are not directly consistent with Hoxby (1994), we believe that some of the other results may be

interpreted as consistent with her finding that competition improves public school performance.38



VI.     Conclusion

        In this paper we take a “market-based” approach to examine whether increased school

expenditures are valued by potential residents and whether the current level of public school

provision is inefficient (as perceived by potential residents). We find that, on average, additional

school spending is valued by potential residents. In addition, we find that, on net, public school

districts do not appear to spend increases in state aid for education inefficiently. That said, we also

find that large school districts, and those in areas with fewer homeowners and in areas in which

residents are poor or less educated, are more likely to overspend. One interpretation of these results

is that increased competition has the potential to reduce overspending on public schools in some

        38
           We have also tested for differences by the percentage of residents over the age of 55 and found
that areas with the lowest concentration of older residents (about 12 percent over 55 years of age) were
significantly more likely to overspend relative to areas with a larger concentration of older residents (on
average 29 percent over 55 years). We also find significant differences by the percentage of children who
attend private schools; districts with high percentages of children enrolled in private school are more likely
to underspend. When we examine the effect of teacher unionization on efficiency we find no evidence that
unionized districts spend beyond the optimal level thereby spending education dollars inefficiently.
Surprisingly, when we test for differences by the percent of funding from the state, we find that districts in
states with less centralized funding (6 percent of the weighted sample) overspend relative districts in states
with more centralized spending (13 percent of the weighted sample).
                                                                                                    31

areas.

         Some care must be taken in interpreting these findings. First, the judgements about school

efficiency result from a model with potentially strong assumptions. While we do not believe that

violations of these assumptions would have a large impact on our qualitative findings, they must be

kept in mind. Second, based on our methodology, it is unclear whether increased efficiency would

generate higher or lower levels of education spending. For example, while we find evidence that

some districts overspend on education, our analysis cannot reveal the source of the inefficiency and

therefore we cannot determine whether increased competition would lead to increases or decreases

in education spending. Competition may lead districts to decrease the amount of education provided

and thus decrease spending. Alternatively, competition may lead districts to increase their

productivity with little effect on the total spending. Finally, we note that the competition we observe

that improves efficiency may have the consequence of increasing stratification which may decrease

social welfare (Fernández and Rogerson, 1996, 1998; Bénabou, 1993).
                                                                                               32

                                           References

Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy. “Using Maimonides' Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size
       on Scholastic Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,114 no. 2 (May 1999), pp.
       533-575.

Barlow, Robin. “Efficiency Aspects of Local School Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 78,
      no.5 (September/October 1970), pp. 1028-1040.

Barrow, Lisa. “School Choice Through Relocation: Evidence from the Washington, D.C. Area.”
      Forthcoming Journal of Public Economics. Forthcoming

Bénabou, Roland. “Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production. Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 108, no. 3 (August 1993), pp. 619-652.

Betts, Julian R. “Does School Quality Matter? Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of
        Youth.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77 no. 2 (May 1995) pp. 231-250.

Black, Sandra E. “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 no. 2 (May 1999), pp. 577-599.

Bergstrom, Theodore C., Judith A. Roberts, Daniel L. Rubinfeld, and Perry Shapiro. “A Test For
       Efficiency in the Supply of Public Education.” Journal of Public Economics, 35 (1988) pp.
       289-307.

Betts, Julian. “Does School Quality Matter? Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of
        Youth.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77 no. 2 (1995), pp. 231-250.

Borland, Melvin, and Roy Howsen. “Student Academic Achievement and the Degree of Market
       Concentration in Education.” Economics of Education Review, 11 (1992), pp. 31-39.

Boskin, Michael J. “Local Government Tax and Product Competition and the Optimal Provision of
       Public Goods.” Journal of Political Economy, 81 no. 1 (January/February 1973), pp. 203-
       210.

Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker. “Problems With Instrumental Variables
      Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
      Variable Is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90 no. 430 (1995) pp.
      443-450.

Brueckner, Jan K. “Property Values, Local Public Expenditure, and Economic Efficiency.” Journal
      of Public Economics, 11 (1979), pp. 223-245.

Brueckner, Jan K. “A Test for Allocative Efficiency in the Local Public Sector.” Journal of Public
                                                                                               33

       Economics, 19 (1982), pp. 311-331.

Brueckner, Jan K. “Property Value Maximization and Public Sector Efficiency.” Journal of Urban
      Economics, 14 (1983), pp. 1-15.

Card, David. “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited.” Research in Labor Economics, 14
       (1995), pp. 23-48.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
       Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy, 100
       no. 1 (1992) pp. 1-40.

Card, David and A. Abigail Payne. “School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School Spending,
       and the Distribution of SAT Scores.” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section
       Working Paper No. 387, July 1997.

Chubb, John E. and Terry M. Moe. Politics, Markets, and America’s Schools. (Washington DC: The
      Brookings Institution, 1990).

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
        the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104 no.
        6 (December 1996), pp. 1263-1296.

Edel, Matthew, and Sclar, Elliott. “Taxes, Spending, and Property Values: Supply Adjustment in a
       Tiebout-Oates Model.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 82, no. 5 (September/October
       1974), pp. 941-954.

Epple, Dennis, Allan Zelenitz, and Michael Visscher. “A Search for Testable Implications of the
       Tiebout Hypothesis.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 86, no. 3 (June 1978), pp. 405-425.

Evans, William N., Sheila E. Murray, and Robert M. Schwab. “School Houses, Court Houses, and
       State Houses After Serrano.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 16 no. 1, (Winter
       1997), pp.10-31.

Fernández, Raquel and Richard Rogerson. “Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of
      Public Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 no. 1 (February 1996), pp. 135-
      164.

Fernández, Raquel and Richard Rogerson. “Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic
      Quantitative Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform.” American Economic Review, 88 no.
      4, (September 1998), pp. 813-833.

Finn, Jeremy D. and Charles M. Achilles, “Answers and Questions about Class Size: A Statewide
        Experiment.” American Educational Research Journal, XXVII (1990), pp. 557-577.
                                                                                            34

Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Freedom. (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1962).

Grosskopf, Shawna, Kathy Hayes, Lori L. Taylor, and William L. Weber, “Allocative Inefficiency
      and School Competition.” in Proceedings: 91st Annual Conference on Taxation. Howard
      Chernick, editor (Washington, D.C.: National Tax Association, 1999).

Guryan, Jonathan. “Public School Finance Reform in Massachusetts: Evidence Using a Regression-
      Discontinuity Identification Strategy.” MIT mimeo. 1999.

Hanushek, Eric A. “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools.”
      Journal of Economic Literature, 24 no. 3 (December 1986), pp. 1141-1177.

Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin, and Lori L. Taylor. “Aggregation and the Estimated Effects
      of School Resources.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78 no. 4 (November 1996), pp.
      611-627.

Hines Jr., James R. and Richard H. Thaler. “Anomalies: The Flypaper Effect.” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 9, no. 4 (1995), pp. 217-226.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and
      Taxpayers? Evidence from National Variation in School Districting.” NBER Working paper
      No. 4979, December 1994.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. “How Teachers’ Unions Affect Education Production.” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 111 no. 3 (August 1996), pp. 671-718.

Hoxby, Caroline M. “All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal.” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 116 no. 4 (November 2001), pp. 1189-1232.

Kenny, Lawrence, and Amy Schmidt. “The Decline in the Number of School Districts in the U.S.
      1950-1980.” Public Choice, 79, no. 1-2 (1994), pp. 1-18.

Krueger, Alan B. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 114 no. 2 (May 1999), pp. 497-592.

Manski, Charles. “Educational Choice (Vouchers) and Social Mobility.” Economics of Education
      Review 11, no. 4 (1992), pp. 351-369.

Moulton, Brent. “Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.” Journal of
      Econometrics, 32 (1986), pp. 385-397.

Murray, Sheila E., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab. “Education-Finance Reform and the
      Distribution of Education Resources.” American Economic Review, 88, no. 4 (September
      1998), pp. 789-812.
                                                                                              35

Newey, Whitney. “Generalized Method of Moments Specification Testing.” Journal of
      Econometrics, 29 (1985), pp. 229-256.

Oates, Wallace E. “The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on Property Values:
       An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis.” Journal of Political
       Economy, vol. 77, no. 6 (November/December 1969), pp. 957-971.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Center for Educational Research and
               Innovation, Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators, 1998

Public School Finance Programs, 1978-79. Esther O. Tron, editor. (Washington, DC: U.S.
       Government Printing Office, 1980).

Public School Finance Programs of the United States and Canada in 1990-91. Steven D. Gold,
       David M. Smith, Stephen B. Lawton, and Andrea C. Hyary, eds. (New York: The Nelson A.
       Rockefeller Institute of Government, 1992).

Rubinfeld, Daniel L. “The Economics of the Local public Sector.” in Handbook of Public
       Economics, vol. II, Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds. (New York: North Holland,
       1987).

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments.”
        Econometrica, vol. 65, no 3 (May 1997), pp. 557-586.

Tiebout, Charles M. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditure.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 64,
       no. 5 (October 1956), pp. 416-424.

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. 1992 Census of Governments: Volume 4
      Government Finances, Number 1 Public Education Finances. Washington, D.C.: 1995.

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. 1987 Census of Governments: Volume 2
      Taxable Property Values. Washington, D.C.: 1987.

U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Education
      Statistics 1996, NCES 96-133, by Thomas D. Snyder. Production Manager, Charlene M.
      Hoffman. Program Analyst, Claire M. Geddes. Washington, DC: 1996.

U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. Pursuing Excellence: A
      Study of U.S. Fourth-Grade Mathematics and Science Achievement in International Context
      NCES 97-255, by Lois Peak et al. Washington, DC: 1997.

U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. Pursuing Excellence: A
      Study of U.S. Twelfth-Grade Mathematics and Science Achievement in International Context
      NCES 98-049, by Sayuri Takahira et al. Washington, DC: 1998.
                                                                                 36

Yinger, John. “Evidence on Discrimination in Consumer Markets.” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, vol. 12, no. 2 (Spring 1998), pp. 23-40.
                                                                                               

                                                   Table 1
                                        Means and Standard Deviations

                                                                                   Standard
                                                                           Mean
                                                                                   Deviation
Change in Aggregate Residential Property Value per Pupil ($1000s)         56.753     99.431
Change in Actual State Aid per Pupil                                    1053.339    826.681
Change in Predicted Basic Aid per Pupil                                 1120.703   1660.762
Change in Predicted Total Aid per Pupil                                 1147.003   1719.029
Change in Average Household Income ($1000s)                                2.377      6.410
Change in % Population With at Least 16 Years of Education                 3.835      2.975
Change in % Unemployed                                                    -0.315      2.794
Change in % Housing Units Owner Occupied                                  -1.309      3.822
Change in % Housing Units Vacant                                           2.398      4.791
Change in % Occupied Housing Units Built More Than 10 Years Ago            8.958      8.256
Change in % Households Moved into House Less Than 10 Years Ago           -11.402     10.369
% Missing Change in % Households Moved into House Less Than 10             0.003      0.558
Years Ago
Change in % Population Over 55 Years of Age                                1.110      2.658
Change in % Children Enrolled in Private School                            2.604      3.176
Change in Total Housing Units (1000s)                                      6.423     24.276
Change in Enrollment (1000s)                                              -3.767     16.209
Change in % Households in Urban Areas                                      1.295      7.513
1980 Average Household Income (1000s)                                     39.875     10.268
1980 % Population With at Least 16 Years of Education                     13.037      7.154
1980 % Unemployed                                                          6.937      3.300
1980 % Housing Units Owner Occupied                                       69.971     12.011
1980 % Housing Units Vacant                                                7.394      4.443
1980 % Occupied Housing Units Built More Than 10 Years Ago                72.151     15.090
1980 % Households Moved into House Less Than 10 Years Ago                 71.978      9.461
% Missing 1980 % Households Moved into House Less Than 10 Years            0.003      0.558
Ago
1980 % Population Over 55 Years of Age                                    20.533      6.224
1980 % Children Enrolled in Private School                                 7.433      5.876
1980 Total Housing Units (1000s)                                          77.599    191.558
                                                                                                                  

 1980 Enrollment (1000s)                                                        32.041               75.848
 1980 % Households in Urban Areas                                               67.134               36.720
 Change in Crime Index                                                         349.160             1352.504
 % Missing Change in Crime Index                                                 0.766                 8.717
 Change in % Voting Republican                                                 -13.431                 6.854
 Change in % Voting Democratic                                                   0.637                 6.742
 Change in % County Employees Organized                                          1.558               20.902
 % Missing Change in County Employees Organized                                  3.122               17.392
 Change in % Employed in Manufacturing                                          -4.329               24.727
 1980 Crime Index                                                            4809.895              2254.493
 % Missing 1980 Crime Index                                                      0.235                 0.048
 1980 % Voting Republican                                                       52.201                 9.381
 1980 % Voting Democratic                                                       40.760                 9.888
 1980 % County Employees Organized                                              18.804               25.199
 % Missing 1980 County Employees Organized                                       3.057               17.217
 1980 % Employed in Manufacturing                                               22.923               30.252

Notes: There are 9079 observations. All dollar values are in 1994 dollars. All means are weighted by student
enrollment in 1980. Changes in “predicted” state aid are calculated using the state school financing formulas and the
1980 characteristics of school districts.
                                                                                                      


                                                Table 2
   OLS Estimates of the Effect of Change in State Aid on Change in Aggregate House Values per Pupil

                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)
Change in State Aid per Pupil                         -5.098             10.496             8.716
                                                      (1.261)            (0.759)           (0.754)
Change in Average Household Income                                         9.599            8.168
                                                                          (0.278)          (0.286)
Change in Average Household Income Squared                                -0.014            0.005
Divided by 10000                                                          (0.018)          (0.017)
Change in % Population With at Least 16 Years of                         720.836          428.598
Education                                                               (304.360)        (289.642)
Change in % Unemployed                                                 3219.059         2967.850
                                                                       (289.046)        (323.393)
Change in % Housing Units Owner Occupied                              -2742.107         -2546.410
                                                                       (186.294)         (180.957)
Change in % Housing Units Vacant                                         854.714          610.122
                                                                        (125.767)        (123.042)
Change in % Occupied Housing Units Built More                           -752.553        -1051.584
Than 10 Years Ago                                                       (123.121)        (129.143)
Change in % Households Moved into House Less                            -994.991         -781.772
Than 10 Years Ago                                                       (167.308)        (175.217)
Change in % Population Over 55 Years of Age                            3688.244         3826.998
                                                                       (291.554)        (278.134)
Change in % Children Enrolled in Private School                        4274.268         3940.764
                                                                       (219.586)        (209.009)
Change in Total Housing Units                                              0.448            0.515
                                                                          (0.049)          (0.051)
Change in Enrollment                                                      -1.639           -1.892
                                                                          (0.118)          (0.117)
Change in % Urban                                                         73.794           19.006
                                                                         (79.412)         (74.879)
1980 Average Household Income                                              6.728            6.759
                                                                          (0.310)          (0.320)
1980 Average Household Income Squared                                     -0.392           -0.355
Divided by 10000                                                          (0.030)          (0.029)
1980 % Population With at Least 16 Years of                               -6.207         -750.505
Education                                                               (159.215)        (157.300)
1980 % Unemployed                                                      2788.169         2235.171
                                                                       (264.511)        (302.214)
                                                                                  

1980 % Housing Units Owner Occupied                      -958.395     -869.055
                                                         (109.999)    (107.704)
1980 % Housing Units Vacant                               138.042      710.592
                                                         (165.180)    (161.961)
1980 % Occupied Housing Units Built More Than            -812.125     -709.791
10 Years Ago                                             (109.217)    (123.767)
1980 % Households Moved into House Less Than            -3263.147    -2526.472
10 Years Ago                                             (162.987)    (181.785)
1980 % Population Over 55 Years of Age                  2566.018     2351.546
                                                        (145.470)    (145.355)
1980 % Children Enrolled in Private School                945.191      900.088
                                                         (131.618)    (128.814)
1980 Total Housing Units                                    0.034        0.040
                                                           (0.027)      (0.027)
1980 Enrollment                                            -0.487       -0.503
                                                           (0.069)      (0.071)
1980 % Households in Urban Areas                         178.259       -77.198
                                                         (27.406)      (27.212)
Change in Crime Index                                                   -1.248
                                                                        (0.501)
Change in % Voting Republican                                        1303.062
                                                                     (155.792)
Change in % Voting Democratic                                        1996.773
                                                                     (139.270)
Change in % County Employees Organized                                -167.900
                                                                       (28.061)
Change in % Employed in Manufacturing                                   22.160
                                                                       (25.502)
1980 Crime Index                                                        -1.874
                                                                        (0.367)
1980 % Voting Republican                                              -160.182
                                                                      (276.422)
1980 % Voting Democratic                                              -351.994
                                                                      (284.375)
1980 % County Employees Organized                                     153.961
                                                                      (32.452)
1980 % Employed in Manufacturing                                       -11.280
                                                                       (21.451)
p-value: State Aid = 18.61
                                                0.000       0.000        0.000
(* = 0.0733*(1-mtr))
                                                                                                                    

    p-value: State Aid = 26.03
                                                                      0.000           0.000               0.000
    (* = 0.0524*(1-mtr))
    R2                                                                0.002           0.729               0.762

Notes: The dependent variable is the change (from 1980-1990) in the aggregate residential property value per pupil.
Standard errors are in parentheses. There are 9079 observations. All equations include a constant. Columns (2) and
(3) also include a dummy variable indicating whether the 1980 percent of the population that moved in 10 years ago is
missing. In addition, column (3) includes indicators for the Census division of the school district and dummy variables
indicating if the change in the crime index or the percent of county employees that are unionized are missing. The
equations are weighted by student enrollment in 1980. All dollar values are in 1994 dollars.
a
    * is the discount rate; mtr is the marginal tax rate. See text.
                                                                                                        




                                                 Table 3

                                     First-stage Estimates:
  The Effect of Change in Predicted State Aid per Pupil on Change in Actual State Aid per Pupil


                                                     (1)                                 (2)
 Change in Predicted Basic State Aid                0.093
 per Pupil                                         (0.005)
 Change in Predicted Total State Aid                                                    0.092
 per Pupil                                                                             (0.005)
 F(1,11802)                                      392.02                              406.95
 R2                                                 0.357                               0.358

Notes: The dependent variable is the change (from 1980-1990) in actual state aid per pupil. Standard errors
are in parentheses. See text or column (3) of Table 2 for other covariates. There are 9079 observations.
Changes in predicted state aid are calculated using the state school financing formulas and the 1980
characteristics of school districts.
                                                                                                           



                                                      Table 4

                         IV Estimates of the Effect of Change in State Aid per Pupil
                              on Change in Aggregate House Values per Pupil

                                                                      Instrumental Variable
                                                 Change in Predicted Basic         Change in Predicted Total
                                                        State Aid                         State Aid
                                                              (1)                              (2)
    Change in Actual State Aid per Pupil                   18.825                             20.114
                                                           (3.732)                            (3.675)
    p-value: State Aid = 18.61
                                                            0.954                              0.683
    (* = 0.0733*(1-mtr))a
    p-value: State Aid = 26.03
                                                            0.054                              0.108
    (* = 0.0524*(1-mtr))a

Notes: The dependent variable is the change (from 1980-1990) in aggregate residential property values per
pupil. The endogenous variable is the change in actual state aid per pupil. Standard errors are in
parentheses. See text or column (3) of Table 2 for other covariates. There are 9079 observations. The
equations are weighted by district student enrollment in 1980. Changes in “predicted” state aid are calculated
using the state school financing formulas and the 1980 characteristics of school districts.
a
    * is the discount rate; mtr is the marginal tax rate. See text.
                                                                                                                                                   



                                                                  Table 5
                              IV First-Differenced Estimates of the Effect of Change in State Aid per Pupil on
                                   School Expenditures, Property Tax Rates, and Property Tax Revenue

                                                                                    Dependent Variable

                                                 Change in                        Change in School District
                                                                                                                        Change in Local Revenue
                                        Total Expenditures per Pupil                Property Tax Rates

                                                     (1)                                      (2)                                    (3)

                                                            Instrumental Variable = Change in Predicted Basic State Aid per Pupil

 Change in Actual State Aid                        0.609                                   -0.089                                   -0.168
 per Pupil                                        (0.077)                                  (0.008)                                  (0.058)

                                                           Instrumental Variable = Change in Predicted Total State Aid per Pupil

 Change in Actual State Aid                        0.634                                   -0.080                                   -0.145
 per Pupil                                        (0.075)                                  (0.007)                                  (0.056)

 Number of Observations                             8463                                    8463                                    8463

Notes: For each equation estimated, the endogenous variable is the change in actual state aid per pupil. Standard errors are in parentheses. See text
or column (3) of Table 2 for other covariates. The equations are weighted by district student enrollment in 1980. The mean of the dependent variable
for column (1) estimates is 1472.37; the mean for column (2) is -2.572; the mean for column (3) is 624.69. The school district property tax rate units
are dollars raised per 10,000 dollars of property value. Changes in “predicted” state aid are calculated using the state school financing formulas and
the 1980 characteristics of school districts.
                                                                                                            

                                             Table 6a
IV First-Differenced Estimates of the Effect of Change in State Aid per Pupil on Aggregate House
          Values per Pupil by Selected Characteristics of the School District Residents

                                                             Type of State Aid Used as Instrument
                                                      Change in Predicted           Change in Predicted
                                                    Basic State Aid per Pupil     Total State Aid per Pupil
 Average Household Income
    Low (Bottom 20th percentile)                              0.552                        -1.347
                                                             (7.739)                       (7.210)
    Average (20 to 80th percentile)                           5.137                         7.041
                                                             (4.378)                       (4.314)
    High (Top 20th percentile)                               63.132                        65.058
                                                             (9.142)                       (8.880)
    p-value: Low = High                                       0.000                         0.000

 Education
    Low (Top 20th percentile in share of                      0.050                        -2.960
       persons without a HS diploma)                         (6.420)                       (6.187)
    Average (20 to 80th percentile in share of               26.409                        28.924
        persons without a HS diploma)                        (4.554)                       (4.473)
    High (Bottom 20th percentile in share of                 12.349                        16.162
       persons without a HS diploma)                         (9.887)                       (9.645)
    p-value: Low = High                                       0.294                         0.093
 Percent Owner Occupied
    Renter-occupied districts                                 6.885                         7.646
      (Bottom 20th percentile)                               (5.183)                       (5.084)
    Mixed                                                    19.320                        21.068
     (20 to 80th percentile)                                 (8.808)                       (5.809)
    Owner-occupied districts                                 39.304                        40.604
     (Top 20th percentile)                                   (7.661)                       (7.636)
    p-value: High Renter = High Owner                         0.001                         0.000

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in aggregate residential property values per pupil. The
endogenous variable is the change in actual state aid per pupil. Standard errors are in parentheses. The
effects of the other covariates are restricted to be the same across the districts and only the state education
                                                                                                         

revenues are interacted with the demographic characteristic in question. See text or column (3) of Table 2
for other covariates. There are 9079 observations. The equations are weighted by district student enrollment
in 1980. Changes in “predicted” state aid are calculated using the state school financing formulas and the
1980 characteristics of school districts. The demographic groups are based on their values in 1980 weighted
by pupils in 1980.
                                                                                                      


                                               Table 6b

     IV First-Differenced Estimates of the Effect of Change in Predicted State Aid per Pupil
     on Aggregate House Values per Pupil by Selected Characteristics of the School District

                                                          Type of State Aid Used as Instrument
                                                 Predicted Basic State Aid    Predicted Total State Aid
                                                         per Pupil                    per Pupil

 County Herfindahl Index (HHI)
   Low                                                  39.483                       40.911
     (HHI < 0.15/Competitive)                           (5.706)                      (5.619)
   Average                                                 9.180                      9.011
     (0.15 # HHI # 0.46)                                  (5.576)                    (5.239)
   High                                                 16.345                       20.806
      (HHI > 0.46/Not Competitive)                      (7.386)                      (7.940)
   p-value: Low = High                                    0.015                       0.043

 District Size in 1980
   Small                                                42.268                       42.846
     (Bottom 20th percentile)                           (8.659)                      (8.628)
   Average                                              20.563                       21.057
     (20 to 80th percentile)                            (4.857)                      (4.745)
   Large                                                -18.885                     -15.372
     (Top 20th percentile)                               (7.696)                     (7.056)
   p-value: Small = Large                                 0.000                       0.000

Notes: See notes to Table 6a. The school district characteristic groups are based on their values in 1980
weighted by pupils in 1980.
                                                                                              

                                     Appendix Table I

           IV First-Differenced Estimates of the Effect of Change in State Aid on
   Change in Aggregate House Values per Pupil Using an Alternative Instrumental Variable

                                                      Instrumental Variable
                                   Change in Predicted Basic          Change in Predicted Total
                                      State Aid per Pupil               State Aid per Pupil
                                               (1)                               (2)
Change in State Aid per Pupil               18.825                            20.114
                                            (3.732)                           (3.675)
p-value: State Aid = 18.61
                                             0.954                             0.683
(* = 0.0733*(1-mtr))a
p-value: State Aid = 26.03
                                             0.054                             0.108
(* = 0.0524*(1-mtr))a
Number of Observations                        9079                              9079
                                   Change in Predicted Basic          Change in Predicted Total
                                      State Aid per Pupil                State Aid per Pupil
                                               (3)                               (4)
Change in State Aid per Pupil               18.835                            20.120
                                            (3.737)                           (3.679)
p-value: State Aid = 18.61
                                             0.952                             0.681
(* = 0.0733*(1-mtr))a
p-value: State Aid = 26.03
                                             0.054                             0.108
(* = 0.0524*(1-mtr))a
Number of Observations                        9076                              9076
                                    Change in Synthetically            Change in Synthetically
                                  Predicted Basic State Aid per       Predicted Total State Aid
                                             Pupil                            per Pupil
                                               (5)                               (6)
Change in State Aid per Pupil               18.448                            21.005
                                            (3.258)                           (3.268)
p-value: State Aid = 18.61
                                             0.960                             0.464
(* = 0.0733*(1-mtr))a
p-value: State Aid = 26.03
                                             0.020                             0.124
(* = 0.0524*(1-mtr))a
Number of Observations                        9076                              9076
                                                                                                           

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in aggregate residential property values per pupil; the
endogenous variable is the change in actual state aid per pupil. See text or column (3) of Table 2 for other
covariates. The equations are weighted by district student enrollment in 1980. “Predicted” state aid per pupil
is calculated using the state school financing formulas and the 1980 characteristics of school districts.
“Synthetically Predicted” state aid is state aid calculated for each school district using the state school
financing formulas and the mean characteristics in 1980 of the 100 districts outside the district’s state that
are “nearest” to the particular district in terms of regression predicted 1980 log property value per pupil.
a
    * is the discount rate; mtr is the marginal tax rate. See text.
                                                                                                                                         50

                                                                     Colorado

                                10000

                                9000

                                8000
Predicted State Aid per Pupil




                                7000

                                6000

                                5000

                                4000

                                3000

                                2000

                                1000

                                    0
                                        0   50000   100000     150000       200000       250000       300000        350000      400000

                                                        Aggregate Residential Property Value per Pupil

                                             1990    1980      1990 Regression Fitted Line        1980 Regression Fitted Line
                                                                                                                                        51

                                                                   West Virginia

                                3500


                                3000
Predicted State Aid per Pupil




                                2500


                                2000


                                1500


                                1000


                                500


                                   0
                                   20000   40000   60000       80000       100000       120000        140000     160000        180000
                                                           Aggregate Residential Property per Pupil

                                            1990    1980        1990 Regression Fitted Line      1980 Regression Fitted Line
