                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CONDITIONAL MEAN AND VOLATILITY OF
               STOCK RETURNS: A LATENT VAR APPROACH


                                          Michael W. Brandt
                                             Qiang Kang


                                          Working Paper 9056
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9056


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




We thank Long Chen, Frank Diebold, Garland Durham, Cam Harvey, Michael Johannes, Leonid Kogan,
Martin Lettau, Sydney Ludvigson, Craig MacKinlay, Roberto Mariano, Frank Schorfheide, Rob Stambaugh,
an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at the 2001 meeting of the Financial Management
Association, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Northwestern University, Rutgers University, Temple
University, and University of Pennsylvania for their comments. Financial support from the Rodney L. White
Center at the Wharton School is gratefully acknowledged. We are responsible for any errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Michael W. Brandt and Qiang Kang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
On the Relationship Between the Conditional Mean and
Volatility of Stock Returns: A Latent VAR Approach
Michael W. Brandt and Qiang Kang
NBER Working Paper No. 9056
July 2002
JEL No. G10, G12, C13, C23



                                              ABSTRACT

        We model the conditional mean and volatility of stock returns as a latent vector autoregressive
(VAR) process to study the contemporaneous and intertemporal relationship between expected returns
and risk in a flexible statistical framework and without relying on exogenous predictors. We find a strong
and robust negative correlation between the innovations to the conditional moments that leads to
pronounced counter-cyclical variation in the Sharpe ratio. We document significant lead-lag correlations
between the conditional moments that also appear related to business cycles. Finally, we show that
although the conditional correlation between the mean and volatility is negative, the unconditional
correlation is positive due to the lead-lag correlations.




Michael W. Brandt                                                Qiang Kang
The Wharton School                                               School of Economics and Finance
University of Pennsylvania                                       University of Hong Kong
2300 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall                                Pokfulam Road
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367                                      Hong Kong
and NBER
Tel: 215-898-3609
Fax: 215-898-6200
brandtm@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction
The relationship between the mean and volatility of returns is a central issue in ﬁnance. Many
asset pricing models imply a proportional relationship between expected excess returns and
risk in the cross-section and through time. Unfortunately, the empirical relationship between
the mean and volatility of returns, in particular stock returns, is much less regular. It has
proven diﬃcult to explain all cross-sectional diﬀerences in expected stock returns through
diﬀerential risks (e.g., Fama and French, 1996). Furthermore, the evidence on the time-series
relationship between the conditional mean and volatility of stock returns is inconclusive and
depends on the model and exogenous predictors used to draw inferences (e.g., Harvey, 2001).
In this paper, we examine more closely the time-series relationship between the conditional
mean and volatility using a latent vector autoregressive (VAR) process for the two moments.
This latent VAR approach allows us to study the contemporaneous and intertemporal
relationship between expected returns and risk in a ﬂexible statistical framework and, more
importantly, without relying on exogenous predictors.
    It is clear from both the volatility ratio tests of LeRoy and Porter (1981) and the long-
horizon autoregressions of Fama and French (1988) that expected returns are time-varying.
Predictive regressions have been used widely to capture the time-variation of expected returns
with an expanding set of predictors, such as the dividend yield, short rate, term premium,
and default premium. However, there is increasing concern over predictive regressions in light
of statistical issues (Boudoukh and Richardson, 1993; Stambaugh, 1999; Ferson, Sarkissian,
and Simin, 2000; Valkanov, 2002) and their lack of robustness and out-of-sample predictive
power (Bossaerts and Hillion, 1999; Ang and Bekaert, 2001; Goyal and Welch, 2002).
    Time-varying volatility is even more ﬁrmly established and is typically modelled in an
ARCH or stochastic volatility (SV) framework.1 In ARCH models the conditional variance
of returns depends deterministically on lagged squared returns and lagged variances, while in
SV models the conditional variance is a stochastic process. The fact that in an ARCH model
all randomness is ex-post observable (through returns) implies that the volatility realizations
can be recovered from the data. As a result, ARCH models are easy to estimate and quite
popular. In SV models, in contrast, the innovations to the volatility process are random
and the volatility realizations are therefore unobservable. Estimating an SV model involves
integrating out the latent volatilities. The computation of this high-dimensional integral is
analytically diﬃcult and computationally intensive, causing SV models to be less popular
    1
        See Bollerslev, Chou, and Kroner (1992) and Ghysels, Harvey, and Renault (1996) for literature surveys.




                                                        1
than ARCH models despite their statistical and economic appeal.2
   Given the empirical evidence on both time-varying expected returns and volatility, it is
only natural to examine the co-movements of the two moments through time. Unfortunately,
the ﬁndings on this relationship are mixed. Using volatility-in-mean models (essentially
ARCH models in which the variance enters contemporaneously in the mean return), French,
Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) and Campbell and Hentschel (1992) estimate a positive
correlation, while Campbell (1987), Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan (1989), Nelson (1991),
and Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993) all report a negative correlation. Koopman
and Uspensky (1999) ﬁnd evidence of a weak negative relationship with an SV-in-mean
model but a weak positive relationship with an ARCH-based volatility-in-mean model.
Harrison and Zhang (1999) employ Gallant and Tauchen’s (1989) semi-parametric method
to document a positive relationship between the conditional mean and volatility at long
horizons but none at short horizons (such as a month). Finally, Harvey (2001) uses exogenous
predictors and ﬁnds that the correlation between the moments generally depends on the
model and conditioning information used in the mean and variance estimation.3
   We examine more closely the time-series relationship between the conditional moments
through a latent VAR model. The ﬁrst equation of the VAR describes the dynamics of the
conditional mean. It captures the temporary component in the permanent and temporary
components model of Fama and French (1988) and Lamoureux and Zhou (1996), in which
stock prices are governed by a random walk and a stationary process, respectively. The
second equation of the VAR describes the dynamics of the conditional volatility. It nests
the standard SV model studied by Wiggins (1987), Andersen and Sorensen (1994), Jacquier,
Polson, and Rossi (1994), and Kim, Shephard, and Chib (1998), among others.
   The latent VAR allows us to study the contemporaneous and intertemporal relationship
between the conditional mean and volatility in a ﬂexible statistical framework and
without relying on exogenous predictors. On the contemporaneous relationship, the mean
equation of the VAR resembles the volatility-in-mean model used by French, Schwert, and
Stambaugh (1987), and others, to measure the contemporaneous eﬀect of volatility on
expected returns. In addition to this volatility-in-mean eﬀect, there is a symmetric mean-in-
   2
     Not until recently have eﬀective methods for estimating SV models been developed. These econometric
methods include quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) (Harvey, Ruiz, and Shephard, 1994; Alizadeh, Brandt,
and Diebold, 2002), simulated maximum likelihood (Danielsson, 1994; Sandmann and Koopman, 1998),
Markov chain Monte Carlo (Jacquier, Polson, and Rossi, 1994; Kim, Shephard, and Chib, 1998), and the
simulated method of moments (SMM) (Duﬃe and Singleton, 1993; Andersen and Sorensen, 1994).
   3
     An alternative to estimating the two conditional moments separately and then relating the estimates is
to infer directly the conditional mean-variance ratio from the ﬁrst-order conditions (Euler equations) of a
mean-variance investor’s portfolio choice (e.g., Brandt, 1999; Aı̈t-Sahalia and Brandt, 2001).



                                                    2
volatility eﬀect in the volatility equation. If a change in the volatility has a contemporaneous
eﬀect on the mean, a change in the mean also has a contemporaneous eﬀect on the volatility.4
On the intertemporal relationship, the VAR allows for lag-adjustments of the volatility to
changes in the mean, and of the mean to changes in the volatility, which Whitelaw (1994)
claims to be salient features of the data. Analogous to the contemporaneous eﬀects, we refer
to these lag adjustments as lag-volatility-in-mean and lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀects.
    Whitelaw (1994) considers a VAR model similar to ours, except he uses ﬁtted moments
from a set of ﬁrst-stage predictive regressions as proxies for the unobservable conditional
mean and volatility. The obvious drawback of using ﬁtted moments is that their dynamics are
determined by the joint conditional distribution of the ﬁrst-stage predictors. Thus, with only
slight model misspeciﬁcation, such as omitted variables, the dynamics of the ﬁtted moments
do not need to correspond to those of the true moments. Another problem with using ﬁtted
moments is that even if the predictive models for the conditional mean and volatility are
well-speciﬁed, the eﬀect of errors in variables induced by the ﬁrst-stage regressions is not
trivial to quantify in a VAR. Our approach is not subject to these critiques because we treat
the conditional mean and volatility as latent state variables.
    We use simulated maximum likelihood (SML) based on importance sampling to estimate
the parameters of the VAR model and to extract estimates of the latent mean, volatility, and
implied Sharpe ratio time-series. We then examine the contemporaneous and intertemporal
relationship between the conditional mean and volatility through the parameter estimates,
extracted series, and impulse response functions of the estimated VAR.
       Among our empirical results, the following are particularly interesting:5

       • The contemporaneous correlation between the innovations to the conditional mean and
         volatility is negative and statistically signiﬁcant (according to asymptotic standard
         errors and corroborated by Monte Carlo experiments), implying negative volatility-in-
         mean and mean-in-volatility eﬀects.

       • The negative contemporaneous correlation between the mean and volatility generates
         substantial variation in the conditional Sharpe ratio that is distinctly counter-cyclical.
         Every business cycle since 1946 is associated with an almost monotonic rise in the
         Sharpe ratio from the peak to the trough of the cycle.
   4
     An immediate implication of the mean-in-volatility eﬀect is that the volatility is governed by two factors.
Such a two-factor model for volatility is consistent with recent empirical evidence (Barndorﬀ-Nielsen and
Shephard, 1999; Engle and Lee, 1999; Gallant, Hsu, and Tauchen, 1999; Alizadeh, Brandt, and Diebold, 2002;
Chernov, Ghysels, Gallant, and Tauchen, 2002).
   5
     We draw inferences with asymptotic standard errors. However, since the asymptotics of our estimator are
questionable (see Section 3.4), we corroborate the evidence on the key results with Monte Carlo experiments.


                                                       3
    • Both lag-adjustments, the lag-volatility-in-mean and the lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀects,
      are positive and statistically signiﬁcant, again according to the asymptotic and ﬁnite
      sample standard errors. Furthermore, the timing of the lag-adjustment appears related
      to business cycles as well. Whenever the economy comes oﬀ the peak of a cycle, the
      conditional volatility rises immediately. The conditional mean, however, increases only
      gradually as the economy moves from the peak to the trough of the cycle. Therefore,
      the volatility appears to lead the mean through the recession by about six months.
      The mean reaches a high at the trough of the cycle, shortly after which the volatility
      drops again to a normal level. As a result, the increase in the mean is associated with
      a subsequent drop in the volatility.

    • Despite the large and negative contemporaneous correlation between the innovations
      to the conditional mean and volatility, which measures the conditional (on the lagged
      mean and lagged volatility) correlation between the moments, the unconditional
      contemporaneous correlation between the mean and volatility is large and positive
      due to the strong lag-volatility-in-mean eﬀect. Unconditionally, times of high expected
      returns are associated with high volatility. We argue that this diﬀerence between
      the conditional and unconditional correlations may explain the disagreement in the
      literature about the contemporaneous correlation.

    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 sets up the latent VAR
for the conditional mean and volatility, derives the implied dynamics of the Sharpe ratio,
explains the link to equilibrium asset pricing models, and outlines the hypotheses we want
to test within this framework. We describe our econometric approach in Section 3. Section 4
then presents our empirical results in six subsections: 4.1 describes the data, 4.2 reports
the parameter estimates and the results of the hypothesis tests, 4.3 analyzes the extracted
latent processes, 4.4 interprets the impulse response functions, 4.5 tries to reconcile the
disagreement in the literature about the sign of the contemporaneous correlation between
the conditional mean and volatility, and 4.6 incorporates exogenous predictors as a robustness
check. We conclude in Section 5 with a summary of our main results.


2     Theory
2.1    Return Dynamics
Let yt be continuously compounded excess returns with time-series dynamics:
                                                              
                          yt = µt−1 + σt−1 εt with εt ∼ N 0 , 1 ,                         (1)

                                              4
where µt and σt denote the conditional mean and volatility of excess returns, respectively.
Both the conditional mean and volatility are unobservable quantities, which we assume to
evolve jointly as a ﬁrst-order vector autoregressive (VAR) process in logs:
                                                           
                          ln µt                     ln µt−1                              
                                      =d+A                        + ηt with ηt ∼ MVN 0 , Σ ,                       (2)
                          ln σt                     ln σt−1

where d is a 2 × 1 coeﬃcient vector that relates to the long-term means of the two latent
state variables, A is a 2×2 coeﬃcient matrix, and Σ is a 2×2 covariance matrix (symmetric
and non-negative deﬁnite). Speciﬁcally, we write:
                                                                           
            d1                    a11 a12                             b11 b12                         
   d=                , A=                       , and Σ =                           with b12 = b21 = ρ b11 b22 .   (3)
            d2                    a21 a22                             b21 b22

As long as the VAR is stationary, closed-form solutions to the unconditional mean and
covariance matrix of the conditional moments are:
                                                  
        ln µt                                  ln µ t                 −1
   E            = (I − A)−1 d and vec Cov                = I − (A ⊗ A)    vec (Σ) , (4)
        ln σt                                  ln σt

where the ⊗ symbol denotes a Kronecker product.
    The key parameters of the latent VAR are the transition matrix A and the correlation
coeﬃcient ρ. The diagonal elements of A reﬂect the persistence of the conditional moments,
and the oﬀ-diagonal elements capture the intertemporal feedback of the conditional volatility
to the conditional mean and vice versa. The coeﬃcient ρ represents the contemporaneous
correlation between the innovations to the conditional moments.
    We entertain three assumptions about the correlation between the return innovations
εt and the conditional moment innovations ηt . The ﬁrst assumption is that the return
innovations are uncorrelated with the conditional moment innovations, or Corr[εt ηs ] = [0, 0]
for all s and t. Second, we assume that the return innovations are contemporaneously
correlated with either the conditional mean or the conditional volatility innovations, but not
both. Formally, either Corr[εt ηt ] = [ρµ , 0] or Corr[εt ηt ] = [0, ρσ ] . The third assumption is
that the return innovations are contemporaneously correlated with both conditional moment
innovations, so that Corr[εt ηt ] = [ρµ , ρσ ] .




                                                              5
2.2    Interpretation
We model the conditional moments as exponential Gaussian processes. For the mean, this
modelling choice guarantees a positive risk premium, which is a sensible assumption for the
market portfolio, and has been used in similar contexts by Bekaert and Harvey (1995) and
De Santis and Gerard (1997,1998). For the volatility, the implied log-normality is consistent
with the recent empirical ﬁndings of Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Ebens (2001).
  Our latent VAR model fuses and generalizes the permanent and temporary components
model of Fama and French (1988) and the standard SV model. The ﬁrst equation of the
VAR describes the dynamics of the conditional mean as:
                                                                                 
             ln µt = d1 + a11 ln µt−1 + a12 ln σt−1 + η1t ,   with η1t ∼ N 0 , b11 .      (5)

This equation captures the temporary component of Fama and French’s permanent and
temporary components model, in which stock prices are governed by a random walk and
a stationary autoregressive process, respectively. In fact, with a12 = 0, this model of the
temporary component is the same as that of Lamoureux and Zhou (1996) (except in logs).
The second equation of the VAR describes the volatility dynamics:
                                                                                   
             ln σt = d2 + a21 ln µt−1 + a22 ln σt−1 + η2t ,    with η2t ∼ N 0 , b22       (6)

and nests the standard SV model. With a21 = 0, equation (6) is the SV model estimated by
Wiggins (1987), Andersen and Sorensen (1994), Jacquier, Polson, and Rossi (1994), Kim,
Shephard, and Chib (1998), and many others.
   The mean equation also resembles the volatility-in-mean model used by French, Schwert,
and Stambaugh (1987) and Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993) to explore the
contemporaneous relationship between the conditional mean and volatility. To illustrate
the connection to the volatility-in-mean model, we project η1t onto η2t , such that:
                                                                     
                      η1t = β1 η2t + ξ1t with ξ1t ∼ N 0 , (1 − ρ2 )b11 ,                  (7)

where ξ1t is uncorrelated with η2t by construction and:

                                        Cov[η1t , η2t ]       b11
                                 β1 =                   =ρ        .                       (8)
                                         Var[η2t ]            b22




                                                6
Then, we rewrite equation (6) as:

                              η2t = ln σt − d2 − a21 ln µt−1 − a22 ln σt−1                              (9)

and substitute it and equation (7) into equation (5) to get:
                                                
       ln µt = d1 − β1 d2 + a11 − β1 a21 ln µt−1 + a12 − β1 a22 ln σt−1 + β1 ln σt + ξ1t .             (10)

This reduced-form equation for the conditional mean is a generalized version of the usual
volatility-in-mean model, where the conditional mean depends contemporaneously on the
conditional volatility.6 The volatility-in-mean eﬀect depends on the projection coeﬃcient β1
and therefore indirectly on the correlation coeﬃcient ρ.
   Our model extends the volatility-in-mean model in two ways. First, unless |ρ| = 1 there are
two sources of randomness in the conditional mean process, as opposed to only one, which
breaks the overly restrictive one-to-one link between the conditional mean and volatility
imposed by the usual volatility-in-mean model. Second, not only the current but also the
lagged volatility aﬀects the conditional mean, whereas the usual volatility-in-mean model
involves only a contemporaneous eﬀect. Analogous to the volatility-in-mean eﬀect, we label
the eﬀect of the lagged volatility the lag-volatility-in-mean eﬀect. The lag-volatility-in-mean
eﬀect depends on a12 − β1 a22 . If this term is positive (negative), the lagged conditional
volatility has a positive (negative) eﬀect on the conditional mean.
       Likewise, we can obtain the reduced-form volatility dynamics:
                                                
       ln σt = d2 − β2 d1 + a22 − β2 a12 ln σt−1 + a21 − β2 a11 ln µt−1 + β2 ln µt + ξ2t ,             (11)

where
                           Cov[η1t , η2t ]      b22                              
                    β2 =                   =ρ       with ξ2t ∼ N 0 , (1 − ρ2 )b22                      (12)
                            Var[η1t ]           b11
and
                                            η2t = β2 η1t + ξ2t .                                       (13)

This reduced-form volatility model captures the persistence of volatility through the term
a22 − β2 a12 . In addition, it incorporates the eﬀects of the mean on the volatility, both at
the contemporaneous and intertemporal level, through the coeﬃcients β2 and a21 − β2 a11 ,
   6
    The standard volatility-in-mean model relates the mean return to the volatility (or variance), while our
model relates the log mean to the log volatility. Let q = dµ/dσ be the usual volatility-in-mean coeﬃcient.
Then, our coeﬃcient on the log-volatility-in-log-mean d ln µ/d ln σ = (dµ/dσ) (σ/µ) = qσ/µ has the same sign
as the usual volatility-in-mean coeﬃcient, since both µ and σ are positive.


                                                     7
respectively. Analogous to the volatility-in-mean and lag-volatility-in-mean eﬀects, we label
the coeﬃcient on the contemporaneous mean the mean-in-volatility eﬀect and the coeﬃcient
on the lagged mean the lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀect. The correlation ρ between the mean
and volatility innovations is again vital in determining the sign and magnitude of the mean-
in-volatility and lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀects (through β2 ).
   The mean-in-volatility eﬀect mirrors the volatility-in-mean eﬀect. Since β1 β2 = ρ2 , the
two eﬀects share the same sign. However, unless |ρ| = 1, the mean-in-volatility and the
volatility-in-mean eﬀects are not perfect reciprocals of each other. The ratio β1 /β2 measures
the variance of the mean innovations relative to that of the volatility innovations.
    The motivation for including the non-contemporaneous lag-volatility-in-mean and lag-
mean-in-volatility eﬀects, a12 −β1 a22 and a21 −β2 a11 , is mostly empirical. Whitelaw (1994)
documents signiﬁcant lead-lag interactions between the conditional mean and volatility.
Although it is possible that his results are an artifact of the exogenous predictors used to
measure the time-variation of the moments, it is equally possible that the lead-lag interactions
are a stylized but until-now overlooked feature of the relationship between expected returns
and risk. In fact, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) document similar lead-lag interactions using
diﬀerent exogenous predictors, which is evidence in favor of the second possibility.
    Finally, the three assumptions about the correlation between the return innovations and
the conditional moment innovations serve to capture and potentially distinguish two popular
explanations of asymmetric volatility. Asymmetric volatility refers to the empirical ﬁnding
that increases in volatility tend to be associated more often with large negative returns than
with equally large positive returns. The two popular explanations of asymmetric volatility
are the leverage eﬀect and volatility feedback eﬀect. The leverage eﬀect states that when
the value of a ﬁrm drops through a large negative return, the leverage of the ﬁrm and the
associated probability of bankruptcy increase, causing the equity claims to become riskier.7
The volatility feedback eﬀect attributes the asymmetric volatility to the equilibrium response
of the conditional mean to changes in volatility. Suppose a large negative return is associated
with an increase in the conditional volatility (in the spirit of an ARCH model) and the
price of volatility risk is positive, so that the increase in the conditional volatility leads to
an increase in the conditional mean. Holding ﬁxed future dividends, the expected return
can only increase through a drop in the current stock price, resulting in an even larger
negative return. In contrast, for a large positive return that also leads to an increase in
both conditional moments, the drop in the stock price associated with the increase in the
   7
    Although the leverage eﬀect is often considered synonymous with asymmetric volatility, direct tests of
this explanation using leverage data generally ﬁnd that the leverage eﬀect is not strong enough to explain
the data. See Christie (1982), French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), and Bekaert and Wu (2000).


                                                    8
expected return partially oﬀsets the positive return. As a result, the increase in volatility is
associated with a large negative return (enhanced by the increase in the conditional mean)
or a small positive return (partially oﬀset by the increase in the conditional mean).
    The assumption that the return innovations are independent of the conditional moment
innovations, ρσ = ρµ = 0, rules out both the leverage and volatility feedback eﬀects. A negative
correlation between the return and conditional volatility innovations, ρσ < 0, is consistent
with the leverage eﬀect. It can also be consistent with the volatility feedback eﬀect, but
only if the contemporaneous correlation between the conditional moments is positive, ρ > 0.
Otherwise, the volatility feedback eﬀect implies a positive correlation between the return
and conditional volatility innovations, ρσ > 0, because negative returns are oﬀset and positive
returns are enhanced by the decrease in the conditional mean associated with the increase
in the conditional volatility. Furthermore, since in our model the conditional mean can vary
independently of the conditional volatility (unless |ρ| = 1), a more direct way to capture
the intuition of the volatility feedback eﬀect is through a negative correlation between the
return and conditional mean innovations, ρµ < 0, which directly ties increases (decreases) in
the conditional mean to negative (positive) returns. Finally, the case ρµ < 0 and ρσ < 0 allows
for both eﬀects, regardless of the sign and magnitude of the contemporaneous correlation
between the conditional mean and volatility.8


2.3     Implied Sharpe Ratio Dynamics
The latent VAR implies that the conditional Sharpe ratio is log-normally distributed and
that it follows a two-factor autoregressive (AR) process. Deﬁne the log Sharpe ratio as:
                                                                                     
                                                         ln µt                      1
                   ln St = ln µt − ln σt = T                        ,   where T =          .        (14)
                                                         ln σt                     −1

Equation (2) then implies that:
                                                
                                     ln µt−1
             ln St = T d + T A                       + T  ηt
                                       ln σt−1
                                                                                                     (15)
                   = (d1 − d2 ) + (a11 − a21 ) ln µt−1 + (a12 − a22 ) ln σt−1 + (η1t − η2t ),
   8
    We can disentangle ρµ and ρσ from ρ by factoring the conditional moment innovations ηt into a common
component due to the correlations with the return innovations εt and components
                                                                                   that are orthogonal to
the return innovations but are correlated with each other by ρ̃ = (ρ −ρµ ρσ )/ (1−ρµ2 )(1−ρσ2 ).




                                                          9
which shows that the time-variation in the log Sharpe ratio is driven by the mean reversion
of the two conditional moments and by the diﬀerence between the conditional moment
innovations η1t − η2t . Given the joint normality of ηt , the diﬀerence between the innovations
is normally distributed and so is the log Sharpe ratio.
    It follows that the Sharpe ratio is stochastic unless η1t − η2t is zero. In particular, it
is stochastic even if the innovations to the mean and volatility are perfectly correlated, or
|ρ| = 1. The reason is that even if the innovations are perfectly correlated, their magnitudes
are diﬀerent, unless also b11 = b22 , and therefore the diﬀerence between the innovations is non-
zero. For example, suppose ρ = 1. If b11 > b22 , the Sharpe ratio increases whenever the mean
increases, because the volatility increases by less than the mean. Alternatively, if b11 < b22 ,
the Sharpe ratio decreases whenever the mean increases, because the volatility increases by
more than the mean. The Sharpe ratio is only non-stochastic if |ρ| = 1 and b11 = b22 . Of
course, even then the Sharpe ratio is still time-varying due to the mean-reversion of the two
conditional moments (because ln µt−1 and ln σt−1 are time-varying).

    Substituting ln µt−1 = ln St−1 + ln σt−1 or ln σt−1 = ln µt−1 − ln St−1 into equation (15)
illustrates that the log Sharpe ratio follows an AR process:

         ln St = (d1 − d2 ) + (a11 − a21 ) ln St−1 +
                                                                                               (16)
                                     (a11 + a12 − a21 − a22 ) ln σt−1 − (1 − β1 )η2t + ξ1t

or

         ln St = (d1 − d2 ) + (a22 − a12 ) ln St−1 +
                                                                                               (17)
                                     (a11 + a12 − a21 − a22 ) ln µt−1 + (1 − β2 )η1t − ξ2t ,

respectively. In fact, if a11 + a12 − a21 − a22 = 0, the log Sharpe ratio follows a univariate
AR process, which is fairly standard in the term structure and portfolio choice literatures. A
suﬃcient condition for this case is that a12 = a21 = 0 and a11 = a22 , or in words, that both
the conditional mean and volatility are univariate AR processes with the same persistence
levels. Otherwise, if a11 + a12 − a21 − a22 = 0, the latent VAR introduces a second factor
into the Sharpe ratio dynamics, namely the lagged conditional volatility in equation (16) or
the lagged conditional mean in equation (17). It is important to recognize, however, that
although the own-lag coeﬃcients depend on which conditional moment is used as the second
factor (a11 − a21 versus a22 − a12 ), the overall time-series dynamics of the log Sharpe ratios
(including the persistence level) are the same in equations (16) and (17) because, given the
deﬁnition ln St = ln µt − ln σt , the two equations are mathematically equivalent.


                                                 10
2.4     Link to Equilibrium Models
To gain some economic intuition about the Sharpe ratio dynamics, consider the ﬁrst-order
condition Et [Mt+1 (Rt+1 − Rtf )] = 0 of a representative investor with marginal utility growth
Mt+1 (the stochastic discount factor or pricing kernel). Using the deﬁnition of a covariance
and the fact that E[Mt+1 ] = 1/Rtf , we can rewrite this ﬁrst-order condition as:
                                                                   
                          Et Rt+1 − Rtf = −Rtf Covt Mt+1 , Rt+1 − Rtf ,                                (18)

and solve for the Sharpe ratio:9
                     
                   Et Rt+1 − Rtf                                                  
                                         f                                         f
                                  = −R t Stdt  M t+1   Corrt   M t+1 , R t+1 − R t .                 (19)
                  Stdt Rt+1 − Rtf

This last equation illustrates that the log Sharpe ratio inherits the dynamics of the log riskfree
rate, the log volatility of marginal utility growth, and the log correlation of marginal utility
growth with returns (assuming this correlation is negative). Furthermore, if we parameterize
marginal utility growth Mt+1 = v  (Ct+1 )/v  (Ct ) and expand around the current consumption
level Ct , we get Stdt [Mt+1 ] RRAt Stdt [(Ct+1 − Ct )/Ct ], which shows that the volatility
of marginal utility growth depends to a ﬁrst-order approximation on relative risk aversion
RRAt = −Ct v  (Ct )/v  (Ct ) and the volatility of consumption growth.
   There is an extensive literature on the dynamics of the riskfree rate. In addition, there
are numerous equilibrium asset pricing models in which the level of relative risk aversion,
the volatility of consumption growth, or the correlation between marginal utility growth and
returns vary in a slowly mean-reverting fashion. Models with changing risk aversion include
Constantinides (1990), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Bekaert and Grenadier (2001), and
Brandt and Wang (2001). Models with varying volatility of consumption growth include
Abel (1988), Kandel and Stambaugh (1991), Gennotte and Marsh (1993), and Bansal
and Yaron (2001). Finally, Whitelaw (2000) formulates a model with changing correlation
between marginal utility growth and returns. Our statistical approach can be interpreted as a
reduced-form approximation of these equilibrium asset pricing models that can accommodate
two independent sources of time-variation in equation (19).
   9
    This Sharpe ratio is not quite comparable to St = µt /σt because it involves gross returns as opposed to
continuously compounded returns. However, the diﬀerence is negligible for short return horizons.




                                                    11
2.5     Hypotheses
Based on the latent VAR model for the conditional mean and volatility, we examine two
main hypotheses about the relationship between the two moments. The ﬁrst hypothesis is
about their contemporaneous relationship:

 H1: No contemporaneous relationship exists between the conditional mean and volatility.
     Formally, in the context of our model, β1 = β2 = 0. From equations (10) and (11),
     both the volatility-in-mean eﬀect β1 and the mean-in-volatility eﬀect β2 depend on the
     correlation ρ. As a result, this hypothesis is equivalent to ρ = 0. If the innovations to
     the moments are uncorrelated, neither the volatility-in-mean eﬀect nor the mean-in-
     volatility eﬀect exists, and the two moments are contemporaneously unrelated.10

   The second hypothesis is about the intertemporal relationship between the conditional
mean and volatility. There are two forms of intertemporal relationship in our model: Granger
causality and the reduced-form lag-adjustments. Granger causality refers to whether one
variable helps predict future realizations of another through the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the
transition matrix A. Despite its name, Granger causality refers to a forecasting relationship
and does not identify a structural relationship or direction of causality. In contrast, the lag-
volatility-in-mean and lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀects shed light on the structural relationship
between the two conditional moments, whether the lagged volatility enters the reduced-
form mean dynamics (10) and whether the lagged mean enters the reduced-form volatility
dynamics (11), respectively. These lag-adjustments depend not only on the oﬀ-diagonal
elements of A but also on the correlation ρ. The second hypothesis is:

 H2: There exists no lag-volatility-in-mean and/or lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀect, meaning
     a12−β1 a22 = 0 and/or a21−β2 a11 = 0. If we fail to reject this hypothesis, the mean adjusts
     instantaneously to changes in the volatility and vice versa. Otherwise, there exists an
     intertemporal relationship between the two moments through the lag-adjustments.


3      Econometric Approach
Equations (1) and (2) make up a state-space model. In the terminology of state-space models,
the ﬁrst equation is the measurement or observation equation and the second equation is the
transition or state equation. To draw inferences about the parameters of the VAR and the
realizations of the latent moments from the observed returns, we need to solve a sequence
  10
   Given the reasoning in footnote 6, this hypothesis is essentially the same as the volatility-in-mean
hypothesis considered by French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), among others.


                                                  12
of ﬁltering and smoothing problems.11 Unfortunately, the ﬁltering and smoothing problems
generated by our latent VAR model are non-standard because of the non-linearities in the
measurement equation. As a result, the standard Kalman ﬁlter (designed for linear Gaussian
state-space models) cannot be used directly in the estimation of our model. We instead rely
on a simulation-based method for non-linear and non-Gaussian state-space models.
   It is convenient for our econometric discussion to reformulate the model slightly. We
deﬁne mt = ln µt and υt = ln σt , so that µt = exp{mt } and σt = exp{υt }. Then, we demean
the latent processes and, with some abuse of our previous notation, let mt and υt denote the
demeaned moments. Finally, we deﬁne st = [mt , υt ] , Z1 = [1, 0] , and Z2 = [0, 1] . With this
revised notation, we write equations (1) and (2) as follows:

                                                                                      
                 yt = µ̄emt−1 + σ̄eυt−1 εt = µ̄eZ1 st−1 + σ̄eZ2 st−1 εt with εt ∼ N 0 , 1                            (20)

and
                                                                    
                                  st = Ast−1 + ηt with ηt ∼ MVN 0 , Σ .                                              (21)

We collect the unknown parameters of the transformed state-space model into a single
parameter vector:
                                                                        
                        ψ = a11 , a12 , a21 , a22 , b11 , b22 , ρ, µ̄, σ̄ ,     (22)

and denote the histories of the unobserved conditional mean and volatility by:
                                                                      
                                               θ = s0 , s1 , ..., sT −1 .                                            (23)


3.1      Estimation
We estimate the latent VAR model by simulated maximum likelihood (SML). In particular,
we numerically construct the likelihood function of the model using an importance
sampling approach similar to the one Durbin and Koopman (1997) and Sandmann and
Koopman (1998) use for estimating SV models.
  11
     Filtering generates the one-step-ahead forecasts of the latent variables E[ln µt , ln σt |y1 , . . . , yt ] and the
corresponding forecast variances Var[ln µt , ln σt |y1 , . . . , yt ], which in a linear Gaussian state-space model
are used to construct the likelihood function. Smoothing yields the full-information forecasts of the latent
variables E[ln µt , ln σt |y1 , . . . , yT ] and the corresponding forecast variances Var[ln µt , ln σt |y1 , . . . , yT ].




                                                           13
3.1.1   Motivation

The likelihood function of the model is:

                               L (ψ) = p (y | ψ)

                                      =     p (y, θ | ψ) dθ                                 (24)

                                      =     p (y | θ, ψ) p(θ | ψ)dθ.

The ﬁrst line of equation (24) deﬁnes the likelihood function as the density of the observed
returns y given the parameters ψ. The second line expresses this density as the marginal
density of the joint distribution of the observed returns y and the unobserved state variables
θ = [m, v]. Finally, in the third line we write the joint density of y and θ as the product of
the conditional density of y given θ and the marginal density of θ.
    The point of this algebra is to illustrate that for a given parameter vector ψ the likelihood
function L(ψ) can be viewed as an expectation of the conditional density p(y|θ, ψ) with
respect to the marginal density p(θ|ψ). With T data points and two latent state variables,
this expectation involves a 2 T -dimensional integral. The high dimensionality of this integral
and the non-linearities in the conditional density p(y|θ, ψ) make the likelihood function
practically impossible to compute analytically.
    In principle, the latent state histories θ can be sampled directly from the density p(θ|ψ)
and Monte Carlo integration can then be used to solve the integral in equation (24). In
practice, however, this brute-force simulation approach is grossly ineﬃcient. We can greatly
improve the eﬃciency of the Monte Carlo integration through the use of importance sampling.
To explain how importance sampling works in our context, we rewrite the likelihood function
in equation (24) as follows:

                                                  p(θ | ψ)
                        L (ψ) =     p (y | θ, ψ)              g (θ | y, ψ) dθ
                                                g (θ | y, ψ)
                                                                                           (25)
                                                   p(θ | ψ)
                              = Eg p (y | θ, ψ)                 ,
                                                 g (θ | y, ψ)

where g(θ|y, ψ), the so-called importance density, is a conditional density of θ that is not
the same as the conditional density p(θ|y, ψ) generated by the model, and Eg [·] denotes an
expectation taken with respect to this importance density.
   If g(θ|ψ) = p(θ|ψ), which means that the distribution of the latent θ is the same under



                                                   14
the two models (but the distribution of y given θ may be very diﬀerent), then:
                                                                 
                      g y, θ | ψ   g y | θ, ψ g θ | ψ   g y | θ, ψ p θ | ψ
           g θ | y, ψ =          =                   =                   ,              (26)
                        g y|ψ             g y|ψ                g y|ψ

which implies that:                              
                                    p θ|ψ       g y|ψ
                                             =          ,                                (27)
                                   g θ | y, ψ  g y | θ, ψ
where g(y|ψ) ≡ Lg (ψ) is the likelihood function of the model g(y|θ, ψ). Finally, substituting
equation (27) into equation (25), we have:
                                                                               
                                          Lg (ψ)                   p (y | θ, ψ)
                L (ψ) = Eg p (y | θ, ψ)                = Lg (ψ) Eg               .         (28)
                                        g (y | θ, ψ)               g (y | θ, ψ)

In summary, the true likelihood function L (ψ) can be expressed as the product of the
likelihood function Lg (ψ) of the model g(y|θ, ψ), which we call the approximating model,
and a correction factor Eg [w(θ, ψ)], where for notational convenience we deﬁne:

                                                  p (y | θ, ψ)
                                     w (θ, ψ) =                .                           (29)
                                                  g (y | θ, ψ)

The correction factor characterizes the departure of the true likelihood from the likelihood of
the approximating model as the average distance between the conditional densities p (y|θ, ψ)
and g (y|θ, ψ). If the two conditional densities are close to each other for all θ, the function
w(θ, ψ) is close to one and so is its expectation with respect to g(θ|y, ψ).
    The importance density g (θ|y, ψ) can in principle be any density of θ given y and ψ that
is positive everywhere, satisﬁes the restriction g(θ|ψ) = p(θ|ψ), and for which Eg [w(θ, ψ)]
exists. The main idea of our econometric approach is to choose an approximating model for
which we can conveniently compute both the likelihood function Lg (ψ) and the correction
factor Eg [w(θ, ψ)]. We can then evaluate the likelihood function L(ψ) using equation (28).
    Before we present the approximating model, note that in choosing an importance density
for computational convenience alone we depart from the usual approach in the literature
of considering also the statistical properties of the resulting ratio of densities w(θ, ψ).
Geweke (1989) shows that for the variance of this ratio to be ﬁnite, the tails of the density in
the numerator must be fatter than the tails of the density in the denominator. In contrast
to other applications of importance sampling, our choice of approximating model is likely to
not satisfy this condition. We return to this issue in Section 3.4.



                                               15
3.1.2   Approximating Model

We choose g(θ|y, ψ) to be the conditional density of a linear Gaussian state-space model
that closely approximates our non-linear model. For example, in the case Corr[εt , ηt ] = 0, we
replace the non-linear measurement equation (20) with the linear measurement equation:
                                       
                              yt                                                                  
            Yt ≡                            = H  st−1 + wt , with             wt ∼ MVN ct−1 , Rt−1 ,   (30)
                        ln (yt − µ̄)2

where
                                                                                      √        
                    1 0                        c1t                               R1t     ρw R1t R2t
          H=                    ,   ct =                 ,   and Rt =           √                       (31)
                    0 2                        c2t                            ρw R1t R2t    R2t

and the parameters ct and Rt are calibrated such that the densities g(y|θ, ψ) of the linearized
model approximate well the true densities p(y|θ, ψ) (the appendix provides more details).
The virtue of this linear measurement equation is that, together with the linear transition
equation (21), it implies a linear Gaussian state-space model for which we can analytically
evaluate the likelihood function Lg (ψ) using the Kalman ﬁlter algorithm.

3.1.3   Likelihood Evaluation

Given a realization of the state history θ, we can easily evaluate the conditional densities
p(y|θ, ψ) and g(y|θ, ψ) and hence also the function w(θ, ψ). However, θ is unobserved and the
expectation Eg [w(θ, ψ)] cannot be computed analytically. We therefore use simulations to
compute this correction factor. Speciﬁcally, we sample N state histories θi , for i = 1, 2, . . . N ,
from the importance density g(θ|y, ψ) and use these samples to construct the ratios:

                                                             p (y | θi , ψ)
                                                     wi =                                               (32)
                                                             g (y | θi , ψ)

and to compute an estimate of the correction factor Eg [w(θ, ψ)] as:

                                                           1  i
                                                              N
                                                      w̄ =       w.                                     (33)
                                                           N i=1

We then use equation (28) to construct an estimate of the likelihood function L(ψ) as:

                                                     L (ψ) = Lg (ψ) w̄.                                (34)



                                                               16
Since w̄ → Eg [w(θ, ψ)] as N → ∞, L (ψ) is a consistent approximation of L (ψ).
    As is usually the case, it is more convenient to work with the log likelihood. Taking logs
of equation (34) gives:
                                   ln L (ψ) = ln Lg (ψ) + ln w̄.                         (35)

However, ln L (ψ) is a slightly biased estimator of ln L (ψ) because E[ln w̄] = ln Eg [wi ] due to
Jensen’s inequality. Durbin and Koopman (1997) and Shephard and Pitt (1997) therefore
suggest adding the following term to the log likelihood function to correct the bias from the
log transformation (up to order N −3/2 ):

                                                                 s2w
                              ln L (ψ) = ln Lg (ψ) + ln w̄ +          ,                      (36)
                                                                2N w̄2

where
                                            1  i
                                                  N
                                                                2
                                  s2w   =           w − w̄          .                         (37)
                                          N − 1 i=1

Finally, we deﬁne our SML estimator ψ as the parameter values that maximize this bias-
corrected approximation of the log likelihood function.
    One drawback of constructing the log likelihood of our model as the sum of the log
likelihood of the approximating model and the log correction factor is that we cannot directly
compute the contribution of each observation yt to the likelihood function. This is because
both terms in the sum are evaluated for the whole sample y. As a result, we cannot compute
outer-product based standard errors to check the validity of the second-derivative based
standard errors we use for drawing asymptotic inferences.


3.2     State Variable Extraction
Analogous to the simulation-based construction of the correction factor, we compute the
smoothed estimates of the unobserved state variables st = [mt , υt ] as follows:

                                                 1  i i
                                                    N
                                             
                                   E st | y, ψ =       w st ,                                 (38)
                                                 N i=1

where sit is the tth element of θi , the ith draw from the importance density.
    The smoothed estimates of the state variables st are based on the entire sample of returns
y instead of on the returns up to date t (ﬁltered estimates). Unfortunately, our estimation
approach does not readily produce ﬁltered estimates of the state variables because the draws
θi are obtained from the full-sample importance density g(θ|y, ψ). The practical implication

                                                  17
is that our approach is more suitable for ex-post description of the data than for “on-line”
signal extraction in a portfolio choice context, for example.12


3.3     Identiﬁcation and Numerical Implementation
As with most nonlinear models, it is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to prove that the parameters
of our model are uniquely identiﬁed. In order to minimize the chance of reporting a local
or non-unique global maximum, we implement the following procedure. We optimize the
likelihood from a variety of sensible (relative to the literature and the data) initial parameter
guesses for µ̄, σ̄, A, b11 , and b22 , and for a grid of correlations ρ, ρµ , and ρσ , each ranging
independently from −0.8 to 0.8. For each set of initial parameter values, we iterate between
applying a simplex algorithm and a gradient-based algorithm, where each optimization round
is started with the outcome of the previous round, until the criterion function does not
improve from one optimization round to the next. We choose as our estimates the parameters
that correspond to the greatest likelihood and verify that the parameters that correspond
to slightly inferior local maxima are qualitatively similar to our estimates. The reason for
considering a grid of initial values for the correlations is that, intuitively, non-zero correlations
are the most likely cause of identiﬁcation problems. We are particularly concerned about the
case ρµ = 0 and ρσ = 0, but have not experienced any clear signs of identiﬁcation problems
(although the likelihood function is not particularly sensitive to the value of ρµ ).
    We are also concerned about the accuracy of the approximation of the likelihood function
because a global maximum of an approximated likelihood function is only as good as the
approximation. Therefore, we use a large simulation size of N = 10,000 (typical applications
of SML with importance sampling use no more than 500 simulations) and, following the
suggestion of Durbin and Koopman (1997), also use the method of antithetic variates to
further reduce the variance of the simulation errors.13 In addition, we verify for ρµ = ρσ = 0
that increasing the number of simulations to 50,000 does not signiﬁcantly change the SML
estimates. Unfortunately, estimating the other speciﬁcations with more simulations is
infeasible due to the dimensionality of the grid of starting values.


3.4     Finite Simulation and Sample Size Properties
The asymptotic distribution of our estimator for a ﬁnite simulation size N is unknown. To
make matters worse, our estimator suﬀers from the critique of Shephard (2000), that the
  12
    See Johannes, Polson, and Stroud (2002) for an example of on-line ﬁltering for a related model.
  13
    Durbin and Koopman (1997) show how to compute the contribution of the simulations to the asymptotic
variance of the SML estimates. In our case, this contribution is less than one percent.


                                                  18
ratio of densities w(θ, ψ) may not have a ﬁnite variance. If the density in the denominator
has thinner tails than the density in the numerator (which is likely to be the case because we
are approximating an unconditionally fat-tailed SV model with a Gaussian model), extreme
draws of θi may cause wi to be unboundedly large. If the ratio of densities does not have a
ﬁnite variance, the central limit theorem does not apply to the Monte Carlo integral w̄ and
there is no way to tell how far a given w̄ is from its expectation.
    To determine the severity of this ﬁnite simulation size problem, we follow the suggestion
of Shephard (2000) to simulate a long series of wi ratios and then compute the variances of
wi for the ﬁrst 500 through 75,000 simulations. If this recursive variance is very sensitive to
individual draws and does not converge to some constant level for very large N , the problem
is serious. If, however, the recursive variance settles down quickly to a constant level, we
can be more conﬁdent in our estimator for a ﬁnite simulation size.
    Figure 1 presents two recursive variance plots for the model with ρµ = ρσ = 0. To see
how the properties of the density ratios diﬀer across the likelihood surface, we evaluate the
ratios in Panel A at a representative set of starting values and in Panel B at the estimates
presented in the empirical section. In both cases, the variance of the density ratios is very
sensitive to individual draws for relatively small N . Furthermore, for the initial parameters,
the variance is not only much larger in magnitude than for the SML estimates (by a factor
of about 300), but it also keeps drifting upward as N increases. This conﬁrms Shephard’s
suspicion that the variance may be unbounded. For the SML estimates, in contrast, the
variance seems to be fairly stable after 10,000 simulations (at least in this particular set of
simulations), ﬂuctuating from 0.209 to 0.227. This also conﬁrms Shephard’s observation in
the context of SV models that the ratio of densities is much better behaved at the SML
estimates than at other points on the likelihood surface.
    Although these recursive variance plots are only indicative of the (lack of) problems
induced by evaluating the correction factor with a ﬁnite number of simulations, we proceed
by assuming that the asymptotic distribution of the estimator is Gaussian as usual. In doing
so, we are likely to understate the true standard errors of our estimates for two reasons.
First, the sampling variation of the Monte Carlo integral for a ﬁnite N (which is 1/N times
the variance in Panel B of Figure 1) increases the standard errors. Second, the poor sampling
properties of the density ratios may severely deteriorate the asymptotic approximation.
   As an alternative way to get a sense for the ﬁnite sample properties of the SML estimator,
we conduct a Monte Carlo experiment. In particular, we repeatedly estimate the model with
ρµ = ρσ = 0 and with N = 5, 000 from 500 independent samples of T = 636 monthly returns
simulated from the model with parameter values that correspond to the estimates presented

                                              19
in the empirical section. Table 1 presents the results. It shows the true parameter values
in the ﬁrst column and describes the sampling distribution of the corresponding parameter
estimates in the remaining columns. The average and median estimates are all close to the
true parameter values, suggesting that the estimator is relatively unbiased. Furthermore,
except for a21 and a12 , the standard deviations of the estimates across samples are small.
In particular, the correlation between the innovations to the conditional moments ρ, which
is central to our ﬁrst hypothesis, is measured very precisely with a true value of −0.634,
an average estimate of −0.636, and a standard deviation of only 0.071 across samples. The
estimates of a21 and a12 , which are important for our second hypothesis, are less precise, with
true values of −0.053 and 0.108 and estimates ranging from −0.295 to 0.181 with a mean
of −0.064 and from −0.109 to 0.320 with a mean of 0.109, respectively. Finally, notice that
some of the sampling distributions are quite skewed, especially for the diagonal elements of
A and for ρ, raising serious concern about asymptotic normal approximations.


4      Empirical Results
4.1     Data
We study monthly returns on the value-weighted CRSP index in excess of the one-month
Treasury bill rate from January 1946 through December 1998 (636 observations). For the
purposes of robustness and speciﬁcation testing, we also consider three information variables
known to be correlated with expected returns and volatility: the short rate, term premium,
and default premium.14 The short rate is the yield of a one-month Treasury bill. The term
premium is the yield spread of a ten-year Treasury bond and a one-year Treasury bill.
Finally, the default premium is the yield spread of corporate bonds with Moody’s Baa and
Aaa rating. Table 2 presents summary statistics of the data. Figure 2 plots the series and
indicates the dates of all business cycle peaks (dashed lines) and troughs (dotted lines).15


4.2     Parameter Estimates and Hypothesis Tests
Table 3 presents SML estimates of the latent VAR with the three diﬀerent assumptions
about the correlation between the return innovations and the conditional mean and volatility
innovations. Model A assumes that these innovations are uncorrelated. In models B and C,
  14
     In particular, subsets of these predictors are used by Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell (1987),
Fama and French (1989), and Ang and Bekaert (2001) to model expected returns and by Campbell (1987),
Schwert (1989), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), and Whitelaw (1994) to model volatility.
  15
     The business cycle dates are obtained from the NBER at http://www.nber.org/cycles.html.



                                                  20
the return innovations are allowed to be correlated either with the conditional mean or the
conditional volatility innovations, respectively. Finally, model D is unrestricted.
   The estimates of µ̄ and σ̄ (together with the estimates of b11 and b22 ) imply an annualized
unconditional risk premium of 7.5 to 7.8 percent and return volatility of 13.2 to 13.6 percent,
which, not surprisingly, match closely the sample moments in Table 2.16 All but one of the
own-lag persistence coeﬃcients a11 and a22 exceed 0.85 (the exception is a11 in model B),
suggesting that both the conditional mean and volatility are highly persistent quantities.
    The innovations to the conditional mean and volatility are contemporaneously negatively
correlated in all models, with a correlation ρ that ranges from −0.635 to −0.458 and is
statistically signiﬁcant at any conventional signiﬁcance level (the t-statistics are computed
with Hessian-based standard errors). This ﬁnding implies a strong rejection of hypothesis H1.
Furthermore, the negative sign implies that the unconditional return distribution is
negatively skewed (consistent with Table 2) and that both the volatility-in-mean and mean-
                                                              
in-volatility eﬀects are negative and signiﬁcant, with β1 = ρ b11 /b22 ranging from −0.235
                       
to −0.155 and β2 = ρ b22 /b11 ranging from −1.998 to −1.352. It is clear that there exists
a negative contemporaneous trade-oﬀ between expected returns and risk, which conﬁrms
the results of Campbell (1987), Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan (1989), Nelson (1991),
and Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), but not those of French, Schwert, and
Stambaugh (1987) and Campbell and Hentschel (1992).
    The oﬀ-diagonal elements of the transition matrix a12 and a21 that determine the Granger
causality embedded in the VAR are individually not signiﬁcant at the ﬁve-percent level
(but a12 is signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level in models A and C). To determine whether
these parameters are also jointly insigniﬁcant, we estimate the models under the restriction
a12 = a21 = 0 and conduct a likelihood ratio (LR) test of the restriction. The LR test
statistics, which are asymptotically χ2 distributed with two degrees of freedom, all exceed the
one-percent critical value of 9.21. This rejection is evidence in favor of bidirectional Granger
causality between the conditional moments, meaning the lagged volatility helps predict the
mean and, to a somewhat lesser degree, the lagged mean helps predict the volatility.
    The opposite signs of a12 and a21 conﬁrm qualitatively Whitelaw’s (1994) ﬁnding that the
cross-autocorrelations between the conditional mean and volatility oﬀset each other through
time. An increase in the mean is followed by a decrease in the volatility, while an increase
in the volatility leads to a subsequent increase in the mean.17
  16
     We compute the unconditional moments of returns using the properties of bi-variate log-normal random
variables and the unconditional mean and covariance matrix of the log moments in equation (4).
  17
     Unfortunately, we cannot directly compare our estimates to Whitelaw’s results because our VAR is for



                                                   21
    The lag-volatility-in-mean and lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀects are both positive and
signiﬁcant at the ﬁve-percent level (in most cases even at the one-percent level), with
estimates of a12 −β1 a22 ranging from 0.238 to 0.325 and of a21 −β2 a11 ranging from 1.103 to
1.604.18 Therefore, both parts of hypothesis H2 are decisively rejected and the reduced-form
models (10) and (11) feature lag adjustments. This means that the mean and volatility
adjust not only instantaneously but also with a lag to changes in the other moment.
    The rejections of the hypotheses H1 and H2 are based on asymptotic standard errors.
However, as stressed in Section 3.4, the asymptotics of our estimator are questionable for a
number of reasons. To substantiate the evidence on the contemporaneous correlation and lag
adjustments, we therefore conduct a Monte Carlo experiment under each null. Speciﬁcally,
we estimate model A under each of the restrictions ρ = 0, a12 = β1 a22 , and a21 = β2 a11 . We
then simulate from each model 500 independent samples of T = 636 monthly returns and
construct sampling distributions of the restrictions under the null. The results corroborate
our asymptotic inferences. Under the null of ρ = 0, the estimated correlation is less than
−0.5 in only two of the 500 samples. Likewise, under the null a12 = β1 a22 or a21 = β2 a11 , the
estimate of a12 −β1 a22 or a21 −β2 a11 exceed their empirical estimates in less than three and
one percent of the samples under the null, respectively. We conclude that the rejections of
H1 and H2 are not attributed to invalid asymptotic approximations.
    The estimates of a11 + a12 − a21 − a22 range from 0.068 to 0.183 and all have t-statistics
greater than two, suggesting (based on the asymptotics) that the Sharpe ratio follows a
two-factor process. If we use the conditional mean as second factor, the own-lag persistence
of the Sharpe ratio is a22 − a12 0.80, and if we use the volatility as the second factor, it
is a11 − a21 0.90. In either case, the Sharpe ratio is highly persistent, which reﬂects our
ﬁnding above that both the conditional mean and volatility are highly persistent.
   The signs of the estimated correlations ρµ between the return and mean innovations
(models B and D) and ρσ between the return and volatility innovations (models C and D) are
consistent with the volatility feedback and leverage eﬀects, respectively. Both correlations
are negative, which implies that increases in the mean and volatility are associated with
negative returns. However, only the estimates of ρσ are signiﬁcant and, judging by the
Akaike information criterion, only model C yields an improvement in ﬁt to the fully restricted
model A.19 Since the estimates of ρµ are insigniﬁcant and the volatility feedback explanation
log moments instead of levels. However, we can approximate the oﬀ-diagonal elements of a levels VAR by
dµ/dσ = (d ln µ/d ln σ)(µ/σ) a12 µ̄/σ̄ and dσ/dµ = (d ln σ/d ln µ) (σ/µ) a21 σ̄/µ̄. Whitelaw’s estimates
(for a shorter sample period) are dµ/dσ = 0.118 and dσ/dµ = −0.107. Our approximations range from 0.014
to 0.021 and from −0.784 to −0.160, respectively.
   18
      The asymptotic standard errors of a12 −β1 a22 and a21 −β2 a11 are computed using the delta method.
   19
      The Akaike information criterion is deﬁned as AIC = ln L − dim[ψ].


                                                  22
is consistent with a negative ρσ only if ρ is positive, we conclude that our results favor the
leverage explanation of asymmetric volatility.
    Finally, the estimates of the latent VAR and, more importantly, of the reduced-form
models (10) and (11), are remarkably similar across the four correlation structures. We
therefore focus in the remainder of the paper on model C, the best-ﬁtting model according
to the Akaike information criterion. However, we veriﬁed that all qualitative statements we
make below are robust to this speciﬁcation choice.


4.3    Time-Series of the Conditional Moments
Given the parameter estimates in Table 3 and the index returns, we extract estimates of
the conditional mean, volatility, and Sharpe ratio. Before we study the time-series of these
estimates, we ﬁrst consider as a point of reference the time-series of the returns themselves.
It is clear from Table 2 that the returns are noisy, with an annualized volatility of 14 percent
and a ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of only 0.035. It is therefore not surprising that in Figure 2
the noise disguises the persistence of the conditional mean. The persistence of the conditional
volatility is more apparent. Judging by the frequency and magnitude of large price changes,
there are pronounced and prolonged periods of high and low volatility in our sample.
    The left column of Figure 3 presents the smoothed estimates of the annualized (not
logged) mean (ﬁrst row), volatility (second row), and Sharpe ratio (third row). Each plot
also shows as vertical lines the dates of all business cycle peaks (dashed lines) and troughs
(dotted lines) in our sample. It is immediately clear that both the conditional mean and
volatility vary through time. The annualized mean has a standard deviation of 0.9 percent
and ranges from 4.75 percent in 1965 to almost ten percent in 1988. The annualized volatility
has a standard deviation of 4.5 percent and ranges from less than ﬁve percent in 1965 to
over 30 percent in 1987. Consistent with the estimates of a11 and a22 , the conditional mean
reverts faster to its long-term average than the conditional volatility. In fact, periods of high
or low volatility appear to last as long as a few decades.
    To gauge the statistical signiﬁcance of the variation of the conditional mean and volatility,
we estimate restricted models with either constant mean or constant volatility and then
perform LR tests of these restrictions. Both constrained models can be rejected at the ﬁve-
percent level (asymptotic p-values of 2.3 percent for the constant-mean model and less than
0.5 percent for the constant-volatility model). To measure the economic signiﬁcance and
relate our results to the literature on time-varying moments, we also compute the statistics
1−Var[yt−µt ]/Var[yt ] and 1−Var[yt2−σt2 ]/Var[yt2 ], which we interpret as predictive regression
R2 s for returns and squared returns, respectively. The values of these statistics, 2.1 percent

                                               23
for returns and 35.7 percent for squared returns, are comparable to the results of predicting
monthly returns with exogenous predictors and squared returns with ARCH models.
    The variation of the conditional mean is distinctly counter-cyclical. In eight of the nine
completed business cycles in the sample, the conditional mean rises almost monotonically
from the peak (dotted vertical lines) to the trough (dashed vertical lines) of the cycle (the only
exception is the 1948–1949 recession). Although other studies have found similar counter-
cyclical patterns in the conditional mean (Fama and French, 1989), the strength of our ﬁnding
is astonishing given the fact that we are not using exogenous predictors. The problem with
using exogenous predictors to identify cyclical patterns is that the NBER may use the same
predictors (or variables that are highly correlated with these predictors) to ex-post date the
peaks and troughs of the business cycles. Furthermore, it is interesting that although the
periods between the peaks and troughs of the business cycles are aligned with the expected
return cycles, the sometimes much-longer periods between a trough and the following peak
often contain more than one large swing in expected returns.

    The conditional volatility exhibits a somewhat diﬀerent cyclical pattern. In particular,
the volatility is almost uniformly high and at times decreasing during recessions, when the
conditional mean is rising, and low during expansions. However, this business cycle pattern
is distorted by low-frequency swings in volatility that last for decades.
    To quantify the patterns in the variation of the conditional moments, we compute the
diﬀerences between the means and volatilities at the trough and preceding peak of each
business cycle. To smooth some of the month-to-month ﬂuctuations in the moments, we
work with the average moments over the three months straddling the peak or trough. For
the mean, all but one of the diﬀerences are positive and the average diﬀerence is 1.1 percent.
If the means were iid, which is a very conservative assumption given their persistence, the
                                     √         √
standard error of this diﬀerence is 2 × 0.9/ 9 = 0.4 percent, indicating that the average
diﬀerence is signiﬁcant at the ﬁve-percent level. For the volatility, all diﬀerences are negative
and the average diﬀerence is −4.9 percent with a standard error (under the conservative iid
                 √         √
assumption) of 2 × 4.5/ 9 = 2.1 percent. In addition, we compute correlations between
the moments and the three exogenous conditioning variables. The univariate correlations of
the conditional mean with the short rate, term premium, and default premium are 0.192,
−0.021, and 0.498, respectively, and a multivariate R2 is 0.319. The correlations of the
conditional volatility with the same variables are 0.252, −0.238, and 0.256, and the R2 is
0.132. These statistics illustrate at least two facts. First, the mean is highly correlated
with the empirically and theoretically counter-cyclical default spread. Second, the volatility
is much less correlated with the predictors than the mean, which is fairly standard in the


                                               24
literature (as long as the predictors exclude lagged volatilities).
    The only seemingly counterfactual feature of our estimates is that the conditional mean
is weakly positively correlated with the short rate, while predictive return regressions suggest
a negative correlation. We conjecture that this result is due to the fact that our estimates
are strongly cyclical and do not exhibit a pattern that resembles the almost monotonic rise
of the short rate from the 1940s through the early 1980s and then subsequent drop through
the late 1990s (see Figure 2). To verify this conjecture, we relate the conditional mean to the
diﬀerence between the short rate and its one-year moving average (which essentially detrends
the short rate). Consistent with predictive return regressions, the resulting univariate
correlation is −0.22. Furthermore, we run a multivariate regression of the conditional mean
on all three predictors (which also detrends the short-rate if the predictors are co-integrated).
The regression coeﬃcient on the short rate is −0.012 with a t-statistic of −8.46.
    Together, the counter-cyclical variation of the mean and the increase in volatility during
recessions leads to counter-cyclical variation of the conditional Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe
ratio rises from the peak to the trough of every completed business cycle in the sample.
This counter-cyclical variation of the Sharpe ratio is consistent with the intuition from habit
formation models (Constantinides, 1990; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). At the peak of a
business cycle consumers are enjoying consumption levels far above their historically built-up
“habits,” which makes them relatively risk-tolerant. As a result, it requires a low expected
reward per unit of risk, or low Sharpe ratio, for consumers to invest in stocks at the peak of
a cycle. At the trough of a cycle, in contrast, consumption levels are approaching the habits
(or perceived subsistence levels), which makes consumers relatively risk-averse. Therefore,
for consumers to invest in stocks at the trough, the Sharpe ratio must be high.
    Figure 3 oﬀers a more visual description of how the lead-lag interactions between the
conditional mean and volatility arise. As the economy comes oﬀ the peak of a business
cycle, the volatility rises almost immediately. The mean, however, increases only gradually
as the economy moves from the peak to the trough of the cycle. Therefore, the volatility
appears to lead the mean through the recession. The mean then reaches a high at the trough
of the cycle, shortly after which the volatility drops back to its lower expansion level. As a
result, the increase in the mean is associated with a subsequent drop in the volatility.


4.4    Impulse Response Functions
To better understand the dynamic behavior of the conditional moments, we now turn to the
impulse response functions of the VAR. The impulse response functions show how a one-
standard-deviation shock to one of the innovations of the VAR aﬀects contemporaneously the

                                               25
conditional mean and volatility and then propagates to future realizations of the moments
through the dynamic structure of the VAR.20 Since our model describes the dynamics of the
log mean and log volatility, we transform the impulse response functions of the VAR to the
implied impulse response functions for the mean and volatility (without logs).
    As long as the innovations of the VAR are uncorrelated, interpreting the impulse response
functions is straightforward. η1t is the innovation to the mean and η2t is the innovation to
the volatility. However, the innovations of the VAR are usually correlated, which means that
η1t and η2t have a common component that acts on both the mean and volatility and two
orthogonal components that act only on the mean or the volatility, respectively. Since we
cannot identify all three components separately, we follow the convention to attribute the
common component of the innovations to η1t (simply because it belongs to the ﬁrst equation
of the VAR) and to remove this common component from η2t , so that this second innovation
is by construction orthogonal to the ﬁrst. Mechanically, we use a Cholesky decomposition
of the error covariance matrix to orthogonalize the innovations of the VAR. The impulse
response functions then trace the eﬀects of a one-standard-deviation shock to the common
component (which contemporaneously acts on the mean and, to the extent that the original
innovations are correlated, also on the volatility) and to the orthogonal component (which
by construction acts contemporaneously only on the volatility).
    The six plots in Figure 4 illustrate the impulse responses for the unrestricted VAR (solid
lines) and the restricted VAR with a12 = a21 = 0 (dashed lines). The ﬁrst column of plots
shows the eﬀects of a one-standard-deviation mean innovation at date t on the mean (ﬁrst
row), the volatility (second row), and the Sharpe ratio (third row) at dates t, t + 1, . . . , t + 60.
Similarly, the second column shows the eﬀects of a one-standard-deviation orthogonalized
volatility innovation on the current and future mean, volatility, and Sharpe ratio.
    Consider ﬁrst the impulse responses for the unrestricted VAR. The ﬁrst column of plots
illustrates clearly the negative contemporaneous correlation between the conditional mean
and volatility. A one-standard-deviation mean innovation results in a contemporaneous 0.66
percent increase in the annualized mean, a 1.76 percent decrease in the annualized volatility,
and a 0.14 increase in the annualized Sharpe ratio. Thereafter, the mean fully mean-reverts
within four months and then overshoots its long-term average by dropping as much as an
additional 0.29 percent over the next 24 months. The explanation for this overshooting of
the mean after a positive mean innovation is the lag-adjustment of the mean to the change in
volatility. The volatility keeps dropping, although at a decreasing rate, for about 24 months
  20
    If a VAR(1) process (I −AL)xt = νt is covariance-stationary, it can be rewritten as a VMA(∞) process
xt = (I−AL)−1 νt = [I+(AL)+(AL)2 +(AL)3 + . . .]νt . This moving average (or Wold-) representation directly
identiﬁes the eﬀects of νt on the current and future realizations of xt as the coeﬃcients {I, A, A2 , A3 , . . .}.


                                                       26
after the mean innovation. This persistent drop in volatility causes the mean to fall due
to the positive and relatively large Granger causality term a12 as well as the positive lag-
volatility-in-mean eﬀect a12 − β1 a22 . The three plots also illustrate clearly the persistence of
the conditional moments. One year after the shock, the conditional mean and volatility are
still 0.22 and 0.68 percent away from their respective long-term averages.
    The second column illustrates that much of the variation of the conditional volatility is
contemporaneously independent of the variation of the conditional mean. A one-standard-
deviation orthogonalized volatility innovation immediately leads to a 3.02 percent increase in
the annualized volatility. Since the volatility is highly persistent, it returns to its long-term
average only about 18 months after the innovation. The lag-adjustment of the conditional
mean to changes in the volatility is also more pronounced for the orthogonalized volatility
innovation because by construction the mean does not react contemporaneously to this
innovation. The response of the mean to the orthogonalized volatility innovation is hump-
shaped. The mean does not respond contemporaneously but rises immediately after the
innovation and peaks six months later at a level of 0.51 percent above its long-term average.
The mean then mean-reverts to its long-term average over the following 30 months. Notice
that even after the volatility fully mean-reverts, the mean is still relatively high with a normal
level of risk. This results in an above-average Sharpe ratio from 12 through 36 months after
the orthogonalized volatility innovation.
    An intuitive way to illustrate the role of the lag-adjustments in the dynamics of the
conditional mean and volatility is to compare the impulse responses of the restricted VAR
with a21 = a21 = 0 (dashed lines) to those of the unrestricted VAR (solid lines). Consider ﬁrst
the responses of the restricted VAR to a one-standard-deviation mean innovation. Although
the initial eﬀect of the innovation is virtually the same as in the unrestricted VAR, the mean
fully mean-reverts within one year and, more importantly, does not overshoot its long-term
average. The reason for this diﬀerence in mean responses is that in the restricted VAR
the decrease in volatility (from the mean innovation) does not feed back to the mean in
future periods. This lack of feedback is even more transparent for a one-standard-deviation
orthogonalized volatility innovation, where in the restricted VAR the mean never responds
to the innovation. It is therefore clear from Figure 4 that the lag-adjustments of the mean
to changes in volatility and, to a lesser extent, of the volatility to changes in the mean, play
an important role in the dynamics of the conditional moments.




                                               27
4.5    A Closer Look at the Contemporaneous Correlation
There is a surprising amount of disagreement about even the sign of the contemporaneous
correlation between the conditional mean and volatility of stock returns. Our results
contribute to this empirical debate by documenting a strong negative correlation between
the innovations to the conditional mean and volatility, which in turn implies negative and
substantial volatility-in-mean and mean-in-volatility eﬀects. However, on the face of it, our
analysis is subject to the caveat that we model the log moments, while most of the literature
relates the mean and volatility directly (without logs).
    To establish a tighter link to the literature, notice that the log moments ln µt and ln σt are
bivariate normally distributed. The moments µt and σt are therefore bivariate log-normally
distributed. It follows from the bivariate log-normal distribution that:
                                                             
                                             exp   ρ b11 b22 − 1
                             
                 Corr µt , σt µt−1 , σt−1 =                                  ρ             (39)
                                             exp{b11 } − 1 exp{b22 } − 1

for suﬃciently small b11 and b22 . In words, we can legitimately approximate the correlation
between the conditional mean and volatility by the correlation between the corresponding
log moments. Given the parameter estimates in Table 3, the approximation error is only
0.012 (−0.557 with logs versus −0.545 without logs). We conclude that despite the log
transformation our empirical results can be interpreted readily in the context of the literature
on the contemporaneous correlation between the conditional mean and volatility.
    However, not only can our results be interpreted in the context of this literature, but they
actually shed light on why there is such disagreement about the sign of the contemporaneous
correlation. The key issue is the distinction between the conditional (on ln µt−1 and ln σt−1 )
and unconditional correlation between the moments. The conditional correlation is the
same as the correlation between the innovations to the moments and is equal to ρ. The
unconditional correlation, in contrast, is computed from the unconditional covariance matrix
in equation (4). It is clear from this equation that, depending on A, the conditional and
unconditional correlations can be quite diﬀerent.
    Figure 5 illustrates this point by plotting the unconditional cross-autocorrelations (as
opposed to the conditional cross-autocorrelations implicit in the impulse response functions)
of the mean and volatility implied by the parameter estimates in Table 3, where the “oﬀset”
represents the number of months the volatility is lagged (negative oﬀset) or led (positive
oﬀset) relative to the mean. Each of the unconditional cross-autocorrelations is computed
from the corresponding unconditional auto-covariance matrices of the VAR. For example,
the unconditional contemporaneous correlation, at an oﬀset of zero, is computed from the

                                               28
unconditional covariance matrix in equation (4).
    The unconditional cross-correlations between the mean and leads of the volatility of more
than 12 months are all negative, with a minimum of −0.09 at an oﬀset of 21 months. In
contrast, the correlations are positive for all lagged values of the volatility as well as for led
values up to an oﬀset of 12 months. The correlations decay with both increasingly negative
and positive oﬀsets, but the decay is asymmetric due to the diﬀerences between the oﬀ-
diagonal elements of A. The cross-correlations peak at an oﬀset of minus six months with
0.75, which means that unconditionally the volatility leads the mean by six months. It is
interesting to note that the average duration of a recession in our sample is approximately
nine months. The six-month lead of the volatility therefore seems to relate to the business
cycle pattern in the conditional moments that we documented in Section 4.3. The increase
in volatility at the beginning of the recession is associated with an (almost certain) increase
in the mean approximately six months later, toward the end of the recession.
    The most important result for understanding the apparent disagreement about the
sign of the contemporaneous correlation is that, although the conditional contemporaneous
correlation is large and negative (−0.557), the unconditional contemporaneous correlation
(at an oﬀset of zero) is large and positive (0.312). This positive unconditional correlation
arises because of the large and positive Granger causality term a12 , which implies a large and
positive lag-volatility-in-mean eﬀect, and because of the high persistence of the volatility.
For example, suppose the volatility increases from a normal 15 percent to 25 percent (as the
economy enters a recession). Over the following few months the mean increases gradually,
reaching its highest level about six months after the increase in volatility. Since the volatility
is highly persistent, it is still relatively high (23 percent, for example) even six months after
the initial increase. Therefore, it appears unconditionally that whenever the mean is high
the volatility is also high, suggesting a positive correlation between the moments.
   This ﬁnding implies that the sign and magnitude of the contemporaneous correlation
between the conditional mean and volatility depends crucially on whether we measure
the conditional or unconditional correlation. It is not surprising then that the results
about the contemporaneous correlation in the literature depend on the statistical model
and predictors (Harvey, 2001; Koopman and Uspensky, 1999), the return horizon (Harrison
and Zhang, 1999), and, most importantly, whether we measure the correlation in levels or
ﬁrst-diﬀerences (French, Schwert, and Stambaugh, 1987; Whitelaw, 1994).




                                               29
4.6     Exogenous Predictors
On one hand, the advantage of our latent VAR approach is that it allows us to study the
dynamics of the conditional mean and volatility without relying on exogenous predictors. On
the other hand, by ignoring the evidence of a correlation between the conditional moments
and exogenous predictors we are potentially discarding some useful information. Discarding
information is always undesirable, but it is particularly so in this application because, judging
by the vast disagreement in the literature, precisely measuring the relationship between the
conditional mean and volatility is diﬃcult.
   As a compromise and robustness check, we therefore estimate an extended version of the
model in which each moment can also depend on three variables known to be correlated with
expected returns and volatility: the short rate, term premium, and default premium (see
footnote 14 for references).21 In particular, we assume that these three variables are truly
exogenous and consider the following model speciﬁcation:22

                                                                                 
                yt = µ̄emt−1 + σ̄eυt−1 εt = µ̄eZ1 st−1 + σ̄eZ2 st−1 εt with εt ∼ N 0, 1                   (40)
and
                                                                  
                         st = Cxt−1 + Ast−1 + ηt with ηt ∼ MVN 0, Σ ,                                     (41)

where xt denotes the demeaned predictors observed at date t.
    The extended transition equation (41) can be interpreted directly in the context of the
predictability (of both the mean and volatility) literature. With A = 0, the ﬁrst equation
of the extended VAR resembles a predictive regression (except for the log) and the second
equation is an EGARCH model with only exogenous predictors. Without this restriction,
both the exogenous predictors xt and the lagged moments st−1 forecast future realizations
of the moments st . Furthermore, since the predictors are demeaned, the coeﬃcient matrix
C shows how deviations of the predictive variables from their long-term averages predict
deviations of the conditional moments from their long-term averages.
   Table 4 reports the estimates of the extended model and also replicates for comparison
the results for model C in Table 3. The estimates of A and Σ are quite similar across the
  21
     Two common volatility predictors, namely squared returns (French, Schwert, and Stambaugh, 1987;
Schwert, 1989; Schwert and Seguin, 1991; Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Ebens, 2001) and option-
implied volatilities (Christensen and Prabhala, 1998), are not included in this list. Squared returns are
already implicitly incorporated in our estimation through the approximating model (30) and the availability
of option-implied volatilities is too limited to study business cycle patterns in the conditional moments
(covering only one business cycle).
  22
     We also estimate this model with ﬁrst-diﬀerences ∆xt in place of the levels xt in the transition equation.
The results are qualitatively similar and are available on request.


                                                      30
two models. When we add exogenous predictors, the own-lag coeﬃcients a11 and a22 both
increase. The coeﬃcients a12 on the volatility in the mean equation and a21 on the mean in
the volatility equation both decrease in magnitude. The variance of the mean and volatility
decrease, which means that the exogenous predictors help explain some of the variation in
the moments that was previously left unexplained. Finally, the contemporaneous correlation
between the innovations to the mean and volatility decreases in magnitude from −0.557
to −0.451. Together, these diﬀerences translate into slightly smaller lag-volatility-in-mean
and lag-mean-in-volatility eﬀects (0.188 versus 0.252 and 1.044 versus 1.471, respectively).
However, both eﬀects remain signiﬁcant at the one-percent level.
    In the mean equation of the extended VAR, the coeﬃcients on the term premium and
default premium (c12 and c13 ) are positive and the coeﬃcient on the short rate (c11 ) is
negative. In the volatility equation, the coeﬃcients on all three predictors (c21 , c22 , and c23 )
are positive. The signs of the coeﬃcients are consistent with the results of predictive return
and squared return regressions. All estimates are statistically signiﬁcant at the ﬁve-percent
level and in most cases even at the one-percent level.23
    Despite the fact that all of the elements of C are statistically signiﬁcant, the overall ﬁt of
the model does not improve substantially when we add the exogenous predictors. An LR test
of the hypothesis C = 0 fails to reject with a p-value of 0.152. Likewise, a Hausman (1978)
test of the hypothesis that the matrix A is the same across the two models fails to reject at
conventional signiﬁcance levels. This failure to reject suggests that the exogenous predictors
do not signiﬁcantly alter the dynamics of the conditional moments.
   The plots on the right-hand side of Figure 3 present estimates of the annualized mean
(ﬁrst row), volatility (second row), and Sharpe ratio (third row), extracted from the extended
VAR with exogenous predictors. The time-variation of the three moments, especially of the
volatility and Sharpe ratio, are remarkably similar across the models with and without
exogenous predictors (correlations of 0.73 for the mean, 0.97 for the volatility, and 0.91 for
the Sharpe ratio). Speciﬁcally, the business cycle pattern in the variation of the conditional
moments is qualitatively unaltered by the exogenous predictors. If anything, the extended
model further emphasizes the counter-cyclical variation of the Sharpe ratio. This conﬁrms
the statistical evidence above and attests to the robustness of our empirical results.
  23
    To make sense of these large t-statistics, it is important to recognize that the results are not comparable to
predictive return or squared return regressions. Instead, they correspond to regressions with the conditional
moments as dependent variables. As we document above, the conditional moments are highly correlated
with the predictors (multiple R2 of 0.32 for the mean and 0.13 for the volatility).




                                                       31
5    Conclusion
We model the conditional mean and volatility of stock returns as a latent VAR to explore
both the contemporaneous and intertemporal relationship between the two moments, as well
as time-variation of the implied Sharpe ratio, in a ﬂexible statistical framework and without
relying on exogenous predictors. The ﬁrst equation of the VAR describes the dynamics of the
conditional mean and captures the temporary component in the permanent and temporary
components model. The second equation describes the dynamics of the conditional volatility
and nests the standard SV model. Finally, the implied Sharpe ratio is time-varying in a way
that is consistent with a variety of equilibrium asset pricing models.
    On the contemporaneous relationship between the conditional mean and volatility,
we estimate a strong negative correlation between the innovations to the two moments,
which implies negative and substantial volatility-in-mean and mean-in-volatility eﬀects.
On the intertemporal relationship, the reduced-form lag-volatility-in-mean and lag-mean-
in-volatility eﬀects are both positive and signiﬁcant. Together, the contemporaneous and
intertemporal relationships generate pronounced counter-cyclical variation of the Sharpe
ratio. Every recorded business cycle in the sample is associated with an almost monotonic
rise in the Sharpe ratio from the peak to the trough of the cycle. We argue that this counter-
cyclical variation of the Sharpe ratio is consistent with the intuition of habit formation.
    We document a systematic pattern in the way the mean and volatility change over the
business cycle. Whenever the economy comes oﬀ the peak of a business cycle, the conditional
volatility rises immediately. The conditional mean, however, increases only gradually as the
economy moves from the peak to the trough of the cycle. Thus, the volatility appears to
lead the mean (by about six months) through the recession. The mean reaches a high at
the trough of the cycle, shortly after which the volatility drops again to a normal level. As
a result, the increase in the mean is associated with a subsequent drop in the volatility.
   Despite the large and negative contemporaneous correlation between the innovations
to the conditional mean and volatility, which measures the conditional (on the lagged
mean and volatility) correlation between the moments, the unconditional contemporaneous
correlation between the mean and volatility is large and positive due to the strong lag-
volatility-in-mean eﬀect. Unconditionally, times of high expected returns are therefore
associated with high volatility. We argue that this diﬀerence between the conditional and
unconditional correlations may explain why there is such disagreement about the sign of the
contemporaneous correlation between the two moments.




                                             32
References
Abel, A.B., 1988, Stock prices under time-varying dividend risk: An exact solution in an
      inﬁnite-horizon general equilibrium model, Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 375–
      393.

Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y., and M.W. Brandt, 2001, Variable selection for portfolio choice, Journal of
       Finance 56, 1297–1351.

Alizadeh, S., M.W. Brandt, and F.X. Diebold, 2002, Range-based estimation of stochastic
      volatility models, Journal of Finance57, 1047–1091.

Andersen, T.G., and B.E. Sorensen, 1994, Estimation of a stochastic volatility model: A
     Monte Carlo study, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 328–352.

Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, F.X. Diebold, and H. Ebens, 2001, The distribution of stock
     return volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 43–76.

Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, 2001, Stock return predictability: Is it there?, Working Paper,
     Columbia University.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron, 2001, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
     puzzles, Working Paper, Duke University.

Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, O.E., and N. Shephard, 1999, Non-Gaussian OU based models and some
     of the uses in ﬁnancial economics, Working Paper, Nuﬃeld College.

Bekaert, G., and S.R. Grenadier, 2001, Stock and bond pricing in an aﬃne economy, Working
     Paper, Columbia University.

Bekaert, G., and C.R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying world market integration, Journal of
     Finance 50, 403-444.

Bekaert, G., and G. Wu, 2000, Asymmetric volatility and risk in equity markets, Review of
     Financial Studies 13, 1–42.

Bollerslev, T., R.Y. Chou, and K.F. Kroner, 1992, ARCH modeling in ﬁnance: A selective
      review of the theory and empirical evidence, Journal of Econometrics 52, 5–59.

Bossaerts, P., and P. Hillion, 1999, Implementing statistical criteria to select return
     forecasting models: What do we learn?, Review of Financial Studies 12, 405–428.

Boudoukh, J., and M. Richardson, 1993, The statistics of long-horizon regressions,
    Mathematical Finance 4, 103–120.

Brandt, M.W., 1999, Estimating portfolio and consumption choice: A conditional Euler
     equations approach, Journal of Finance 54, 1609–1646.

Brandt, M.W., and K.Q. Wang, 1999, Time-varying risk aversion and unexpected inﬂation,
     Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

                                              33
Breen, W., L.R. Glosten, and R. Jagannathan, 1989, Economic signiﬁcance of predictable
     variations in stock index returns, Journal of Finance 44, 1177–1189.

Campbell, J.Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics
    18, 373–399.

Campbell, J.Y., and J.H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
    explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
    205–251.

Campbell, J.Y., and L. Hentschel, 1992, No news is good news: An asymmetric model of
    changing volatility in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281–318.

Chernov, M., E. Ghysels, A.R. Gallant, and G.E. Tauchen, 2002, Alternative models for
     stock price dynamics, Working Paper, Columbia University.

Christensen, B.J., and N.R. Prabhala, 1998, The relation between implied and realized
      volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 50, 125–150.

Christie, A.A., 1982, The stochastic behavior of common stock variances: Value, leverage,
      and interest rate eﬀects, Journal of Financial Economics 10, 407–432.

Constantinides, G.M., 1990, Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle,
     Journal of Political Economy 98, 519–543.

Danielsson, J., 1994, Stochastic volatility in asset prices: Estimation with simulated
     maximum likelihood, Journal of Econometrics 64, 375–400.

De Santis, G., and B. Gerard, 1997, International asset pricing and portfolio diversiﬁcation
     with time-varying risk, Journal of Finance 52, 1881–1912.

De Santis, G., and B. Gerard, 1998, How big is the premium for currency risk?, Journal of
     Financial Economics 49, 375–412.

De Jong, P., and N. Shephard, 1995, The simulation smoother for time series models,
     Biometrika 82, 339–350.

Duﬃe, D., and K.J. Singleton, 1993, Simulated moments estimation of Markov models of
    asset prices, Econometrica 61, 929–952.

Durbin, J., and S.J. Koopman, 1997, Monte Carlo maximum likelihood estimation for non-
     Gaussian state space models, Biometrika 84, 669–684.

Engle, R.F., and G.G.J. Lee, 1999, A permanent and transitory model of stock return
     volatility, in R.F. Engle and H. White, eds., Cointegration, Causality, and Forecasting:
     A Festschrift in Honor of Clive W.J. Granger, 475–497, Oxford University Press:
     Oxford, UK.

Fama, E., and K.R. French, 1988, Permanent and temporary components of stock prices,
     Journal of Political Economy 96, 246–273.

                                             34
Fama, E., and K.R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and
     bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.

Fama, E., and K.R. French, 1996, The CAPM is wanted, dead or alive, Journal of Finance
     51, 1947–1958.

Ferson, W.E., S. Sarkissian, and T. Simin, 2000, Spurious regressions in ﬁnancial economics,
     Working Paper, University of Washington.

French, K.R., G.W. Schwert, and R.F. Stambaugh, 1987, Expected stock returns and
     volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3–30.

Gallant, A.R., and G.E. Tauchen, 1989, Seminonparametric estimation of conditionally
     constrained heterogeneous processes: Asset pricing applications, Econometrica 57,
     1091–1120.

Gallant, A.R., C.T. Hsu, and G.E. Tauchen, 1999, Using daily range data to calibrate
     volatility diﬀusions and extract the forward integrated variance, Review of Economics
     and Statistics 81, 617–631.

Gennotte, G., and T.A. Marsh, 1993, Variations in economic uncertainty and risk premiums
    on capital assets, European Economic Review 37, 1021–1041.

Geweke, J., 1989, Bayesian inference in econometric models using Monte Carlo integration,
    Econometrica 57, 1317–1339.

Ghysels, E., A. Harvey, and E. Renault, 1996, Stochastic Volatility, in G.S. Maddala and
     C.R. Rao, eds., Statistical Methods in Finance, Handbook of Statistics, Volume 14,
     North-Holland: Amsterdam.

Glosten, L.R., R. Jagannathan, and D. Runkle, 1993, On the relation between the expected
     value and the volatility of the nominal excess returns on stocks, Journal of Finance
     48, 1779–1802.

Goyal, A., and I. Welch, 2002, Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios, Working
     Paper, UCLA.

Harrison, P., and H. Zhang, 1999, An investigation of the risk and return relation at long
      horizon, Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 399–408.

Harvey, A.C., E. Ruiz, and N. Shephard, 1994, Multivariate stochastic variance models,
     Review of Economic Studies 61, 247–264.

Harvey, A.C., and N. Shephard, 1996, Estimation of an asymmetric stochastic volatility
     model for asset returns, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 429–434.

Harvey, C.R., 2001, The speciﬁcation of conditional expectations, Journal of Empirical
     Finance 8, 573–638.

Hausman, J.A., 1978, Speciﬁcation tests in econometrics, Econometrica 46, 1251–1272.

                                            35
Jacquier, E., N.G. Polson, and P.E. Rossi, 1994, Bayesian analysis of stochastic volatility
     models, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 12, 371–417.

Johannes, M., N. Polson, and J. Stroud, Sequential optimal portfolio performance: market
     and volatility timing, Working Paper, Columbia University.

Kandel, S., and R.F. Stambaugh, 1991, Asset returns and intertemporal preferences, Journal
    of Monetary Economics 27, 37–91.

Keim, D.B., and R.F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets,
     Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357–390.

Kim, S., N. Shephard, and S. Chib, 1998, Stochastic volatility: Likelihood inference and
     comparison with ARCH models, Review of Economic Studies 65, 361–393.

Koopman, S.J., and E.H. Uspensky, 1999, The stochastic volatility in mean model:
    Empirical evidence from international stock markets, Working Paper, Free University
    of Amsterdam.

Lamoureux, C.G., and G. Zhou, 1996, Temporary components of stock returns: What do
    the data tell us?, Review of Financial Studies 9, 1033–1059.

LeRoy, S.F., and R.D. Porter, 1981, The present-value relation: Tests based on implied
     variance bounds, Econometrica 49, 555–574.

Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson, 2001, Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-return
     tradeoﬀ, Working Paper, NYU.

Nelson, D.B., 1991, Conditional hetereoskedasticity in asset returns: A new approach,
     Econometrica 59, 347–370.

Sandmann, G., and S.J. Koopman, 1998, Estimation of stochastic volatility models via Monte
    Carlo maximum likelihood, Journal of Econometrics 87, 271–301.

Schwert, G.W., 1989, Why does stock market volatility change over time?, Journal of Finance
     44, 1115–1153.

Schwert, G.W., and P.J. Seguin 1991, Heteroskedasticity in stock returns, Journal of Finance
     45, 1129–1155.

Shephard, N., and M.K. Pitt, 1997, Likelihood analysis of non-Gaussian measurement time
     series, Biometrika 84, 653–667.

Shephard, N., 2000, Comment on “Time series analysis of non-Gaussian observations based
     on state space models from both classical and Bayesian perspective,” Journal of the
     Royal Statistical Society 62, 29–30.

Stambaugh, R.F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375–421.



                                            36
Valkanov, R., 2002, Long-horizon regressions: Theoretical results and applications, Working
     Paper, UCLA.

Whitelaw, F.R., 1994, Time variation and covariations in the expectation and volatility of
     stock market returns, Journal of Finance 49, 515–541.

Whitelaw, F.R., 2000, Stock market risk and return: An equilibrium approach, Review of
     Financial Studies 13, 521–547.

Wiggins, J.B., 1987, Option values under stochastic volatility: Theory and empirical
     estimates, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 351–372.




                                            37
A        Choice of Approximating Model
The measurement equation (20) is non-linear in both mt−1 and υt−1 . We consider separate
ﬁrst-order expansions of this equation around E[mt−1 ] = E[vt−1 ] = 0:

                                            yt = µ̄ + σ̄eυt−1 εt                                    (A.1)
and
                                            yt = µ̄emt−1 + σ̄εt ,                                   (A.2)

respectively. Both of these equations are still non-linear in the state variables, but each
is only non-linear in one of the variables. Following convention in the stochastic volatility
literature, we log-linearize equation (A.1):

                               y˜t ≡ ln (yt − µ̄)2 = 2 ln σ̄ + 2vt−1 + ln ε2t ,                     (A.3)

where ln ε2t is log-χ2 distributed. We further approximate equation (A.2) and the log-linear
equation (A.3) with the following linear equations:
                                                                    
                         yt = mt−1 + w1t with w1t ∼ N c1t−1 , R1t−1                   (A.4)
                                                                    
                         y˜t = 2vt−1 + w2t with w2t ∼ N c2t−1 , R2t−1 ,               (A.5)

where w1t and w2t are correlated. Finally, we write these equations in vector form:
                                 
                     yt − c1t−1                                            
             Yt ≡                  = H  st−1 + wt with wt ∼ MVN 0, Rt−1 ,                          (A.6)
                     y˜t − c2t−1

where                                                                   √           
                              1 0                           √R 1t    ρ w   R 1t R 2t
                     H=                 and Rt =                                       .            (A.7)
                              0 2                         ρw R1t R2t      R2t

    In the special case Corr[εt , ηt ] = 0, we can use equation (A.6) as the measurement equation
and equation (21) as the transition equation of the linearized model. In general, the log-
linearization of equation (A.1) looses all information about the correlation between εt and
the second element on ηt . However, Harvey and Shephard (1996) show in the context of a
more standard stochastic volatility model that this information about the correlation can
be recovered from the signs of the return innovations. The following is a straightforward
application of Harvey and Shephard’s approach to our latent VAR model.
    Deﬁne sgnt = sign[yt −µ̄], such that sgnt is one (minus one) if yt −µ̄ is positive (negative).
Following the steps in Harvey and Shephard (1996), the transition equation conditional on
the sign of the returns is:24

                                        st = Ksgnt + Ast−1 + ηt∗                                    (A.8)
 24
      We condition the transition equation of the approximating and true model to maintain g(θ|ψ) = p(θ|ψ).




                                                     38
with
                                                                
                                    wt                Rt−1 Gt−1
                                          sgnt ∼ MVN 0,              ,                              (A.9)
                                    ηt∗                Gt−1  Σ̃

where Rt is the same as in equation (A.7) and:
                         √                      √                 √          
       k1              ρµ √b11                  ρµ √b11           ρσ √b22
 K=          = 0.7979            , Gt =                                          ,
       k2              ρσ b22              1.1061ρµ b11 sgnt 1.1061ρσ b22 sgnt
                                                                                                   (A.10)
                                                                                 
                                      b11 − k1          ρ (b11 − k1 )(b22 − k2 )
                       Σ̃ =                                                         .
                                ρ (b11 − k1 )(b22 − k2 )        b22 − k2

Note that if ρµ = ρσ = 0, we get K = 0, Σ̃ = Σ, and Gt = 0 for all t.


B         Calibrating the Approxmiating Model
Let θ̄t = Eg [θt ] be the smoothed value of θt for the approximating model obtained through
the Kalman ﬁlter. Under the assumptions of De Jong and Shephard’s (1995) simulation
smoother, simulated values of θt are normally distributed around their mean θ̄t . This suggests
that the parameters ct and Rt of the approximating model should be chosen such that the
densities p(y|θ, ψ) and g(y|θ, ψ) are as close as possible in the neighborhood of θ̄t .
       To operationalize this idea, we deﬁne:

                              l (θ, ψ) ≡ ln p (y | θ, ψ) − ln g (y | θ, ψ)
                                          
                                          T
                                                                                                    (B.1)
                                      =         ln p (yt | st−1 , ψ) − ln g (yt | st−1 , ψ) .
                                          t=1

and choose ct and Rt such that the ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives of l(θ, ψ) with respect
to st are set to zero at θt = θ̄t . More speciﬁcally, we set ρw = 0 and solve for c1t and R1t
from the derivatives of equations (A.2) and (A.4) and for c2t and R2t from the derivatives of
equations (A.3) and (A.5).25
       From equations (A.2) and (A.4) we have:

         (m)                             1                                          
        pt     ≡ ln p (yt | st−1 , ψ) = −   ln 2π + 2 ln σ̄ + σ̄ −2 (yt − µ̄emt−1 )2
                                         2                                                          (B.2)
         (m)                             1                                                  
        gt     ≡ ln g (yt | st−1 , ψ) = − ln 2π + ln R1t−1 + R1t−1  −1
                                                                         (yt − mt−1 − ct−1 )2 .
                                         2
  25
    The coeﬃcient ρw captures the correlation between a normally-distributed and a log-χ2 -distributed
random variable. Our Monte Carlo experiments show that this correlation is very small (less than 0.05), and
we therefore set ρw = 0. However, we check that a non-zero correlation leads to very similar estimates.




                                                            39
The ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives of pt and gt with respect to mt−1 are:
                             . (m)
                            pt        = σ̄ −2 (yt − µ̄emt−1 ) µ̄emt−1                          (B.3)
                             . (m)       −1
                            gt        = R1t−1 (yt − mt−1 − c1t−1 )                             (B.4)
                             .. (m)
                            pt        = σ̄ −2 (yt − µ̄emt−1 ) µ̄emt−1 − σ̄ −2 (µ̄emt−1 )2      (B.5)
                             .. (m)       −1
                            gt        = −R1t−1 .                                               (B.6)
                                                       .. (m)        .. (m)
Equating the second-order derivatives, pt                       = gt      , yields:

                                                                       σ̄ 2
                                        R1t−1 = −                                     ,        (B.7)
                                                       (yt − 2µ̄emt−1 ) µ̄emt−1

where we take the absolute value of R1t if it is negative. Likewise, equating the ﬁrst-order
              . (m)    . (m)
derivatives, pt     = gt , and using equation (B.6), we get:

                                                                       (yt − µ̄emt−1 )
                                       c1t−1 = yt − mt−1 +                             .       (B.8)
                                                                      (yt − 2µ̄emt−1 )

      From equations (A.3) and (A.5) and using the log-χ2 density, we have:26
                                        . (v)
                                       pt       = exp {ỹ − 2 ln σ̄ − 2vt−1 } − 1              (B.9)
                                        . (v)       −1
                                       gt       = 2R2t−1 (y˜t − 2vt−1 − c2t−1 )               (B.10)
                                       .. (v)
                                       pt       = −2 exp {ỹ − 2 ln σ̄ − 2vt−1 }              (B.11)
                                       .. (v)        −1
                                       gt       = −4R2t−1 ,                                   (B.12)

and equating the ﬁrst- and second-order derivatives yields:
                                                     2
                           R2t−1 =                                                            (B.13)
                                        exp {ỹ − 2 ln σ̄ − 2vt−1 }
                                                          exp {ỹ − 2 ln σ̄ − 2vt−1 } − 1
                            c2t−1 = y˜t − 2vt−1 −                                         .   (B.14)
                                                            exp {ỹ − 2 ln σ̄ − 2vt−1 }




 26
                                                           √
      If z is log-χ2 distributed, its density is f (z) = 1/ 2π exp{(z − ez )/2}.


                                                                40
                                 Table 1 : Finite Sample Properties of Simulated Likelihood Estimator

     This table describes the sampling distribution of simulated likelihood estimates of the model:
                                                                                                            
                                           yt = µ̄emt−1 + σ̄eυt−1 εt = µ̄eZ1 st−1 + σ̄eZ2 st−1 εt with εt ∼ N 0, 1

     and                                                                                  
                                                         st = Ast−1 + ηt with ηt ∼ MVN 0, Σ ,
     where                                                                        √        
                                               a11 a12                   √b11     ρ b11 b22
                                         A=                  , Σ=                             , and Corr[εt , ηt ] = 0.
                                               a21 a22                  ρ b11 b22   b22
     The results are based on 500 independent samples of T = 636 returns simulated from the model with the parameters in the ﬁrst column.


                                             Standard            Excess                                       Percentiles
                                True Average Deviation Skewness Kurtosis Max                   95%      75%      50%      25%   5%     Min
41




                         a11    0.8589    0.8588   0.0626     -0.2422      -0.6821   0.9787   0.9514   0.9047 0.8633 0.8134 0.7465 0.7097
                         a21   -0.0529   -0.0643   0.0961      0.1959     -0.1858    0.1814   0.1123   0.0005 -0.0743 -0.1661 -0.2318 -0.2945
                         a12    0.1084    0.1089   0.0910     -0.0908     -0.3689    0.3197   0.2478   0.1581 0.1099 0.0735 -0.0430 -0.1087
                         a22    0.9226    0.9146   0.0423     -0.3584      0.1328    0.9902   0.9727   0.9352 0.9041 0.8771 0.8344 0.7833
                         b11   0.0076 0.0081       0.0041      0.0049     -0.5830    0.0208 0.0183 0.0131 0.0089 0.0071 0.0037 0.0021
                         b22   0.0553 0.0513       0.0061     -0.0707      0.0163    0.0709 0.0603 0.0554 0.0510 0.0476 0.0416 0.0379
                          ρ    -0.6336 -0.6357     0.0713     0.4844      -0.3324 0.3350 -0.5063 -0.5883 -0.6667 -0.7019 -0.7643 -0.7951
                                        Table 2 : Data

This table presents descriptive statistics of monthly returns on the value-weighted CRSP index in
excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate as well as of the short rate, term premium, and default
premium from January 1946 through December 1998. The short rate is the yield on a one-month
Treasury bill, the term premium is the yield spread of a ten-year Treasury bond and a one-year
Treasury bill, and the default premium is the yield spead of Moody’s Baa and Aaa rated bonds.


                                     Market       Short       Term          Default
                                     Index        Rate       Premium       Premium

             Mean                    0.0063      0.0470        0.0115        0.0090
             Std Dev                 0.0413      0.0304        0.0126        0.0042
             Max                     0.1495      0.1805        0.0431        0.0265
             Min                    -0.2455      0.0031       -0.0367        0.0027
             Median                  0.0095      0.0448        0.0115        0.0076
             Skewness               -0.6257      1.0177       -0.3442        1.5361
             Kurtosis                5.5870      4.4510        4.0337        5.3480
             Autocorrelation:
                1-month              0.0347      0.9572       0.9582         0.9755
                6-month             -0.0637      0.8819       0.7040         0.8435
               12-month              0.0398      0.8153       0.5410         0.7087
               24-month              0.0271      0.6663       0.2359         0.5263
             Correlation with:
               Market Index          1.0000      -0.1209       0.1293        0.0530
               Short Rate                         1.0000      -0.3344        0.6652
               Term Premium                                    1.0000        0.0726
               Default Premium                                               1.0000




                                               42
                                     Table 3 : Parameter Estimates

This table presents simulated maximum likelihood estimates of the model:
                                                                                  
                 yt = µ̄emt−1 + σ̄eυt−1 εt = µ̄eZ1 st−1 + σ̄eZ2 st−1 εt with εt ∼ N 0, 1

and                                                               
                                 st = Ast−1 + ηt with ηt ∼ MVN 0, Σ ,
where                                               √                                        
                   a11 a12                 √b11     ρ b11 b22                             ρµ
           A=                    , Σ=                           , and Corr[εt , ηt ] =             .
                   a21 a22                ρ b11 b22   b22                                 ρσ
The estimates are for monthly returns on the value-weighted CRSP index in excess of the one-month
Treasury bill rate from January 1946 through December 1998.


                             Model A               Model B              Model C                Model D
      Parameters         Estimate     t-Stat   Estimate    t-Stat   Estimate    t-Stat   Estimate      t-Stat

         a11               0.8592     17.41      0.8313     9.23      0.8658    11.21      0.8677      10.92
         a21              -0.0531     -1.92     -0.0211    -1.43     -0.0885    -1.96     -0.1292      -1.42
         a12               0.1081      0.92      0.1168     1.12      0.0861     1.01      0.0947       0.71
         a22               0.9237     15.23      0.9110    16.32      0.8973    15.32      0.9086      18.49
          b11            7.60×10−3     4.24    6.43×10−3    2.20    5.96×10−3     3.19   4.68×10−3       2.76
          b22              0.0554     13.02      0.0561    12.22      0.0614      5.55     0.0591        5.22
          ρ               -0.6345     -4.32      -0.4577   -3.21      -0.5584   -5.80     -0.5621       -5.96
          ρµ                 —           —      -0.0866    -0.49         —         —      -0.0517       -0.77
          ρσ                 —           —          —         —      -0.2541    -4.04     -0.2430       -3.67
         µ̄              6.50×10−3     3.31    6.48×10−3     5.94   6.24×10−3     5.11   6.24×10−3       4.87
         σ̄                0.0377     10.32      0.0385      5.60     0.0382      8.79     0.0382        9.01
         
   β1 = ρ b11 /b22        -0.2350     -6.23     -0.1550    -4.11     -0.1740    -5.98     -0.1582       -3.99
         
   β2 = ρ b22 /b11        -1.7131     -8.34     -1.3519    -6.34     -1.7923    -9.32     -1.9975      -10.92
      a12 − β1 a22        0.3252        3.82    0.2580       3.11    0.2422       3.47    0.2384         3.82
      a21 − β2 a11        1.4188        5.21    1.1028       4.35    1.4623       4.11    1.6040         2.42
 a11 + a12 − a21 − a22    0.0967        3.33    0.0684       2.54    0.1431       2.31    0.1830         2.92
         ln L             1150.98               1151.11              1152.94              1153.06




                                                      43
               Table 4 : Parameter Estimates with Exogenous Predictors

This table presents simulated maximum likelihood estimates of the model:
                                                                                
               yt = µ̄emt−1 + σ̄eυt−1 εt = µ̄eZ1 st−1 + σ̄eZ2 st−1 εt with εt ∼ N 0, 1

and                                                                 
                             st = Cxt + Ast−1 + ηt with ηt ∼ MVN 0, Σ ,
where
                                                                   √                                       
        c11 c12 c13               a11 a12                  √b11     ρ b11 b22                             0
C=                         , A=                  , Σ=                           , and Corr[εt , ηt ] =            .
        c21 c22 c23               a21 a22                 ρ b11 b22   b22                                ρσ

The vector of conditioning variables xt contains the demeaned short rate, term premium, and
default premium. The estimates are for monthly returns on the value-weighted CRSP index in
excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate from January 1946 through December 1998. The results
for the base model without conditioning variables are reproduced from Table 3.



                                         Model C                          Extended Model C
              Parameters          Estimate          t-Stat               Estimate        t-Stat

                 a11                0.8638              15.22              0.8843        11.69
                 a21               -0.0875              -1.82             -0.0746        -2.91
                 a12                0.0867               1.00              0.0312         1.40
                 a22                0.8913              35.57              0.8955        32.47
                 b11              5.96×10−3              3.21           5.62×10−3         2.23
                 b22                0.0614               5.54             0.0441          4.47
                  ρ                -0.5572              -5.80             -0.4512         -2.64
                  ρσ               -0.2519              -3.11             -0.2817         -4.22
                  µ̄              6.24×10−3              5.35           6.29×10−3         4.48
                  σ̄                0.0382               8.76             0.0380          9.87
                 c11                 —                    —               -2.6187         -5.22
                 c21                 —                    —                0.6550          3.18
                 c12                 —                    —                0.3613          2.36
                 c22                 —                    —                1.4233          3.04
                 c13                 —                    —                2.9969          5.43
                 c23                 —                    —                1.6929          5.16
                 ln L              1152.89                                1157.62




                                                         44
                               Figure 1 : Recursive Variance of the Density Ratio

This ﬁgure plots the variance of the density ratio w(θ, ψ) = p(y|θ, ψ)/g(y|θ, ψ) for the model with
ρµ = ρσ = 0, using 500 through 75,000 successive simulated values of the latent states θi . In Panel
A, the parameters ψ are set to representative starting values of the SML estimator. In Panel B,
the ratios are evaluated at the SML estimates.



                                               Panel A: Initial Parameters
                     70.0


                     65.0
Recursive Variance




                     60.0


                     55.0


                     50.0
                            10,000    20,000    30,000       40,000       50,000   60,000   70,000
                                                  Number of Simulations

                                                Panel B: SML Estimates
                     0.28


                     0.26
Recursive Variance




                     0.24


                     0.22


                     0.20
                            10,000    20,000    30,000       40,000       50,000   60,000   70,000
                                                  Number of Simulations




                                                       45
                                                     Figure 2 : Returns and Predictors

This ﬁgure plots the monthly returns on the value-weighted CRSP index in excess of the one-month
Treasury bill rate as well as of the short rate, term premium, and default premium from January
1946 through December 1998. It also plots as dashed and dotted lines the NBER dates of the peak
and trough of every business cycle in the sample, respectively.

                     0.20                                                                            0.18

                     0.15
                                                                                                     0.15
                     0.10
                                                                                                     0.12
                     0.05




                                                                                    Short Rate
      Return




                     0.00                                                                            0.09

                    −0.05
                                                                                                     0.06
                    −0.10
                                                                                                     0.03
                    −0.15

                    −0.20                                                                            0.00
                            50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95                                 50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95
                                                 Year                                                                            Year


                    0.06                                                                         0.030

                    0.04                                                                         0.025
                                                                                   Default Premium
     Term Premium




                    0.02                                                                         0.020

                    0.00                                                                         0.015

                −0.02                                                                            0.010

                −0.04                                                                            0.005

                −0.06                                                                            0.000
                            50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95                                 50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95
                                                 Year                                                                            Year




                                                                              46
           Figure 3 : Estimates of the Conditional Mean, Volatility, and Sharpe Ratio

This ﬁgure plots the annualized full-information (or smoothed) estimates of the conditional mean
E[µt |y1 , . . . yT ], volatility E[σt |y1 , . . . yT ], and Sharpe ratio E[µt |y1 , . . . yT ]/E[σt |y1 , . . . yT ]. Panels A
and B correspond to Model C without conditioning variables and the extended model with the
short rate, term premium, and default premium as conditioning variables, respectively.

                                     Panel A: Model C                                                       Panel B: Extended Model C

                    0.12                                                                        0.12


                    0.10                                                                        0.10
      Expected Return




                                                                                  Expected Return
                    0.08                                                                        0.08


                    0.06                                                                        0.06


                    0.04                                                                        0.04


                    0.02                                                                        0.02
                           50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95                             50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95
                                               Year                                                                        Year


                    0.35                                                                        0.35

                    0.30                                                                        0.30

                    0.25                                                                        0.25
      Volatility




                                                                                  Volatility




                    0.20                                                                        0.20

                    0.15                                                                        0.15

                    0.10                                                                        0.10

                    0.05                                                                        0.05

                    0.00                                                                        0.00
                           50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95                             50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95
                                               Year                                                                        Year

                    1.75                                                                        1.75

                    1.50                                                                        1.50

                    1.25                                                                        1.25
      Sharpe Ratio




                                                                                  Sharpe Ratio




                    1.00                                                                        1.00

                    0.75                                                                        0.75

                    0.50                                                                        0.50

                    0.25                                                                        0.25

                    0.00                                                                        0.00
                           50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95                             50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95
                                               Year                                                                        Year




                                                                             47
                                                Figure 4 : Impulse Response Functions

This ﬁgure plots the contemporaneous and lagged responses of the conditional mean, volatility,
and Sharpe ratio to a one-standard deviation mean innovation (in Panel A) and a one-standard
deviation orthogonalized volatility innovation (in Panel B) for Model C. The solid and dashed lines
correspond to unrestricted and restricted (a21 = a12 = 0) estimates.

                           Panel A: Response to Mean Innovation                                    Panel B: Response to Orthogonal Volatility
                                                                                                                  Innovation
                          0.008                                                                   0.008



                          0.004                                                                   0.004
     Expected Return




                                                                             Expected Return
                          0.000                                                                   0.000



                   −0.004                                                                  −0.004



                   −0.008                                                                  −0.008
                         0         12      24            36   48   60                            0          12      24            36   48   60
                                                Months                                                                   Months

                           0.03                                                                    0.03

                           0.02                                                                    0.02

                           0.01                                                                    0.01
           Volatility




                                                                                   Volatility




                           0.00                                                                    0.00

                       −0.01                                                                   −0.01

                       −0.02                                                                   −0.02

                       −0.03                                                                   −0.03
                            0      12     24             36   48   60                               0       12      24            36   48   60
                                                Months                                                                   Months

                           0.20                                                                    0.05


                           0.15                                                                    0.00
           Sharpe Ratio




                                                                                   Sharpe Ratio




                           0.10                                                                −0.05


                           0.05                                                                −0.10


                           0.00                                                                −0.15


                       −0.05                                                                   −0.20
                            0      12     24             36   48   60                               0       12      24            36   48   60
                                                Months                                                                   Months




                                                                        48
                                           Figure 5 : Cross-Autocorrelations

This ﬁgure plots the cross-autocorrelations of the conditional mean and volatility, where the oﬀset denotes
the number of months the volatility is lagged (negative oﬀset) or led (positive oﬀset) relative to the mean.


                                           0.8
                                           0.7
                                           0.6
                                           0.5
                             Correlation
                                           0.4
                                           0.3
                                           0.2
                                           0.1
                                           0.0
                                       −0.1
                                       −0.2
                                         −30 −24 −18 −12 −6     0      6   12   18   24   30
                                                              Offset




                                                          49
