NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING DISCONTINUOUS ELIGIBILITY RULES TO IDENTIFY THE EFFECTS OF THE
FEDERAL MEDICAID EXPANSIONS ON LOW INCOME CHILDREN

David Card
Lara D. Shore-Sheppard

Working Paper 9058
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9058

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

We are grateful to Barrett Graf and Pablo Ibarraran for outstanding research assistance, and to Ken Chay and
David Lee for many helpful discussions. We have also received helpful comments from Janet Currie,
Jonathan Gruber, Arleen Leibowitz, Robert Moffitt, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Williams, the
Census Bureau, UCLA, and the NBER. This research was supported by the Center for Labor Economics at
UC Berkeley, by the Joint Center for Poverty Research/U.S. Census Bureau Research Development Grant
Program, and by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Grant No. R01 HD3936901A1. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2002 by David Card and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to Identify the Effects
of the Federal Medicaid Expansions on Low Income Children
David Card and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard
NBER Working Paper No. 9058
July 2002
JEL No. I18, I38

ABSTRACT
This paper exploits the discrete nature of the eligibility criteria for two major federal expansions
of Medicaid to measure the effects on Medicaid coverage, overall health insurance coverage, and the
probability of visiting a doctor. The “100 percent” expansion, effective in 1991, extended Medicaid
eligibility to children born after September 30, 1983 in families below the poverty line. We estimate that
this law led to about a 10 percentage point rise in Medicaid coverage for children born just after the cutoff
date, and a similar or slightly smaller rise in overall health insurance. It also increased the fraction of
children in the newly eligible group with a doctor visit in the previous year. The “133 percent” expansion,
effective in 1990, extended Medicaid to children under 6 in families with incomes below 133 percent of
the poverty line. This law had relatively small effects on Medicaid coverage for children near the
eligibility limits, and little or no effect on health insurance coverage.

David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Lara D. Shore-Sheppard
Department of Economics
Fernald House
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
lara.d.shore-sheppard@williams.edu

Concerns over the adequacy of health insurance coverage for low income children have
transformed Medicaid from a narrowly targeted program for welfare recipients and the medically
needy to a broad-based health insurance program for low-income families. Starting in the early
1980s a series of legislative changes allowed states to offer Medicaid coverage to children in
married-couple families with incomes below the maximum limits for welfare, and to younger
children in families with higher incomes. Two key laws at the close of the decade extended the
program even further. Effective in 1990, states were required to offer Medicaid coverage to
children under six in families with incomes up to 133 percent of the poverty line. A year later,
coverage was mandated for children born after September 30, 1983 in families with incomes
below the poverty line.1 Despite these expansions, health insurance coverage rates for children in
families just under the poverty line remain below those of children in richer or poorer families.
Figure 1, for example, shows the fraction of children with health insurance in different family
income groups in 1989, 1993, and 1999.2 Coverage rates in all three years exhibit a U-shaped
pattern, with the lowest rates for children of families with incomes from 75 to 100 percent of the
poverty line – a range that is just above the welfare threshold in most states. Although this group
experienced a modest rise in coverage between 1989 and 1993, the expansions only partially
closed the gap between the welfare system and private health insurance.
Previous studies have examined the impacts of the Medicaid expansions and evaluated
alternative explanations for the continuing coverage gap in Figure 1. Currie and Gruber (1996)
1

In addition, states were granted the option of offering even more extensive coverage.
See Section II for a more comprehensive discussion of the expansions.
2

These data are drawn from the March 1989, 1993, and 1999 Current Population Surveys
(CPS). The samples include individuals age 0-18 who are neither a family head nor a spouse of a
head. See the Data Appendix for more information.

2
estimated that the takeup rate for Medicaid among the newly-eligible population was relatively
low – on the order of 20 percent. Cutler and Gruber (1996) argued that although the expansions
increased the fraction of low-income children enrolled in Medicaid, they also led to reductions in
the fraction covered by private health insurance, compounding the effect of low takeup rates.
Subsequent research (Dubay and Kenney (1996), Shore-Sheppard (2000), Yazici and Kaestner
(2000), Blumberg et al (2000), Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2001)) has confirmed the modest
effect of the expansions on Medicaid coverage, while finding less consistent evidence of crowdout. A number of explanations – mainly focusing on the administrative burden of establishing
and maintaining Medicaid coverage – have been offered for the apparently low takeup rate of
coverage among groups made eligible by the recent expansions.
In this paper we re-examine the effects of the two major federal Medicaid expansions of
the early 1990s – the “133 percent” expansion covering children under the age of six, and the
“100 percent” expansion covering children born after September 30, 1983. Results from an
analysis of these two programs – one targeted at younger, somewhat more advantaged children,
and the other aimed at older, poorer children – should provide useful insights about the likely
success of the recent State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), which expanded
eligibility even further up the income distribution. A key feature of the early 1990s expansions is
the discontinuity in eligibility for children of different ages.3 Under the 133 percent provision,
five year olds in families with incomes from 100 to 133 percent of the poverty line are eligible
for Medicaid, whereas six year olds are not. Under the 100 percent provision, a child born in

3

See Angrist and Krueger (1999) for a discussion of program evaluation methods that
focus on “discontinuous” program eligibility rules, and a survey of recent applications.

3
October 1983 whose family’s income is below the poverty line is eligible for Medicaid, whereas
a child born one month earlier is not. These rules allow us to construct simple comparisons
between otherwise similar groups of eligible and ineligible children and construct new estimates
of the effects of these expansions.
Our results, based on data from the Surveys of Income and Program Participation, the
March Current Population Surveys, and the Health Interview Surveys, point to two main
conclusions. First, the 100 percent expansion covering children born after September 30, 1983
led to about a 10 percentage point increase in Medicaid coverage among children in families just
under the poverty line who were made eligible by the law, implying a takeup rate only one-half
as large as the estimate of Currie and Gruber (1996). We find a similar or only slightly smaller
effect on health insurance coverage, and evidence that the rise in coverage led to an increase in
the fraction of children with at least one doctor visit in the previous year. Second, the 133
percent expansion had much smaller effects on Medicaid coverage, and little or no effect on
health insurance coverage or the probability of visiting a doctor – at least for children near the
eligibility threshold of the expansion. We also consider two explanations for the difference in
takeup between the expansions: (1) that the richer families eligible for coverage under the 133
percent expansion had a relatively low probability of remaining Medicaid-eligible, and thus were
less likely to enroll; and (2) that families eligible under the 133 percent expansion had less
previous experience with means-tested benefit programs, and therefore had less knowledge about
such programs or attached greater stigma to participating in them. We find only weak evidence
for the first explanation, but somewhat stronger evidence for the second.

4

II. The Medicaid Expansions
Medicaid eligibility for non-disabled children was originally limited to families receiving
cash assistance under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. The first
loosening of the links between AFDC and Medicaid occurred in 1984 with implementation of the
“Ribicoff program” which allowed states to offer Medicaid to children in families that satisfied
the income limits of the AFDC program, but not the family structure rules (i.e., children in twoparent families). Further decoupling occurred with passage of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Acts (OBRA) of 1986 and 1987. As described in Appendix Table 1, these laws
permitted states to raise the income limits for Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women, infants,
and young children over and above the limits for AFDC. OBRA 1987 also required the states to
cover all children born after September 30, 1983 who lived in families with incomes below the
AFDC income threshold, regardless of family structure.
The Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act (MCCA, effective July 1989) and Family
Support Act (FSA, effective October 1990), both passed in 1988, required states to extend
Medicaid eligibility even further. The MCCA mandated eligibility for pregnant women and
infants in families with incomes up to 75 percent of the poverty line, and permitted coverage of
children up to age 8 in these families. The FSA required states to offer coverage to children in
two-parent families in which the principal earner was unemployed.
Two further expansions of the Medicaid program – and the focus of the analysis in this
paper – were included in OBRA 1989 and OBRA 1990. Effective April 1990, OBRA 1989
required states to offer Medicaid coverage to pregnant women and children up to age 6 with

5
family incomes below 133 percent of the federal poverty level (the “133 percent expansion”).
Effective July 1991, OBRA 1990 required states to cover children born after September 30, 1983
with family incomes below 100 percent of the federal poverty level (the “100 percent
expansion”). These children continue to be covered until they reach the age of 18.4 We show in
the next section that the laws raised the fraction of children eligible for Medicaid by about 6
percentage points – a substantial increase in the potential coverage of the program.5

III. Measuring Medicaid Eligibility and Coverage
Data Sources
We use three different surveys to measure the effects of the 1990 and 1991 expansions.
Our main evidence is drawn from the first waves of the 1990-1993 Surveys of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP). These data have the advantage that family income, composition,
and program participation information all pertain to the month just before the interview (i.e., the
fourth month of the panel), rather than to the previous calendar year, reducing the scope for recall
errors and minimizing the gaps between Medicaid eligibility rules and observed characteristics.6

4

Two other federal rule changes allowed the states to expand Medicaid eligibility. The
“Section 1902(r)(2) option” allowed states to adopt more liberal standards for calculating income
and resources for some categories of eligibility. The “Section 1115 waiver option” allowed
states to apply for a research and demonstration waiver that would allow higher income limits for
Medicaid.
5

Similarly, Currie and Gruber (1996, Table 1) report a 7 percentage point rise in eligibility
between March 1990 and March 1992.
6

For these and other reasons, health insurance coverage is thought to be better-measured
in the SIPP than the CPS, at least in the early 1990s. See Bennefield (1996) and Nelson and
Mills (2001).

6
A second feature of the SIPP (also shared by the Health Interview Survey) is that the public use
samples report month and year of birth. This information allows us to form precise comparison
groups of children on either side of the Medicaid eligibility thresholds.
The SIPP data also have some limitations. The samples are smaller than Current
Population Survey or Health Interview Survey samples. Moreover, SIPP files do not identify
state of residence for 9 smaller states (Maine, Vermont, Iowa, North Dakota, South Dakota,
Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming). Since we need this information to assign AFDC and
Medicaid eligibility, we exclude residents of these states from our SIPP analysis. Finally, SIPP
samples are not available for every calendar year. To confirm the SIPP findings and provide a
broader perspective, we use data from the 1990-1996 March Current Population Surveys (CPS)
and the 1992-1996 Health Interview Surveys (HIS). The HIS includes information on recent
doctor visits which we use as an indicator of health care access.7
From each of the three data sources we constructed samples of individuals age 18 or
younger who were not heading their own families. The age, race, and ethnicity distributions of
children in the three data sets are very similar (see Appendix Table 2 for details). The three data
sets also give similar estimates of the family income distributions among children in the early
1990s.8 The SIPP and CPS show roughly comparable Medicaid coverage rates, and similar

7

Currie and Gruber (1996) look at this measure as well as the probability of a doctor visit
in the past two weeks, the probability of hospitalization last year, and the probability of visiting a
doctor’s office, hospital emergency room or clinic, or other site.
8

See the Data Appendix for details on the calculation of family income in the three
surveys. The similarity of the family income distributions in the SIPP and CPS is rather
surprising given that the SIPP income data are for the previous month and the CPS data are for
the previous year. Appendix Figure 1 of Card and Shore-Sheppard (2001) plots the distributions
of family income relative to the family poverty standard in the two data sets.

7
patterns of coverage across the family income distribution. The HIS shows Medicaid coverage
rates comparable to those in the SIPP or CPS, but slightly lower overall health insurance
coverage rates for low-income children.

Age, Income, Medicaid Eligibility, and Medicaid Participation
Table 1 presents an overview of the age, income, and Medicaid eligibility characteristics
of our SIPP samples in 1990 through 1993. About one-third of the children in our sample are
under the age of 6, and between one-third and one-half were born after September 30, 1983,
depending on the survey year. These numbers suggest potentially large impacts of both the 133
percent expansion (for children under 6) and the 100 percent expansion (for those born after
September 30, 1983). In the early 1990s, however, there was a substantial overlap between the
groups. In 1992 – the first year affected by the 100 percent expansion – only 13 percent of the
children were born after September 30, 1983 and were at least 6 years old. This fraction rose to
19 percent in 1993, and continued to rise over the remainder of the 1990s.
Medicaid eligibility under OBRA 1989 and OBRA 1990 is based on family income
relative to the family poverty threshold. In 1990, the poverty rate of the children in our sample
(i.e. the fraction with an income-to-poverty ratio under 100 percent) was 21.2 percent.9 Another
7.6 percent of children were in families with incomes between 100 and 133 percent of the
poverty line. The fraction of children in poor families rose in the early 1990s, reflecting the
cyclical downturn and other factors, while the fraction in families with income-to-poverty rates
of 100-133 percent was relatively stable.
9

The estimated child poverty rate in our March CPS sample was 21.6 percent in 1990.

8
In classifying Medicaid eligibility it is useful to divide children in poor families into two
groups: those with family incomes below the appropriate AFDC income threshold (based on state
and family composition) and those with family incomes between the AFDC threshold and the
poverty line.10 The former are nearly all eligible for Medicaid through AFDC (if the family is
headed by a single woman) or AFDC-UP (if the state has an unemployed parent program) or
through the “Ribicoff” program adopted by most states in the mid-1980s.11 The latter are only
eligible through a poverty-based expansion. We use data on state benefit rates to assign each
family an AFDC threshold. We then express this maximum eligibility cutoff as a fraction of the
corresponding (family-specific) poverty line. In estimating AFDC income limits, a key issue is
the amount of child care allowances that workers can deduct from their gross earnings. We
assign the highest child care disregards that a family can potentially receive for children under 6
(see the Data Appendix), overstating the cutoffs for families that rely on unpaid child care.
The average AFDC income limit for our 1990 sample was 68.9 percent of the familyspecific poverty line. Over the next three years the AFDC limit fell relative to the poverty line,
reflecting the erosion of the real value of benefits in many states and benefit cuts in some states.
Despite this decline, the fraction of children living in families below the AFDC cutoff rose
slightly, from 15.4 percent in 1990 to 17 percent in 1993. The fraction in families above the
AFDC limit but below the poverty line increased more, from 6.1 to 9.1 percent.

10

A small fraction of families in high benefit-level states actually face AFDC thresholds
that are above the family-specific poverty line.
11

85 percent of our 1990 SIPP sample resided in states with Ribicoff rules allowing
Medicaid eligibility regardless of family structure for all families with incomes below the AFDC
limit.

9
In the absence of poverty-based expansions, the family income limit for Medicaid would
equal the AFDC limit. State and federal programs in place in 1990 raised the average Medicaid
limit 7.6 percentage points above the average AFDC limit, and extended coverage to about 1.7
percent more children than were eligible under the AFDC limits. In all, about 10 percent of
children who were financially eligible for Medicaid in 1990 were eligible under poverty-line
related expansion programs. Over the next three years, the OBRA 1989 and OBRA 1990
expansions, coupled with state-level programs, raised the average Medicaid income cutoff to 112
percent of the poverty line, and raised the fraction of Medicaid-eligible children in families with
incomes over the AFDC threshold to 40.8 percent.
The final rows in Table 1 present data on AFDC and Medicaid participation. AFDC
participation rose faster than estimated eligibility in the early 1990s, from 8.4 percent in 1990 to
12 percent in 1994. The fraction of children covered by Medicaid and not on AFDC increased
even faster, from 3.7 percent to 7.7 percent. As a result, the share of Medicaid recipients from
outside the welfare system rose from 30 percent in 1990 to 40 percent in 1993. Data from the
March CPS show a similar rise, from 31 percent in the March 1990 CPS to 44 percent in the
1993 CPS.
The results in Table 1 suggest that the Medicaid expansions of the early 1990s raised
eligibility, leading to a rise in the fraction of Medicaid recipients from outside the traditional base
of welfare recipients. At the same time, increasing welfare participation also contributed to the
growth in Medicaid caseloads. A more detailed look at changes in Medicaid eligibility and
coverage is presented in Table 2. Here, we use a simple hierarchy to assign the sources of
Medicaid eligibility: (1) eligible under the AFDC income limits; (2) eligible through a federal or

10
state program for infants; (3) eligible under the 133 percent program for children under age 6; (4)
eligible under the 100 percent program for children born after September 30, 1983; or (5) eligible
under a state program that provides coverage beyond the federal programs. Due to data
limitations we ignore eligibility for disabled children and those whose families have incurred
large medical expenses. For each eligibility group we show the fraction of children in the group
and the Medicaid coverage rate (or takeup rate). The right-hand columns of the table also report
the change in overall Medicaid participation attributable to the trend in Medicaid recipiency
within the group.12 Expansions in Medicaid coverage should not necessarily affect Medicaid
takeup among groups that were previously eligible. Arguably, then, these changes should be
factored out of the rise in Medicaid in assessing the effect of the expansions. On the other hand,
eligibility is measured with error, and takeup by newly-eligible children who are mis-assigned to
the ineligible or AFDC-related eligibility groups may cause measured takeup rates for these
groups to rise.
This phenomenon could partially explain the rise in Medicaid coverage among children
we estimate to be ineligible for coverage, from 3.5 percent in 1990 to 5.1 percent in 1993.13
Although the takeup rate of the ineligible group is low, the group is large, and the rise in their
coverage accounts for 1.1 percentage points (or 15 percent) of the overall rise in Medicaid

12

We calculate this as the change in the participation rate of the group, multiplied by the
group’s population share in 1993. Using the 1990 shares leads to slightly different within-group
changes.
13

Even if eligibility is correctly assigned, errors in reported Medicaid coverage will lead to
some measured coverage among the ineligible group. Card, Hildreth, and Shore-Sheppard
(2001) estimate that the false positive rate of Medicaid reporting by lower-income children in the
SIPP is between 2 and 5 percent – enough to explain the mean level of reported coverage among
the ineligible population, but not the rising trend.

11
participation.14 A similar trend of increased Medicaid coverage is evident among children in
families with incomes below the AFDC threshold. The Medicaid participation rate of children
in female-headed families with incomes below the AFDC limit rose by 10 percentage points,
contributing 1.1 percentage points to the overall rise in Medicaid.15 For children in other types of
families (e.g., dual headed and single-father families) with incomes under the AFDC limit there
was a 20 point rise in takeup, accounting for an additional 1.2 percentage points of the rise in
Medicaid.16 Finally, there was also a rise in participation among the roughly 1 percent of
children covered by federal and state infant programs.
The fifth and sixth rows in Table 2 present data on children eligible under the OBRA
1989 and OBRA 1990 programs. The 133 percent program became effective in April 1990.
Three quarters of the 1990 SIPP sample were interviewed before this date, leaving only one
quarter potentially eligible for coverage under the new program. By 1993, however, the fraction
eligible had risen to 4.1 percent. The 100 percent program became effective in July 1991, so

14

As we are unable to identify disabled children who may be eligible for Medicaid
through the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, some of the increase in participation
among the apparently ineligible may be due to the increase in disability rates and SSI
participation that occurred over this period (see for example Kaye et al. (1996) and Kubik
(1999)). An advantage of using the discontinuities in the Medicaid expansions to identify the
expansions’ effect is that trends such as increasing SSI participation will not confound our
estimates of the impact of the poverty-related expansions.
15

The rise in Medicaid for this group parallels a rise in AFDC participation, from 60.7
percent in 1990 to 69.9 percent in 1993.
16

About 90 percent of these children are in Ribicoff states, and so were eligible for
Medicaid throughout the sample period. The levels and trends in Medicaid participation for
children in Ribicoff and non-Ribicoff states are nearly identical. In addition to the Ribicoff
program, children in dual-headed families may be enrolled in Medicaid via the AFDCUnemployed Parent program, or via AFDC if the “father” is actually a stepfather (Moffitt,
Reville, and Winkler (1994)).

12
only the children in our 1992 and 1993 samples were potentially eligible for this expansion.
Because of the overlap in age coverage of the 133 percent and 100 percent programs, and the
modest gap between the AFDC income limits and the poverty line (see Table 1), less than two
percent of children in the later SIPP’s gained eligibility because of the 100 percent program.
Interestingly, the Medicaid takeup rate for the 100 percent program eligibility group is higher
than the rate for the 133 percent eligibility group, although both are below the rate among the
traditional AFDC-related eligibility group. Thus, as noted by Currie and Gruber (1996) and
Shore-Sheppard (1997), the marginal takeup rate of Medicaid among children made newly
eligible by the expansions was below the average takeup rate.
Although OBRA 1986 permitted states to offer Medicaid coverage to children in families
with incomes over the AFDC limit, less than 1 percent of children were eligible under such
programs in early 1990. Over the next few years, however, many states began to implement
coverage expansions that went beyond the minimum federal requirements. Some of these
programs only covered certain categories of medical expenses, or required co-payments. By
1993, we estimate that optional state programs offered potential coverage to about 5 percent of
children who were otherwise ineligible for Medicaid. As shown in Table 2, the takeup rate for
this group was low, potentially reflecting the restrictive nature of some of the programs and/or a
lack of knowledge about them.
The results in Table 2 point to three main conclusions. First, the rise in Medicaid
coverage in the early 1990s was driven by a combination of rising participation among groups
that were already eligible, expansions of eligibility, and a rise in participation among children
that appear to be ineligible. Given errors in imputing eligibility, it is hard to assess whether the

13
rises in participation among ineligible and AFDC-eligible children should be attributed to the
expansions, or to a general trend toward higher takeup of welfare programs. Second, prior to the
effective dates of the 133 percent and 100 percent federal expansions, optional state expansions
covered a very small fraction of children in families with incomes beyond the AFDC limit (less
than 1 percent), although subsequent state programs extended coverage further. Third, by 1993,
the 133 percent program offered coverage to about 4 percent of children in families with incomes
above the AFDC limit, while the100 percent program expanded coverage to an additional 2
percent of children.

IV. The 100 Percent Program
We begin our analysis of the federal Medicaid expansions by considering the effect of the
100 percent program. To set the stage, Figure 2 shows Medicaid eligibility rates by quarter of
birth for children just under the poverty line (with family incomes from 60-99 percent of poverty)
and just over the line (100-140 percent of poverty) in our 1992 and 1993 SIPP samples. Since
most children in families with incomes below the AFDC limit were eligible for coverage before
the 100 percent program, we exclude anyone whose family-specific AFDC cutoff is above 70
percent of the poverty line.17 The graph illustrates the sharp discontinuity in Medicaid eligibility
induced by the expansion. Among children in families below the poverty line but above the
AFDC income limit, Medicaid eligibility rates average 6-8 percent for those born before the
17

An examination of AFDC participation rates shows that welfare participation falls off
very quickly once the income-to-poverty rate is within 10 percent of the AFDC cutoff – see Card
and Shore-Sheppard (2001, Figure 2). The fall-off before the cutoff presumably reflects the fact
that our calculations overstate the AFDC income limit. We build this 10 point gap into our
sample exclusion.

14
fourth quarter of 1983, and 100 percent after. Among children in families just above the poverty
line, eligibility rates are about 6-8 percent on either side of the 1983-III breakpoint. Since nearly
all the children in the above-poverty group are eligible under the 133 percent program if they are
under 6 years of age, the average eligibility rate for the above-poverty group rises to nearly 100
percent for those born 12-16 quarters after 1983-III.
Figure 3 shows corresponding patterns of Medicaid coverage. There is a discernable
“jump” in Medicaid coverage for the below-poverty group between the 1983-III and 1983-IV
birth cohorts, with no such jump for the above-poverty group. Moreover, coverage rates of the
below poverty group are fairly stable on either side of the eligibility cutoff , suggesting that the
jump is not just a random blip.18 In contrast to the rise at 1983-III, there is no rise in coverage
for the above-poverty group born 12-16 quarters after 1983-III, despite the steep rise in eligibility
noted in Figure 2. This is consistent with other evidence (discussed below) that the 133 percent
expansion had very small effects on Medicaid coverage.
The rules of the 100 percent expansion also create discontinuities in eligibility by family
income. In particular, for children born after September 1983, one would expect Medicaid
coverage rates to fall as family income passes through the poverty line. Figure 4 graphs
Medicaid coverage rates by family income for children in the 1992 and 1993 SIPP samples born
before and after the OBRA 1990 cutoff date.19 A key difference between these comparisons and

18

There are 25-30 children per birth quarter in the 60-99 percent poverty group in the
combined 1992 and 1993 SIPPs. Thus, the standard error of the estimated Medicaid participation
rate for a single birth-quarter is about 8 percentage points.
19

As in Figure 3 , the samples used in Figure 4 exclude children whose AFDC cutoff is
greater than 70 percent of the family-specific poverty line.

15
the comparisons by birth quarter in Figure 3 is that family incomes (unlike birth dates) vary from
month to month.20 Since enrolling in Medicaid is burdensome, families will not necessarily
enroll if their incomes are only temporarily low, leading to some fuzziness in the discontinuity by
income. Consistent with this reasoning, there is a smoother rise in Medicaid coverage around
the poverty line in Figure 4 than at the 1983-III cohort cutoff in Figure 3. Nevertheless, the
patterns of Medicaid coverage for the older and younger cohorts in Figure 4 suggest that the 100
percent program has a significant effect. Above the poverty line, Medicaid coverage rates are
fairly similar for the older and younger cohorts. Below the poverty line the coverage rate of the
younger cohort is 10 percentage points higher.

Differences-in-Differences and Regression-Discontinuity Estimates
The evidence of discontinuities in Figures 3 and 4 can be evaluated more formally. One
way is to compare the differences in Medicaid coverage and related outcomes for children in
families just above and just below the poverty line who were born before and after September 30,
1983. The components of these “differences-in-differences” are presented in Table 3, using the
same samples underlying Figures 3 and 4. For children in the later cohort we show means for all
age groups and for the subset who are age 6 or older as of the SIPP survey. Focusing on children
6 or older eliminates the problem that most of the younger children in the higher-income group
are eligible for Medicaid through the 133 percent expansion.

20

See for example Pischke (1995), who fits a variety of models to monthly family income
from the SIPP. In our samples, the correlation of monthly family incomes measured 6 months
apart is around 0.80.

16
The eligibility rates in the third column of the table show that children born before
October 1, 1983 have very low rates of Medicaid eligibility, regardless of whether their family
income is above or below the poverty line.21 Children born after the cutoff date in poor families
are all eligible for Medicaid. Children born after the cutoff in families just above the poverty line
but over age 6 also have very low rates of Medicaid eligibility. However, because of the 133
percent program, if younger children are included the average Medicaid eligibility rate of the
higher-income group rises to 50.8 percent. Thus, if the comparisons are restricted to children
over 6, the difference in differences in eligibility is 92 percent, while if younger children are
included it falls to 47 percent. The gap reflects the “contamination” of the above-poverty/postSeptember 1983 group by children who are eligible under the 133 percent program.
One way to focus more directly on the discontinuity is to construct regression-adjusted
differences in differences that include smooth functions of age and income, as well as controls
for age under 6 and other factors. In particular, consider the following regression model for the
event of Medicaid eligibility, or any related outcome (e.g. Medicaid coverage):
(1)

Y = a + b1 Poor + b2 (Born After 9/30/83) + b3 Poor × (Born After 9/30/83)
+ b4 (Age<6) + b5 (Age<6) × (1Poor) + G(Age, Income) + d X + e ,

where “Poor” is an indicator for family income under the poverty line, “Age” represents an
individual’s age, “Income” represents family income relative to the poverty line, G( ) is some
smooth function of age and income (e.g. a low order polynomial), and X is a set of other
characteristics (e.g., year dummies and controls for race and ethnicity) This specification allows
the outcome variable Y to vary smoothly with age and family income, and to exhibit possible
21

Nearly all of the eligible children in this cohort were eligible under state programs.

17
discontinuities as family income reaches the poverty line, or the child’s birth date approaches
September 30, 1983, or the child reaches age 6. The impact of the 100 percent program is
identified by the coefficient of the interaction between poverty status and birth cohort. Any
confounding effect of the 133 percent program is captured by the coefficient b5 of the interaction
between age under 6 and above-poverty status.22
Note that if only the first three terms of equation (1) are included, then the coefficient b3
of the interaction between poverty status and the indicator for born after September 1983 is just
the difference in difference. The addition of the G( ) function controls for any systematic
variation in the outcome by age or income, and shifts the source of identification from a “global”
difference in differences to a local one, concentrated around the eligibility threshold. The
addition of other covariates helps to control for factors such as region or time effects that might
be differentially distributed across the four groups in the difference-in-differences comparison.
The regression-adjusted differences in differences in Table 3 include a cubic in age, a
quadratic in income (relative to poverty), dummies for race, Hispanic ethnicity, and living with a
single mother, and interactions of year effects with 4 region effects. Looking at the eligibility
models, when the comparison is restricted to children age 6 and older, the regression-adjusted
estimate of the eligibility effect is nearly identical to the unadjusted difference in differences (92
percent). When the sample includes children under 6, the adjusted estimate is also very close to
92 percent, suggesting that the controls effectively shift the identification to the eligibility
threshold.

22

Nearly all the children in our higher income group under the age of 6 are eligible under
the 133 percent expansion.

18
The models for Medicaid coverage confirm the visual impression from Figures 3 and 4
that the 100 percent expansion led to a 10 percentage point rise in coverage for children close to
the eligibility limits. As with the eligibility models, the coverage effects from the regressionadjusted models are similar whether or not children under 6 are included. Since the 100 percent
program increased eligibility by about 92 percent and increased coverage by 10 percent, the
implied takeup rate among the newly eligible group is 11 percent (with a standard error of 4.2
percent) – substantially below the 20 percent takeup rate estimated by Currie and Gruber (1996)
for the combined federal and state expansions over the 1985-93 period.23
The other models in Table 3 analyze AFDC participation, Medicaid coverage outside of
AFDC, overall health insurance coverage, and the presence of non-Medicaid insurance. The
results for AFDC and for Medicaid coverage outside of AFDC can be interpreted as specification
checks. In principle, the change in the Medicaid income limit should not have affected AFDC
participation: thus, all of the rise in Medicaid associated with the rise in eligibility should have
occurred outside AFDC. This is confirmed by the unadjusted and regression-adjusted differences
in differences.
The results for any health insurance, and for other (i.e., non-Medicaid) insurance, address
the issue of crowd out. The unadjusted difference in differences that includes children under 6
shows some evidence of crowd out, with a smaller rise in total coverage than in Medicaid, and a

23

Taking the ratio of the coverage and eligibility effects is equivalent to an instrumental
variables (IV) estimate of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on Medicaid coverage, using the
interaction of poverty status and pre-September 1983 birth cohort as an instrument for eligibility.
The corresponding OLS estimate is 8.1 percent with a standard error of 2.7 percent.

19
decline in other coverage.24 However, our preferred specifications that either exclude children
under 6 or add controls for age, income, and coverage under the 133 percent program show no
such patterns
We have performed a number of specification tests to probe the validity of the methods
used in Table 3. One test is to perform the same analysis using data from 1990 and 1991, before
the 100 percent program took effect. Unfortunately, this exercise is not very informative because
there are very few children in the right income range who were at least 6 years old in 1990 or
1991 and were born after September 1983 (a total of only 121 observations). Using this small
sample, the difference in differences in Medicaid coverage prior to the effective date of the 100
percent expansion is actually negative (but statistically insignificant). The negative “pre-program
treatment effect” is attributable to a gap in AFDC participation: the difference in differences of
Medicaid participation outside of AFDC is close to zero.
A second test is to drop the exclusion restriction that eliminates children in high-AFDC
benefit states. The main impact of this change is to raise the Medicaid eligibility and
participation rates of the below-poverty group born before October 1983. As a consequence, the
regression-adjusted difference in differences in eligibility falls to 66.3 percent, the corresponding
effect on Medicaid coverage falls to 8.8 percent (standard error 3.4), and the effect on overall
health insurance falls to 8.8 percent (standard error 3.6). For this broader sample the implied
takeup rate of Medicaid coverage by newly eligible children is 13.3 percent (standard error 5.2
percent) – quite similar to the estimate using the narrower sample, as would be expected if all the
24

Some children have both Medicaid and other coverage. Thus, the coefficients for
Medicaid coverage and non-Medicaid coverage do not “add up” to the coefficient in the model
for any coverage.

20
changes in the broader sample are generated by behavioral reactions among children above the
AFDC limit.
A third test is to augment the sample for 1992 and 1993 with data from the earlier panels.
For example, month 16 of the 1991 panel represents the same calendar period as month 4 of the
1992 panel. We included these data (for the 90 percent of the 1991 panel who were still in the
sample at their 16th month) and re-estimated the models in Table 3. The results are very similar
to those in Table 3, and slightly more precise. For example, the regression-adjusted estimate of
the Medicaid coverage effect is 10.8 percent (standard error 3.4) while the corresponding
estimate of the overall health insurance effect is 9.2 percent (standard error 4.0). Adding in data
for month 28 of the 1990 panel similarly has very little effect on the character of the results.

V. The 133 Percent Expansion
Like the 100 percent expansion, the 133 percent Medicaid expansion generates sharp
discontinuities in Medicaid eligibility along both age and income dimensions. As a first step in
evaluating this expansion, we compare children older and younger than 6 in families with
incomes from 100 to 132 percent of the poverty line in the 1991-93 SIPP, against similar age
groups in families with incomes from 133 to 166 percent of the poverty line. Figure 5 shows
Medicaid coverage rates by age measured in quarters for the two groups, using data from the
1991-1993 SIPP samples.25 Unlike Figure 3, there is no evidence of a jump in Medicaid

25

To avoid issues of AFDC eligibility, the underlying samples exclude children in
families whose AFDC income limit is above 100 percent of the poverty line. This affects a
relatively small number of children.

21
coverage associated with the age limit of the 133 percent program26. A graph of Medicaid
coverage by family income similarly shows no evidence of a drop in coverage as income reaches
133 percent of poverty.
Table 4 presents means of Medicaid eligibility and coverage for children older or younger
than 6 in families with incomes just below and just above the cutoff of the 133 percent program.
We also show the associated differences in differences, following the same format as Table 3.
Both the unadjusted and adjusted differences in differences show that the 133 percent expansion
raised Medicaid eligibility of the target group by about 85 percent. Unlike the 100 percent
expansion, however, there was no corresponding effect on Medicaid coverage or health insurance
coverage. To check whether these estimates might reflect a slow diffusion of knowledge about
the 133 percent program, we constructed differences in differences using data for 1992 and 1993
only. The results, shown in the bottom row of Table 4, are not much different from the results
based on 1991-1993. We also tried various changes in the sample (e.g., narrowing the income
limits of the affected and unaffected groups around the 133 percent income cutoff; and narrowing
the age range), but found no changes in the results.
A limitation of the analysis in Table 4 is that it focuses on only some of the children who
were affected by the 133 percent expansion – those in families with incomes from 100 to 133
percent of poverty. The program also extended coverage to children under the age of 6 with
family incomes below the poverty line. By pooling different age and income groups and
including indicators for potential eligibility under either or both expansions, it is possible to
26

As in Figure 3, the lines in Figure 5 are smoothed using a 3-quarter moving average
with weights (0.2, 0.6, 0.2). There are 40-50 observations per quarter for both income groups,
slightly more than in the samples in Figure 3.

22
determine whether this group responded more like the older group affected by the 100 percent
expansion, or more like the higher income group affected by the 133 percent expansion. The
results of this exercise – using SIPP data for 1992 and 1993 for children with family incomes
from 60 to 166 percent of the poverty line – are reported in Table 5. For simplicity, we report
only the coefficients of the potential eligibility indicators from regression-adjusted models that
control for age, income, demographic characteristics, and region and year effects.
The results in the first column show that potential eligibility under the 100 percent
expansion, or under both expansions, was associated with about a 66 percent increase in
Medicaid eligibility, whereas potential eligibility under the 133 expansion was associated with an
83 percent rise in eligibility. The smaller effect for the 100 percent and combined expansions
reflects the fact that about one quarter of children in families with incomes between 60 and 100
percent of poverty had family incomes under the AFDC limit and were therefore already eligible
for Medicaid. In terms of Medicaid coverage, the estimates in Table 5 show that children who
were eligible for the 100 percent expansion only, or for both expansions, had 9-10 percentage
point gains in Medicaid coverage, while those who were eligible for the 133 percent expansion
had a slight decline in Medicaid coverage. In all three cases there is no significant effect on
AFDC participation. The results for the probability of any health insurance hint at a possible
difference between the older children eligible for the 100 percent expansion only, and the
younger children eligible for both. Specifically, the rise in overall insurance coverage for the
100-percent-only group is about the same size as the rise in Medicaid, implying (as in Table 3)
that there was little or no crowd-out for this group. By comparison, non-Medicaid insurance
coverage among the younger children affected by both expansions fell, leading to a smaller gain

23
in overall coverage than in Medicaid. It should be noted, however, that the differences between
the coefficient estimates for the 100-percent-only group and the group eligible for both
expansions are statistically insignificant, as shown by the probability values reported in the
bottom row of the Table.
To summarize, the results in Tables 3, 4, and 5 indicate that the 100 percent expansion
led to about a 10 percentage point rise in Medicaid coverage and overall health insurance
coverage among previously ineligible children, whereas the 133 percent expansion had little
effect on either. Impacts for the set of younger children covered by both expansions are about the
same as for those covered by the 100 percent program only, although this group shows slightly
more evidence of crowd-out.

VI. Evidence from the March CPS
In view of the surprising results for the 133 percent expansion obtained from our SIPP
samples, we decided to look at the program using March CPS data. Since the age limit of the
133 percent expansion falls at exactly 6 years, it is possible to distinguish eligible and ineligible
children using age data measured only in years. The results are summarized in Table 6. Despite
some small differences in the levels of Medicaid, AFDC, and health insurance coverage in the
CPS and SIPP, the differences-in-differences are very similar. In particular, March CPS data
from 1991-93 suggest that the 133 program had a very small effect on Medicaid coverage of
children under 6 in families with incomes from 100-133 percent of poverty – on the order of 2
percent or less. Despite the much larger CPS sample sizes, none of the differences-in-differences
is statistically significant, with the exception of the -3.9 percent effect on other health insurance.

24
Paradoxically, the CPS data suggest that the 133 program caused other insurance coverage to fall
by more than the rise in Medicaid, leading to a net loss in overall health insurance coverage. We
also conducted a year-by-year analysis using the CPS files for 1991 to 1996, to check if the
impact of the 133 expansion changed over time. The results are summarized in Appendix Table
3. While there is some year-to-year variation, on balance we see no systematic effects of the 133
percent expansion on Medicaid participation or overall health insurance coverage of children
close to the eligibility limits of the law.

VII. Evidence from the Health Interview Survey
Our final set of estimates is based on data from the 1992-1996 Health Interview Surveys.
We focus on three key dependent variables from the HIS: Medicaid coverage, any health
insurance coverage, and the number of doctor visits in the past year. Following previous
researchers (Holl et al., 1995; Currie and Gruber, 1996), we distinguish between children who
had at least one doctor visit last year, and those who did not, and interpret the incidence of at
least one doctor visit as an indicator of access to preventative medical care.
The upper panel of Table 7 reports unadjusted and regression-adjusted difference-indifferences estimates of the effect of the 100 percent poverty expansion, using children in
families with incomes from 60 to 140 percent of poverty born before and after September 30,
1983.27 (The adjusted models include the same set of control variables used in Table 3 for our
27

Since the the public-use samples of the HIS do not report state of residence, we cannot
construct family-specific AFDC income cutoffs and eliminate children with high AFDC
thresholds who were eligible for Medicaid even before the exansion. As described in the Data
Appendix, we estimate the ratio of family income to poverty using income intervals reported in
the HIS and family size information. We exclude the roughly 15 percent of individuals with

25
analysis of the SIPP). The estimated effects on Medicaid coverage and overall insurance
coverage are slightly smaller than for comparable samples of the 1992-93 SIPP, and more
precise.28 The adjusted HIS estimates suggest that the 100 percent expansion raised Medicaid
coverage by 6 percentage points and raised health insurance coverage by about 5 percentage
points, although the gap – which is an estimate of the crowdout effect – is not significant (t=0.8).
The impact of the expansion is illustrated in Figure 6, which plots Medicaid coverage rates by
quarter of birth for children in families just below and just above the poverty line. As in Figure
3, there is a noticeable jump in Medicaid coverage after the September 30, 1983 eligibility date
for the poorer children, and no such jump for the richer children.
The results in the third column of Table 7 suggest that the 100 percent expansion also had
a positive effect on health care utilization. The unadjusted effect is not quite statistically
significant, while the regression-adjusted effect is marginally so, with a t-ratio of 2.18.29
Considering the rather modest estimate of the expansion’s effect on insurance coverage, the
effect on doctor visits is relatively large. Specifically, the estimates suggest that children with
newly available health insurance coverage have a 60% higher probability of at least one annual

missing family income information.
28

The effects for the 1992-93 SIPP using a comparable sample are 8.8 percent on
Medicaid coverage (standard error 3.4) and 8.8 percent on overall health insurance coverage
(standard error 3.6). We cannot estimate the effects of the expansions on eligibility in the HIS
since we do not know state of residence and therefore cannot assign eligibility for those with
incomes under the AFDC income limits. However, assuming the eligibility effect is the same as
in the SIPP (66 percent), the implied takeup rate for the HIS sample is about 9 percent.
29

The mean fractions of children with at least one doctor visit in the previous year for the
four groups used in the difference-in-differences are as follows: poor children born before
October 1983 – 65.2%; poor children born later – 83.1%; above-poverty children born before
October 1983 – 65.6%, above poverty children born later – 81.6%.

26
doctor visit than in the absence of the expansion, although this estimate is rather imprecise
(standard error 31%). This is the instrumental variables estimate of the effect of health insurance
coverage on the probability of visiting a doctor at least once, using the interaction of poor and
born after September 1983 as an instrument for coverage. By comparison, an OLS regression of
doctor visits on insurance coverage and the same set of control variables has a coefficient of only
12 percent (standard error 0.6 percent).
The models in the lower panel of Table 7 examine the combined effects of the 100 and
133 percent expansion, using the same framework as in Table 5. The results are comparable to
those based on the SIPP, although in the HIS sample there is more evidence of an effect of the
133 percent program on Medicaid coverage. Interestingly, however, this increase in Medicaid
was not associated with a significant rise in overall health insurance coverage, or with a
significant change in the probability of visiting a doctor.30 It is also interesting that although the
SIPP sample showed larger crowdout effects of the 100 percent expansion for younger children
who were also eligible for the 133 program, in the HIS sample the opposite is true: any evidence
of crowdout is confined to the older children who were excluded from the 133 percent program.
Overall, we interpret the HIS results as supportive of our findings from the SIPP and
CPS, although differences across the various specifications suggest the need for caution in
drawing strong conclusions from any one data set. Based on the three data sets we conclude that
the 100 percent program had a larger effect on Medicaid and health insurance coverage than the

30

If we examine the 133 program separately looking at children with incomes from 100 to
166 percent of poverty, as in Tables 4 or 6, we obtain estimates of the effects on Medicaid and
overall health insurance coverage nearly identical to those reported in Table 7 for the 133percent-only group.

27
133 percent program. In fact, the 133 percent expansion seems to have had no effect on total
health insurance coverage, implying that any impact on Medicaid was offset by reductions in
other coverage. Evidence of crowd-out effects from the 100 percent expansion varies slightly
across data sets. The SIPP shows little or no crowdout effects among older children covered by
the 100 percent expansion, but some crowdout for younger children, whereas the HIS shows the
opposite pattern. In neither case, however, are the crowdout estimates statistically significant.
Finally, HIS data suggest that the 100 percent expansion led to a sizeable increase in the fraction
of newly-covered children who visited a doctor at least once in the previous year.

VIII. Explanations for Differential Takeup of the 100 Percent and 133 Percent Expansions
The contrast between the modest but positive impacts of the OBRA 1990 expansion and
the more limited effects of the OBRA 1989 expansion raises the question: what factors can
explain the differential impact of these two laws? One hypothesis is that the higher-income
families eligible for coverage under the 133 percent expansion have a relatively low probability
of remaining Medicaid-eligible in the near future, and are therefore less willing to undertake a
lengthy enrollment process than families with a higher probability of continuing eligibility. To
evaluate this hypothesis, we used the 1992 and 1993 SIPP panels to calculate Medicaid eligibility
status 12 months after the first interview for children in different eligibility groups at the first
interview. The results are presented in Table 8. Among all children who were Medicaid-eligible
at the first interview, 78 percent were eligible 12 months later. As expected, the rate of future
eligibility is highest for the poorest children (who are eligible via AFDC at the first interview),
somewhat lower for those eligible under both the 100 percent and 133 percent expansions, and

28
lowest for those eligible under the 133 percent expansions only.31 Nevertheless, over 60 percent
of the 133-percent-only group are eligible a year later. By comparison, the rate of future
eligibility is only 21 percent for children who are ineligible for Medicaid at the first interview but
have family incomes under 166% of poverty. Qualitatively, future eligibility rates are lower for
families covered by the 133 percent expansion than for families covered by the 100 percent
expansion. Quantitatively, however, the difference is small.
Another hypothesis is that the higher income families affected by the 133 percent
expansion have less experience with means-tested benefit programs and therefore have less
information about such programs, or perhaps attach greater stigma to participating in the them.
Comparisons of the characteristics of the children and families in the different eligibility groups
in Table 8 suggest there may be some truth to this idea. For example, families in the 133percent-only eligibility group are much less likely to be female-headed or black than families in
the 100-percent-only eligibility group: both characteristics are highly correlated with welfare
participation rates. To test the hypothesis more formally, we took all children in the 16th month
of the 1992 and 1993 SIPP panels, and calculated their Medicaid eligibility status. We then
compared rates of AFDC and Medicaid participation 12 months earlier across different eligibility
groups. The results, presented in Table 9, confirm that families of children in the 133-percentonly eligibility group have lower rates of previous participation in welfare or Medicaid than

If income for family i in month t follows a simple mean-regressive process like: yit = i
+ uit, where uit = 'uit1 + it is a first order autoregressive process with '>0 and it is i.i.d. , then it
is easy to show that P(yit+k  M | yit  L) > P(yit+k  M | L < yit  M) . Thus, families whose
incomes fall below the poverty line (L) in month t are more likely to have income below the
Medicaid limit (M) k months later than those with incomes between the poverty line and the
Medicaid limit in month t.
31

29
families of children who are eligible under AFDC or the 100 percent expansion. The differences
in previous program participation rates are somewhat larger than the differences in future
eligibility rates in Table 8. For example, 45 percent of children in the 100-percent-only
eligibility group were on Medicaid one year earlier, compared with 29 percent of the 133percent-only group. To the extent that previous program participation increases knowledge
about Medicaid, or reduces the stigma associated with entering the program, these gaps could
help to explain the lower takeup rate by children in the 100-percent-only eligibility group than in
the 133-percent-only group.

IX. Conclusions
This paper presents new estimates of the effects of the federal Medicaid expansions in the
early 1990s, using comparisons of children close to the eligibility limits of the laws. We find
that the 100 percent expansion – which extended Medicaid eligibility to children born after
September 30, 1983 in families below the poverty line – led to about a 10 percentage point rise in
Medicaid coverage for children just inside the eligibility limits, and a similar or slightly smaller
rise in overall health insurance. It also increased the fraction of children in the newly eligible
group with a doctor visit in the previous year. The impacts of the expansion on Medicaid
coverage are discernable from a simple graphical analysis, in conventional differences-indifferences, and in a regression-discontinuity framework. Nevertheless, the takeup rate in the
newly eligible population was low – on the order of 10 percent. The 133 percent expansion –
which opened up Medicaid to children under 6 in families with incomes below 133 percent of the
poverty line – had even smaller impacts. We find no effect of the 133 percent expansion on

30
Medicaid coverage rates of children close to the eligibility limits of the law in the SIPP or CPS.
Even in the HIS, which shows a small effect on Medicaid, there is no effect on overall health
insurance coverage.
Our findings underscore the conclusion of earlier research that the impact of recent
Medicaid expansions was limited by low takeup rates among the newly eligible children. Indeed,
our estimated takeup rates for children near the age boundaries of the federal laws are even lower
than suggested by previous studies. An examination of eligibility dynamics in the SIPP suggests
that the newly eligible children under the recent expansions differ from traditional Medicaid
participants in two key dimensions. Families of the newly eligible children – especially those
covered by the 133 percent expansion – have less previous contact with means-tested programs.
As a result, they may have less information about Medicaid, or may feel greater stigma from
participating in the program, than the traditional Medicaid clientele. The newly-eligible children
are also less likely to remain eligible in the near future. Consequently, their families may be less
willing to go through a lengthy enrollment process. Whatever the explanation for the low
takeup, the behavior of children affected by the 100 percent and 133 percent expansions suggests
that increases in the income limits for Medicaid eligibility have very limited effects on health
insurance coverage of poor and near-poor children. To the extent that these patterns continue,
the recent SCHIP programs will have only modest impacts.

31
References
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics.” In Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics (Volume 3A). New York,
Elsevier, 1999.
Bennefield, Robert L. “A Comparative Analysis of Health Insurance Coverage Estimates: Data
from CPS and SIPP.” Proceedings from the 1996 Joint Statistical Meetings, Social Science
Section, 1996.
Card, David and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. “Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to Identify the Effects
of the Federal Medicaid Expansions.” UC Berkeley Center for Labor Economics Working Paper No. 36,
September 2001.
Card, David, Andrew Hildreth and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. “The Measurement of Medicaid Coverage
in the SIPP: Evidence from California, 1990-1996.” UC Berkeley Center for Labor Economics Working
Paper No. 32, February 2001.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care,
and Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1996), pp. 431-466.
Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber. “Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private Insurance?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1996), pp. 391-430.
Dubay, Lisa C. and Genevieve Kenney. “The Effects of the Medicaid Expansions on Insurance
Coverage of Children.” The Future of Children 6 (1996), pp. 152-161.
Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for LowIncome Children on Medicaid Participation and Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the SIPP.”
NBER Working Paper No. 8063, January 2001.
Holl, J.L., P.G. Szilagy, L.E. Rodewald, R.S. Byrd, and M.D. Weitzman. “Profile of Uninsured
Children in the United States.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 149 (1995), pp.
398-406.
Kaye, H. Stephen, Mitchell P. LaPlante, Dawn Carlson, and Barbara L. Wenger. “Trends in
Disability Rates in the United States, 1970-1994.” Disability Statistics Abstract 17 (1996). U.S.
Department of Education, National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research
(November), pp. 1-6.
Kubik, Jeffrey D. “Incentives for the Identification and Treatment of Children with Disabilities:
The Supplemental Security Income Program.” Journal of Public Economics 73 (1999), pp. 187215.

32
Moffitt, Robert A., Robert T. Reville, and Anne E. Winkler. “State AFDC Rules Regarding the
Treatment of Cohabitors: 1993.” Social Security Bulletin 57 (1994), pp. 26-33.
National Governor’s Association, Center for Best Practices, Health Policy Studies Division.
“States have Expanded Eligibility Through Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance
Program”. Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Update (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services Health, Resources Administration, Maternal and Child Health Bureau). February 1999.
Nelson, Charles T. and Robert J. Mills. “The March CPS Health Insurance Verification Question
and Its Effect on Estimates of the Uninsured.” U.S. Census Bureau Unpublished Research
Report, August 2001. (http://www.census.gov/hhes/hlthins/verif.html).
Pischke, Jorn-Steffen. “Individual Income, Incomplete Information, and Aggregate
Consumption.” Econometrica 63(4) July 1995, pp. 805-840.
Shore-Sheppard, Lara D. “The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on the Distribution of
Children’s Health Insurance Coverage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54 (October
2000), pp. 59-77.
United States House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means. Green Book:
Background Material and Data on Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways
and Means. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1986-1991.
Yazici, Ezel and Robert Kaestner. “Medicaid Expansions and the Crowding Out of Private
Health Insurance Among Children.” Inquiry 37(1), Spring 2000, pp. 23-32.

33
Data Appendix
Surveys of Income and Program Participation
Our SIPP samples are taken from the 1990-1993 full panel research files. The samples
include individuals up to 18 years of age in the 4th interview month who are neither the head of a
family nor the spouse of a head. Individuals in 9 states that are not separately identified are
dropped. We constructed nuclear families for the children in our sample using information on
relationship to household head, family status, and relationship to family head. In most cases the
re-constructed families correspond to the members of the SIPP households. In cases where a
child and his or her parent(s) live with other adults, however, our families include only the
children and parent(s) of the appropriate subfamily. This definition corresponds to the family
benefit unit that would be potentially eligible for AFDC or Medicaid. Variables such as family
income and family structure are then calculated by summing the individual values for people in
the family. We also assign family-specific poverty thresholds based on family size and year.
To determine the maximum income cutoff for AFDC, we merge AFDC benefit levels and
need standards to individuals, based on state of residence and family size. There are two income
tests that a family must pass in order to qualify for AFDC – the “gross test”, which requires that a
family’s gross income be less than 1.85 times the state’s need standard, and the “net test”, which
requires that a family’s income after disregards be less than the state’s payment standard. In
determining AFDC eligibility, families are permitted to disregard actual child care expenses up
to a maximum of $175 per month ($200 per month for children under 2). Since we do not know
actual child care expenses, we assume that families can deduct the full disregard for all children
under age 6, and no disregard for older children. This assumption overstates the amount of the
disregard for families that use informal or low cost care. Income eligibility cutoffs for Medicaid
are determined using the age of the child, the ratio of family income to the family-specific
poverty line, and the parameters of the relevant state Medicaid programs.
Current Population Surveys
We use data for individuals 18 and younger who are neither the head of a family nor the
spouse of a head from the 1989-1999 March Current Population Surveys. Since subfamilies are
identified directly in the CPS, we use subfamily income and poverty levels to assign income
relative to the family poverty level. Income eligibility cutoffs for AFDC and Medicaid are
determined as in the SIPP. We use information on health insurance coverage from the
individual responses and the children’s recoded variables to assign Medicaid and other insurance
coverage.
Health Interview Surveys
We use data for individuals age 18 or younger who are neither the head nor the spouse of
a head in the 1992-1996 Health Interview Surveys. We exclude observations with missing
family income, Medicaid coverage, parental status, or birth month/year. We assign midpoint
values to the HIS categorical annual family income variable, and we use information on the
number of individuals in the family to assign approximate family poverty lines. We assign
Medicaid coverage to individuals who report that they are covered by Medicaid or other public

34
assistance health insurance programs. We assign overall coverage if an individual has Medicaid,
private health insurance, or military coverage.

Appendix Table 1: Summary of Federal Legislation Related to Medicaid Coverage for Pregnant Women,
Infants, and Children, 1986-1990.

1. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) 1986. Effective: April 1987.
Optional: States may raise the income eligibility threshold above AFDC levels to as high as the Federal
poverty level for pregnant women, infants, and children up to 5 years of age, even if the principal earner
is employed. (Children may be phased in gradually.)
2. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) 1987. Effective: July 1988.
Required: States must cover all children under age 7 born after 9/30/83 who meet income and resource
standards for AFDC, regardless of family structure.
Optional: States may raise income thresholds for pregnant women and infants to 185% of the Federal
poverty level. States may cover children under age 2, 3, 4, or 5 who were born after 9/30/83 with
incomes below the Federal poverty level.
3. Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act (MCCA). Effective: July 1989.
Required: States must cover pregnant women and infants with incomes less than or equal to 75% of the
poverty level (it was to move to 100% by the following year, but was superseded by OBRA 1989)
Optional: States may cover children up to 8 years of age with incomes less than or equal to 75% of the
poverty level.
4. Family Support Act (FSA) 1988. Effective: October 1990.
Required: States must extend Medicaid coverage to eligible 2-parent families where the principal earner
is unemployed.
5. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) 1989. Effective: April 1990.
Required: States must cover pregnant women and children under age 6 with family incomes up to 133%
of the Federal poverty level.
6. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) 1990.

Effective: July 1991

Required: States must cover children under age 19 who were born after 9/30/83 whose family income
level is below 100% of the poverty level. States must continue benefits for pregnant women until 2
months after the end of pregnancy, and for infants through the first year of life.

Sources: United States House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means (1986-1991).

Appendix Table 2: Characteristics of Children in 1992-93 SIPP,
March CPS, and HIS

SIPP

March
CPS

All

HIS:
with Income

Percent Age 0-5 Years

33.3

34.3

33.7

34.0

Percent Born After 9/30/1983

49.1

–-

50.7

51.2

Percent Black

16.7

15.1

15.8

14.8

Percent Hispanic

13.8

11.5

13.0

12.8

Percent with Single Mother

24.4

23.9

16.1

16.1

Percent Below Pov. Line

24.9

23.9

22.0

22.0

Percent 100-200% Pov. Line

22.9

21.4

26.7

26.7

Percent on AFDC

11.0

12.8

–-

--

Percent on Medicaid

18.0

20.0

17.3

17.1

Percent on Medicaid not AFDC

7.0

7.4

–-

--

Percent with Health Insurance

85.8

85.8

81.9

84.0

Number Observations
28,557
86,171
52,796
45,000
Notes: Sample includes individuals age 0-18 in wave 1 of the 1992 and
1993 SIPP panel, the 1991 and 1992 March CPS, and the 1992 and 1993
Health Interview Surveys. SIPP sample excludes observations in Maine,
Vermont, Iowa, North Dakota, South Dakota, Alaska, Idaho, Montana,
Wyoming. HIS sample excludes observations with missing birth date
information. All means are weighted.

Appendix Table 3: Comparisons of Medicaid Eligibility and Participation Rates
for Children Older and Younger than Age 6 in Families Above and Below 133% of
the Poverty Line, Current Population Survey 1991-1996

Percent
Medicaid
Eligible

Percent
Covered by
Medicaid

1991

94.1
(0.6)

2.3
(2.1)

-3.0
(1.6)

4.9
(1.6)

-2.6
(2.4)

-8.8
(2.6)

1992

85.8
(1.0)

-0.2
(2.2)

-0.5
(1.7)

0.4
(1.8)

1.2
(2.4)

1.7
(2.7)

1993

77.0
(1.4)

3.6
(2.2)

4.8
(1.6)

-1.3
(1.9)

-1.7
(2.3)

-4.0
(2.6)

1994

64.8
(1.5)

1.0
(2.3)

0.5
(1.6)

1.1
(2.0)

1.1
(2.2)

-0.2
(2.6)

1995

73.1
(1.4)

-1.1
(2.4)

0.9
(1.7)

-2.6
(2.0)

-0.1
(2.3)

1.6
(2.6)

1996

82.8
(1.0)

0.7
(2.5)

-0.7
(1.8)

1.3
(2.2)

-0.8
(2.4)

-1.7
(2.7)

CPS Year

Percent
on AFDC

Percent on
Medicaid
not AFDC

Percent
with Any
Insurance

Percent
with Other
Insurance

Note: Table entries are regression-adjusted differences in differences.
note to Table 6 for model specifications and sample definitions.

See

Figure 1: Health Insurance Coverage Rates by Family Income in 1989, 1993, and 1999

Fraction with Health Insurance

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

1989
1993
1999

0.6

0.5
0

20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420 440 460 480

Family Income (Percent of Poverty Line)

Figure 2: Medicaid Eligibility by Birth Quarter, Children in 1992-93 SIPP

1.0

Fraction Eligible

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Family Income
60-100% of Poverty
Family Income
100-140% of Poverty

0.0
-24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

Quarter of Birth Relative to 1983-III

Figure 3: Medicaid Coverage Rate by Birth Quarter

Fraction Covered by Medicaid

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
60-99% of Poverty
0.3
0.2
0.1
100-140% of Poverty
0.0
-24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28
Quarter of Birth Relative to 1983-III

Figure 4: Medicaid Coverage Rates by Family Income

Fraction Receiving Medicaid

0.7
Born October 1983
or later

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Born Before October 1983

0.0
61 64 67 70 73 76 79 82 85 88 91 94 97 100 103 106 109 112 115 118 121 124 127 130 133 136

Family Income-to-Poverty Ratio

Figure 5: Medicaid Coverage Rates by Age

Fraction Covered by Medicaid

0.4

0.3

100-132% of Poverty
1

0.2

0.1
133-166% of Poverty

0.0
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32 36 40
Age in Quarters

44

48

52

56

60

64

68

Figure 6: Medicaid Coverage Rates by Quarter of Birth, 1992-96 HIS
0.7

Fraction With Medicaid

0.6
0.5

60-99% of Poverty

0.4
0.3
0.2

100-140% of Poverty

0.1
0.0
-24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

Quarter of Birth Relative to 1983-III

Table 1: Characteristics of Children in 1990-1993 SIPP Panels

Age Distribution:
Percent Age 0-5 Years
Percent Born After 9/30/1983
Percent Born Afer 9/30/1983
and Age 6 or Older

1990

1991

1992

1993

33.3
35.9
2.5

32.9
40.8
7.9

33.5
46.6
13.1

33.2
51.7
18.4

Family Income Distribution Relative to Poverty Line and AFDC Cutoff:
Percent Below Pov. Line
21.2
24.3
23.8
26.1
Percent Between Poverty Line
7.6
6.9
7.4
7.2
and 133% of Poverty
Mean AFDC Income Cutoff
(Percent of Pov. Line)
Percent Below AFDC Cutoff
Percent Between AFDC Cutoff
and Poverty Line

68.9

67.4

63.1

60.2

15.4
6.1

17.5
6.9

16.2
7.8

17.0
9.1

76.5

86.4

92.7

111.9

1.7

4.3

6.7

11.7

17.1
9.9

21.8
19.7

22.9
29.3

28.7
40.8

AFDC and Medicaid Participation:
Percent on AFDC
8.4
Percent on Medicaid not AFDC
3.7
Percent on Medicaid
12.1
Percent of Medicaid Recipients 30.1
Not on AFDC

9.9
5.7
15.6
36.5

10.0
6.2
16.2
38.3

12.0
7.7
19.7
39.1

10,268

14,063

14,494

Medicaid Eligibility:
Mean Medicaid Income Cutoff
(Percent of Pov. Line)
Percent Eligible for Medicaid
not AFDC
Percent Eligible for Medicaid
Percent of Eligibles with
Income Over AFDC Cutoff

Number Observations

16,196

Notes: Sample includes individuals age 0-18 in wave 1 of the SIPP
panels who are not heads of families. Characteristics are measured as
of the fourth interview month. See text for description of AFDC and
Medicaid income cutoffs. Means are weighted by first year weights.
(All subsequent calculations use first year weights unless otherwise
noted.)

Table 2: Medicaid Eligibility Rates by Source of Eligibility, and Medicaid
Participation Rates of Eligibility Groups

1990
1. Ineligible for Medicaid

1991

1992

1993

Pct. of Population

82.9

78.2

77.1

71.3

3.5

4.7

4.6

5.1

Pct. on Medicaid

Change in Overall Medicaid
Participation Attributable
to Trend Within Group:
Percentage
Share of
Change
Total Change
1.1

15.0

1.1

15.0

1.2

15.7

0.2

2.2

0.9

11.5

0.9

11.6

0.4

4.9

5.8

75.7

2. Income Below AFDC Threshold – Single Female Head
Pct. of Population
Pct. on Medicaid

9.6

10.3

10.3

10.9

73.0

77.6

79.1

83.5

3. Income Below AFDC Threshold - Other Head
Pct. of Population
Pct. on Medicaid

5.8

7.1

5.9

6.1

32.6

40.9

42.7

52.2

4. Eligible for Federal or State Infant Coverage
Pct. of Population
Pct. on Medicaid

0.7

0.9

1.0

1.0

18.3

19.1

37.4

34.8

0.6

3.2

3.8

4.1

15.9

23.9

28.6

37.3

0.0

0.0

1.2

1.8

–-

--

40.1

49.0

0.4

0.2

0.8

4.8

13.6

42.3

13.6

21.4

–-

–-

–-

–-

5. Eligible for 133% Program
Pct. of Population
Pct. on Medicaid

6. Eligible for 100% Program
Pct. of Population
Pct. on Medicaid

7. Eligible for State Program
Pct. of Population
Pct. on Medicaid

ALL GROUPS

Notes: see notes to Table 1. Children who are eligible under several criteria
are assigned to the first criterion they meet. Entry in column 5 is the change
in Medicaid participation for the group, multiplied by the group’s population
share in 1993. Entry in column 6 is the entry in column 5, divided by total
rise in Medicaid participation (7.6%).

Table 3: Medicaid Eligibility and Program Participation for Children Eligible and Ineligible for 100 Percent Program

Percent
Medicaid
Eligible

Percent
Covered by
Medicaid

Percent
on AFDC

Percent on
Medicaid
not AFDC

Percent
with Any
Insurance

Percent
with Other
Insurance

Number
Obs.
Family Income 60-99% of Poverty Line:
Born Before 10/1/83

888

6.8
(0.8)

24.1
(1.4)

13.8
(1.2)

10.4
(1.0)

57.6
(1.7)

34.2
(1.6)

Born 10/1/83 or Later
and Age 6 or Older

278

100.0
(0.0)

40.1
(2.9)

15.1
(2.1)

25.1
(2.6)

69.5
(2.8)

32.1
(2.7)

Born 10/1/83 or Later

639

100.0
(0.0)

44.8
(2.0)

11.5
(1.3)

33.3
(1.9)

72.3
(1.8)

31.8
(1.8)

Family Income 100-140% of Poverty Line:
Born Before 10/1/83

841

4.7
(0.7)

12.8
(1.2)

5.3
(0.8)

7.5
(0.9)

66.1
(1.6)

55.6
(1.7)

Born 10/1/83 or Later
and Age 6 or Older

278

5.9
(1.4)

17.0
(2.3)

3.9
(1.2)

13.1
(2.0)

65.3
(2.8)

52.1
(3.0)

Born 10/1/83 or Later

670

50.8
(1.9)

17.8
(1.5)

2.7
(0.6)

15.2
(1.4)

70.5
(1.8)

55.7
(1.9)

12.6
(4.8)

1.3
(4.8)

Comparison of Children Born Before and After 10/1/83 in Poor and Near-Poor Families:
Ages 6 and Older Only:
Difference-in-Differences
-92.0
11.8
2.7
9.2
(2.2)
(4.0)
(2.9)
(3.1)
Regression-Adjusted D-in-D
All Ages
Difference-in-Differences

Regression-Adjusted D-in-D

--

91.9
(1.9)

10.3
(3.8)

1.3
(2.8)

9.0
(3.1)

12.3
(4.6)

2.4
(4.7)

--

47.1
(2.1)

15.6
(3.0)

0.3
(2.0)

15.3
(2.6)

10.3
(3.5)

-2.6
(3.6)

--

92.1
10.1
1.5
8.6
12.2
2.6
(2.1)
(3.9)
(2.6)
(3.4)
(4.5)
(4.7)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Sample includes children in month 4 of 1992 and 1993 SIPP in families with
incomes from 60-140% of poverty line and with family-specific AFDC eligibility thresholds under 70% of poverty line.
Regression-adjusted difference-in-differences includes cubic in age (in months), dummy for age under 6 interacted with
dummy for income below poverty, dummies for black, Hispanic, single mother, dummies for region interacted with survey
year, ratio of family income to poverty line and its square, dummy if family income below poverty line, dummy if born
after 10/1/83, and interaction of dummies for income below poverty line and born after 10/1/83 (reported in table).

Table 4: Comparisons of Medicaid Eligibility and Program Participation Rates for Children Eligible and
Ineligible for 133% Program

Number
Obs.

Percent
Medicaid
Eligible

Percent
Covered by
Medicaid

Percent
on AFDC

Percent on
Medicaid
not AFDC

Percent
with Any
Insurance

Percent
with Other
Insurance

Family Income 100-132% of Poverty Line:
Age 6 and Older

Under Age 6

1552

9.1
(0.7)

17.9
(1.0)

8.2
(0.7)

9.7
(0.8)

67.6
(1.2)

52.7
(1.3)

795

100.0
(0.0)

22.5
(1.5)

4.5
(0.7)

18.0
(1.4)

77.1
(1.5)

58.2
(1.7)

8.4
(0.7)

7.9
(0.7)

2.0
(0.3)

5.9
(0.6)

74.7
(1.1)

69.2
(1.1)

15.3
(1.2)

13.4
(1.1)

1.9
(0.5)

11.5
(1.1)

84.6
(1.2)

74.1
(1.5)

Family Income 134-166% of Poverty Line:
Age 6 and Older
1710

Under Age 6

912

Comparisons of Children Under and Older than 6 in Families Above and Below 133% Poverty Limit
Difference-in-Differences

--

83.7
(1.7)

-0.8
(2.1)

-3.5
(1.2)

2.7
(1.8)

-0.5
(2.6)

0.6
(2.9)

Regression-Adjusted D-in-D

--

85.5
(1.4)

0.2
(2.1)

-3.1
(1.2)

3.2
(1.8)

-0.1
(2.6)

0.0
(2.8)

Regression-Adjusted D-in-D
1992 and 1993 ONLY

--

83.1
(1.8)

-3.1
(2.4)

-3.0
(1.4)

-0.1
(2.1)

0.5
(3.0)

3.7
(3.3)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Sample includes children in month 4 of 1991-1993 SIPP in families with incomes
from 100-166% of poverty line and with family-specific AFDC eligibility thresholds under 100% of poverty line.
Regression-adjusted difference-in-differences includes age in months and dummy for age under 6, dummies for black,
Hispanic, single mother, Census region interacted with sample year, ratio of family income to poverty line and its square,
dummy if family income is below 133% of poverty line, dummy if under age 6, and interaction of dummies for income below
133% of poverty line and under age 6 (reported in table).

Table 5: Combined Models for Medicaid Eligibility and Program Participation Rates for Children in Families
with Incomes from 60 to 166 Percent of Poverty, 1992 and 1993 SIPP

Medicaid
Eligible

Covered by
Medicaid

On AFDC

On
Medicaid
not AFDC

Have Any
Insurance

Have
Other
Insurance

Eligible for 100% Program
ONLY (c1)

66.8
(2.0)

9.5
(2.9)

0.6
(2.1)

9.0
(2.5)

9.7
(3.2)

1.3
(3.4)

Eligible for Both 100%
and 133% Programs (c2)

67.8
(1.8)

9.8
(2.7)

-1.4
(1.9)

11.3
(3.3)

5.1
(3.0)

-2.4
(3.1)

Eligible for 133% Program
ONLY (c3)

82.9
(1.9)

-3.0
(2.8)

-2.3
(2.0)

-0.7
(2.4)

1.1
(3.1)

4.1
(3.2)

P-value of Test:
c1=c2 and c3=0 .

0.00

0.73

0.73

0.85

0.58

0.40

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Models are fit to sample of 6,045 children in 1992 and 1993 SIPP
with family incomes from 60 to 166% of the poverty line. All models include cubic in age (in months), dummy
for age under 6, dummy if born after 10/1/83, dummy if family income below poverty, dummy if family income
below 133% of poverty, dummies for black, Hispanic, and single mother, dummies for Census region interacted
with survey year, ratio of family income to poverty line and its square, and the three dummies reported
in the table.

Table 6: Comparisons of Medicaid Eligibility and Participation Rates for Children Older and Younger than Age 6
in Families Above and Below 133% of the Poverty Line, Current Population Survey

Number
Obs.

Percent
Medicaid
Eligible

Percent
Covered by
Medicaid

Percent
on AFDC

Percent on
Medicaid
not AFDC

Percent
with Any
Insurance

Percent
with Other
Insurance

Family Income 100-132% of Poverty Line:
Age 6 and Older

6383

7.7
(0.3)

23.9
(0.5)

13.9
(0.4)

11.1
(0.4)

71.8
(0.6)

54.3
(0.6)

Under Age 6

2730

100.0
(0.0)

33.2
(0.9)

14.8
(0.7)

18.5
(0.7)

77.8
(0.8)

54.3
(1.0)

7.3
(0.3)

12.7
(0.4)

6.0
(0.3)

7.5
(0.3)

74.6
(0.5)

66.3
(0.6)

13.9
(0.7)

20.2
(0.8)

7.1
(0.5)

13.3
(0.6)

82.1
(0.7)

70.2
(0.9)

Family Income 134-166% of Poverty Line:
Age 6 and Older
6334

Under Age 6

2788

Comparisons of Children Under and Older than 6 in Families Above and Below 133% Poverty Limit
Difference-in-Differences

--

85.7
(0.8)

1.8
(1.4)

-0.2
(1.0)

1.6
(1.0)

-1.5
(1.3)

-3.9
(1.6)

Regression-Adjusted D-in-D

--

85.4
(0.6)

2.2
(1.3)

0.4
(0.9)

1.5
(1.0)

-1.1
(1.4)

-3.9
(1.5)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Sample includes children in 1990-1993 March CPS in families with
incomes from 100-166% of poverty line and with family-specific AFDC eligibility thresholds under 100% of
poverty line. Regression-adjusted difference-in-differences includes age in years, dummy for age under 6,
dummies for black, Hispanic, single mother, dummies for Census region interacted with CPS year, ratio of
family income to poverty line and its square, dummy if family income below 133% of poverty line, dummy if
under age 6, and interaction of dummies for income below 133% of poverty line and under age 6 (reported in
table).

Table 7: Health Insurance Coverage and Probability of At Least One Doctor
Visit in 1992-1996 Health Interview Surveys

Covered by
Medicaid

Have Any
Insurance

At Least One
Doctor Visit
in Past Year

A. Analysis of 100% Program Only: Children in Families
with Incomes from 60-140% of Poverty (n=24,964)
(a)

Unadjusted Difference
in Differences

5.0
(1.2)

6.8
(1.2)

1.8
(1.1)

(a)

Regression-Adjusted
D-in-D

6.0
(1.5)

4.8
(1.5)

2.9
(1.3)

B.

Analysis of 100% and 133% Programs: Children in Families
with Incomes from 60-166% of Poverty (n=32,617)

(c)

Eligible for 100%
Program Only

8.0
(1.2)

5.3
(1.3)

3.8
(1.2)

(d)

Eligible for Both 100%
and 133% Programs

9.6
(1.3)

9.3
(1.3)

1.6
(1.2)

(e)

Eligible for 133%
Program Only

5.8
(1.2)

2.7
(1.4)

0.5
(1.2)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Samples include children age 0-18
in 1992-1996 Health Interview Surveys who report non-missing data on
family income, Medicaid coverage, and date of birth. Family-specific
poverty lines are assigned using family size information and midpoints of
reported family income categories. Specifications in Panel A are the
same as in Table 3. Specifications in Panel B are the same as in Table
5.

Table 8: Comparisons of Subsequent Medicaid Eligibility for Children in
1992 and 1993 SIPP Who Were Medicaid-Eligible at the First Interview

Characteristics at 1st Interview:
FemaleHeaded
Income/
Family
Black Hispanic Poverty

MedicaidEligible
12 Months
Later (%)

Basis of Eligibility
at First Interview:
1. All (n=6,588)

51.2

27.1

24.7

66.2

77.7

2. Income < AFDC
Threshold
(n=4,153)

64.1

31.8

26.2

39.7

83.4

3. Eligible Under
100% and 133%
Federal Program
(n=531)

30.0

24.3

19.9

81.2

75.9

4. Eligible Under
100% Program
Only (n=383)

42.5

30.3

21.7

74.3

67.1

5. Eligible Under
133% Program
Only (n=665)

23.3

17.2

17.9

116.1

61.6

6. Eligible Under
State Program
(n=856)

24.7

10.8

26.7

150.6

67.1

7. NOT ELIGIBLE
33.4
25.2
17.4
118.2
21.3
Inc/Pov <166%
(n=3,784)
Note: Sample includes dependent children under 18 in first interview who are
interviewed 12 months later.

Table 9: Comparisons of Previous Program Participation Rates for Children
in 1992 and 1993 SIPP Who Were Medicaid-Eligible in Month 16

Participation Rates 12 Months Earlier:
Child on
Family
Child on
AFDC
On AFDC
Medicaid
Basis of Eligibility
in Month 16:
1. All (n=6,998)

33.4

37.2

50.6

2. Income < AFDC
Threshold
(n=3,901)

48.0

52.8

64.6

3. Eligible Under
100% and 133%
Federal Program
(n=512)

15.8

18.4

46.8

4. Eligible Under
100% Program
Only (n=565)

23.1

27.9

44.7

5. Eligible Under
133% Program
Only (n=566)

10.5

13.0

29.1

6. Eligible Under
State Program
(n=1,454)

12.4

14.4

24.1

7. NOT ELIGIBLE
Inc/Pov <166%
(n=3,575)

9.7

11.6

18.2

Note: Sample includes dependent children under 18 in first interview who
are interviewed in month 16 of the SIPP panels.

