                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DOES SALES-ONLY APPORTIONMENT OF
                         CORPORATE INCOME VIOLATE THE GATT?


                                        Charles E. McLure, Jr.
                                         Walter Hellerstein


                                         Working Paper 9060
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9060


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by Charles E. McLure, Jr. and Walter Hellerstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Does Sales-only Apportionment of Corporate Income Violate the GATT?
Charles E. McLure, Jr. and Walter Hellerstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9060
July 2002
JEL No. H2, H7



                                               ABSTRACT

        There has been a pronounced change in the formulas states use to apportion the income of
multistate corporations from one that placed equal weight on payroll, profits, and sales to one that places
at least half the weight on sales, and eight base apportionment solely on sales. This paper, which is
intended to stimulate further analysis and debate, rather than provide a definitive conclusion, suggests that
sales-only apportionment may violate the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the
GATT) that prohibits export subsidies.




Charles E. McLure, Jr.                                             Walter Hellerstein
Hoover Institution                                                 University of Georgia Law School
Stanford University                                                Athens, GA 30602
Stanford, CA 94305-6010                                            wallyh@arches.uga.edu
and NBER
mclure@hoover.stanford.edu
                         Does Sales-only Apportionment of Corporate Income
                                         Violate the GATT?

                                            Charles E. McLure, Jr.
                                              Hoover Institution
                                              Stanford University

                                            Walter Hellerstein
                                      University of Georgia Law School

I. Introduction

        Over the past quarter century there has been a pronounced change in the formulas states
use to apportion the income of multistate corporations. In 1978, the year the U.S. Supreme Court
sustained the constitutionality of Iowa’s single-factor apportionment formula based on
destination sales of tangible personal property,1 almost all the states that imposed corporate
income taxes placed equal weight on property, payroll, and sales. Now almost three-fourth of the
states that have corporate income taxes place at least half the weight on sales, and eight base
apportionment solely on sales.2 It seems reasonable to believe that this trend will continue and
that other states will adopt sales-only apportionment formulas in an effort to improve their
competitive position.3 This note, which is intended to stimulate further analysis and debate,
rather than provide a definitive conclusion, suggests that sales-only apportionment may violate
the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the GATT) that prohibit export

1
 Moorman Mfg. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267 (1978). This note concerns only the apportionment of income from the
manufacture and sale of tangible personal property. Although some states assign sales from services on a market
state or destination basis, most states assign sales from services on the basis of where the income-producing activity
relating to those sales is performed. See Uniform Division of Income for Tax Purposes Act [UDITPA] § 17(a).
Accordingly, single-factor apportionment of such sales often does not raise the issues addressed in this note, which
concerns the exclusive use of a destination-sales factor to assign income. Moreover, the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) applies only to goods. When the United States signed on to the Uruguay Round
Agreements, thereby extending the scope of international trade rules to services under the General Agreement on
Trade in Services (GATS), it explicitly reserved from the scope of the GATS national treatment requirement:

         Sub-federal tax measures which afford less favorable treatment to services or service suppliers of
         another Member based on the method of allocating or apportioning the income, profit, gain, losses,
         deductions, credits, assets or tax base of such service suppliers or the proceeds of a services
         transaction.

These reservations were submitted to the GATT on June 29, 1994 as a "Schedule of Specific Commitments for the U.S."
The reservation quoted above was designated as "paragraph 3."
2
 See Mazerov (2001). Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Missouri are included in this count, since sales-only
apportionment is available to manufacturers in the first two states and is an option in the third.
3
  Indeed, the California Assembly's Revenue and Taxation Committee has approved a measure that would change the
state's current three-factor formula with double weight on sales to a single-factor formula based exclusively on sales
(see Pratt, 2002) and both incumbent Governor George Pataki of New York and one of his Democratic rivals
(Andrew Cuomo) have supported New York's adoption of a single-factor sales formula (see Plattner, 2002).


                                                           1
subsidies.4 Given this purpose, we concentrate on the simplest case, involving the apportionment
of income from the manufacture and sale of tangible personal property, where there appears to be
a prima facie violation of the GATT, inviting others to consider other more complex situations.
Perhaps we should note at the outset that we are not arguing that the GATT rules make sense;
rather, we take them as given.

II. The GATT Provisions

       It is useful to start the discussion with the concept of “border tax adjustment” (BTA).5
Although the term does not appear in the GATT, in 1970 a Working Group of the GATT
described BTAs generically

           as any fiscal measures which put into effect, in whole or in part, the destination
           principle (i.e. which enable exported products to be relieved of some or all of the
           tax charged in the exporting country in respect of similar domestic products sold
           to consumers on the home market and which enable imported products sold to
           consumers to be charged with some or all of the tax charged in the importing
           country in respect of similar domestic products) (emphasis added).6

The GATT allows border tax adjustments for indirect taxes, such as VAT, sales taxes, and
excises, but not for direct taxes such as income taxes and payroll taxes.7 Sales-only
apportionment appears to violate the GATT’s prohibition against providing export BTAs for
direct taxes (hereafter simply “export subsidies”).

III. The Economics of Formula Apportionment8

A. The Need for Formula Apportionment


4
 This is, of course, not all that is wrong with sales-only apportionment; see Hellerstein & Hellerstein (1998), at pp. 8-
233 to 8-234; Hellerstein (1995); Mazerov (2001) and McLure (forthcoming). It appears at first glance that sales-
only apportionment may also constitute a tax on imports that is prohibited by the GATT. We do not discuss that
possibility in detail, although we advert to it briefly in the notes below (see infra ns. 18&19) as there may be reasons
why it would not actually have the effect of taxing imports, such as the use of domestic affiliates of foreign
corporations to make imports in states without single-factor sales formulas
5
    For a much more complete discussion, see Hufbauer and Erb (1984).
6
 The GATT Working Group on border tax adjustments, in its report of December 2, 1970, attributes this description
to the OECD; see http://www.worldtradelaw.net/reports/gattpanels/bordertax.pdf, visited May 2, 2002.
7
 Articles III (compensating taxes on imports) and XVI (export rebates) of the GATT permit BTAs for indirect taxes.
The prohibition of BTAs for direct taxes was originally implied by silence, but was made explicit in the Illustrative
List of Export Subsidies contained in the Code on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures adopted in 1979 at the
Tokyo Round and repeated in Annex I to the Uruguay Round Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
8
 For a more detailed exposition of the points covered in parts A and B of this section, see Hellerstein and Hellerstein
(1998), Chapter 8.



                                                           2
         The American states have long recognized — and the Member States of the European
Union are coming to realize — that geographic separate accounting is not practicable within a
highly integrated economy such as the United States. First, economic interdependence between
parts of the corporate group often makes it impossible to isolate the geographic source of profits
on a separate accounting basis. Second, even if corporations undertook to account separately for
the income earned in each state, the task would be fearfully expensive, because their books and
records would need to be maintained to reflect the details of their business operations on a state-
by-state basis. Third, separate accounting is vulnerable to the manipulation of actual or imputed
transfer prices within the enterprise in a manner that shifts income to low-tax states. As a result,
the states, like the provinces of Canada, have long employed formula apportionment to determine
the portion of the income of multistate corporations they will tax.
         Some states apportion the combined income of related corporations deemed to be
engaged in a unitary business, rather than limiting apportionment to the income of separate legal
entities. In the late 1980s, following a period in which some states combined the worldwide
activities of commonly controlled corporations, the states, under political pressure from the
federal government, foreign governments, and the business community, imposed "water's edge"
restrictions on combined reporting.9 A more detailed analysis of the basic question addressed in
this note would take account of combination and other variations of state practice.

B. UDITPA and the Multistate Tax Compact

       During the first half of the twentieth century the states used a wide variety of divergent
apportionment formulas, before converging toward the standard practice of employing three,
equally weighted factors of property, payroll, and sales in the formula used to apportion income.
Throughout this period the quest was to find a formula that would accurately reflect the
geographic source of income, tempered by the need to provide for a formula that fairly divided
income among the states.10 The broad consensus that emerged in favor of the equally-weighted,
9
 With the limited exception of oil companies in Alaska, all the states now limit mandatory combination to the
"water's edge." That is, with limited exceptions for certain tax haven and other corporations whose activities are
conducted predominantly in the United States, only domestic corporations are included in the combined groups and
only the income of such corporations is apportioned. In some states, notably California, there is a water's-edge
election; taxpayers that fail to make the election are subject to worldwide combined reporting.
10
  In its comprehensive report to Congress on state taxation of interstate commerce, the Willis Committee observed
that "[m]ost students of State taxation have assumed that the search for reasonable division of income rules
necessarily resolves itself into a search for the 'sources' of income.'" Willis Committee Report (1964-65), p. 158.
However, the Committee went on to note that a countervailing view held that the search for the "source" of income
was misguided and that "the important issue is the proportion of the company’s activities which take place in the
each State, since 'these activities cause the state to incur the governmental costs which form the justification for its
demand for a compensatory tax." Id. at 158-59 (citation omitted). The Committee went on to point out the conflict
between these two approaches, since

         [a] company with factories in two States … may conduct an unprofitable operation in one of the
         States by any standard which may be used for determining the source of income, but it can hardly
         be argued that its activities contribute to governmental costs only in the State in which its operation
         is profitable.



                                                            3
three-factor formula as a reasonable method for attributing income to the states, embodied both
traditional "sourcing" concepts in the weight accorded to capital (property) and labor (payroll) as
well as the equitable claim of the "market" state to a share of the income tax base, as reflected in
sales made into the state.11 In 1957 the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State
Laws (NCCUSL) approved the Uniform Division of Income for Tax Purposes Act (UDITPA), a
model law intended to provide the basis for uniform state taxation of corporate income.
UDITPA, which was incorporated in the Multistate Tax Compact, codified the then-standard
equally weighted three-factor formula.12 While 20 states are currently members of the
Compact,13 most have forsaken its underlying purpose to "[p]romote uniformity"14 by
abandoning the uniform apportionment formula and placing greater weight on the sales factor.15

C. The Economic Effect of Sales-only Apportionment

        It is easy to understand why states have reduced the weight on property and payroll in
their apportionment formulas and have increased the weight on sales. Formula apportionment
has the economic effect of converting a tax on corporate income into a set of taxes on the factors
in the apportionment formula16 That is, the sales-related portion of the income tax is equivalent



Id. at 159. On the history of the development of formula apportionment, see Hellerstein and Hellerstein (1998),
Chapter 8; Weiner (1996).
11
     See Hellerstein and Hellerstein (1998), ¶ 8.06.
12
 Section 9 of UDITPA provides: “All business income shall be apportioned to this state by multiplying the income
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the property factor plus the payroll factor plus the sales factor, and the
denominator of which is three." Professor William J. Pierce, the principal draftsman of UDITPA, recognized that
UDITPA's three-factor formula reflected both supply and demand factors and declared that the act "represents a
compromise between the positions of consumer and manufacturing states." Pierce (1957), p. 781.
13
     Hellerstein and Hellerstein (2001), p. 576.
14
     Multistate Tax Compact Article I(2).
15
  Section 16(b) of UDITPA provides that sales made to a state where the taxpayer is not taxable are attributed to the
state of origin. If this “throwback” rule were universally applied to foreign exports, it is less likely that sales-only
apportionment would violate the GATT, because the reduction of taxes on export income would occur only in
circumstances when another jurisdiction had a legitimate claim to tax at least a portion of that income. (For reasons
set forth below, however, we still believe that such a rule would probably understate the export income properly
attributable to the state of origin and overstate the export income properly attributable to the destination jurisdiction.)
In any event, such a rule would violate the Commerce Clause as a discrimination against foreign commerce unless
also applied to "interstate" exports. See Kraft General Foods, Inc. v. Iowa Department of Revenue, 512 U.S. 71
(1992) But in that case, the wholesale adoption of the throwback rule would undercut the economic development
objective of sales-only apportionment. It is worth pointing out, moreover, that many states (including, in particular
those with single-factor or heavily-weighted sales formulas (e.g., Connecticut, Iowa, and Minnesota) do not employ
the "throwback" rule.
16
  See McLure (1980). The effective tax rate on each factor depends on the profitability of the corporation, relative
to the factor nationwide, as well as the statutory tax rate.



                                                            4
to a destination-based sales tax,17 the payroll-related portion is equivalent to a tax on payroll, and
the property-related portion is equivalent to a tax on property. Since both payroll and property
are origin-based factors and sales is a destination-based factor, the shift in weights that is
occurring reduces the weight on the origin of interstate sales used to assign income and increases
the weight on the destination of such sales, thereby increasing the state’s competitive position in
both in-state markets and out-of state markets, including foreign markets. To see this in the case
of foreign exports, consider the simple case of a corporate manufacturer, all of whose payroll and
property are located in a single state, that exports either all of its output or none of it.
        Exports. Under the equally weighted three-factor formula, if the corporation exported all
its output, it would pay state tax on two thirds of its profits; under the formula that double-
weights sales, it would pay state tax on half of its profits. By comparison, under sales-only
apportionment, it would pay no state tax, if it exported all its output.
        Domestic sales. Under any of the above formulas (equally weighted, double weighting of
sales, or sales only), the corporation would pay state tax on all its income, if it exported none of
its output.
        Net effect. These results can be summarized as in Table 1. The net effect of placing
greater weight on sales is to reduce the tax paid on income associated with exports, while leaving
the tax on income associated with domestic sales unaffected.18




17
  Again, we remind readers that our concern in this note is only with income derived from the manufacture and sale
of tangible personal property.
18
  The following is the analogous table for income associated with sales of imports and income associated with sales
of domestic products:

     Fraction of income associated with in-state sales that is taxable in state, for a domestic manufacturer and a
                                                foreign manufacturer

                                         Domestic manufacturer making in-       Foreign manufacturer making in-
                                         state sales                            state sales ("imports")
 Equally-weighted three-factor           100 percent                            1/3
 formula
 Double-weighted sales formula           100 percent                            ½
 Sales-only apportionment                100 percent                            100


For purposes of the foregoing table, we again assume that the domestic manufacturer has all of its property and
payroll in the taxing state. We also assume that the foreign manufacturer has nexus in the taxing state, and we ignore
whatever domestic payroll and property of the foreign manufacturer may be associated with such nexus.


                                                          5
                                               Table 1
     Fraction of income that is taxable in state, assuming all output is sold domestically or is
                                              exported

                                         Domestic manufacturer                Domestic manufacturer making
                                         making in-state sales                foreign sales ("exports")
 Equally-weighted three-factor           100 percent                          2/3
 formula
 Double-weighted sales                   100 percent                          ½
 formula
 Sales-only apportionment                100 percent                            0


IV. Why Sales-only Apportionment Violates the GATT

        In the case of sales-only apportionment the corporation in the foregoing example pays no
tax in the state if it exports all its output, but pays tax on all its income if it exports none of its
output. Thus sales-only apportionment does, indeed, fall squarely within the description of
BTAs quoted earlier, “fiscal measures which put into effect, in whole or in part, the destination
principle (i.e. which enable exported products to be relieved of some or all of the tax charged in
the exporting country in respect of similar domestic products sold to consumers on the home
market ... )19 (emphasis added). Since corporate income taxes are direct taxes, sales-only
apportionment constitutes a subsidy of the type prohibited by the GATT. Stated differently,
sales-only apportionment violates the GATT because it produces a destination-based income
tax.20

19
  The same thing occurs on the import side. Sales-only apportionment falls within the prohibited class of “fiscal
measures which put into effect, in whole or in part, the destination principle (i.e. ... which enable imported products
sold to consumers to be charged with some or all of the tax charged in the importing country in respect of similar
domestic products)" (emphasis added)
20
  Despite the apparent subsidy for exports created by sales-only apportionment, we recognize that one may
nevertheless argue that it does not offend GATT because such apportionment favors "interstate" as well as "foreign"
exports. For example, if Corporation A and Corporation B, conduct all of their manufacturing operations in State X,
which has adopted sales-only apportionment, and Corporation A sells all of its output to State Y while Corporation B
sells all of its output to Country Z, one may contend that there is no violation of GATT because foreign sales are
subsidized no more than domestic sales. Although this is plainly an issue that will require further exploration to
determine whether the "prima facie" case set forth in this article will survive more extended scrutiny, we offer
several preliminary observations at this juncture.

          First, in the context of "national treatment" allegations against subnational legislation, the appropriate
comparison is between treatment of in-state and foreign goods. See Canada - Import, Distribution and Sale of
Certain Alcoholic Drinks by Provincial Marketing Agencies, GATT Doc. No. DS17/R (18 February 1992) (report of
the panel); United States - Measures Affecting Alcoholic and Malt Beverages, GATT Doc. No. DS23/R (Feb. 7, 1992)
(report of the panel). The fact that out-of-state goods are treated no better than foreign goods does not save the state
legislation from condemnation under GATT. One might advance an analogous argument with regard to the treatment
of interstate and foreign exports.



                                                           6
V. But Is Sales-only Apportionment an Export Subsidy?

        To overcome the prima facie case that sales-only apportionment is a prohibited export
subsidy, it would be necessary to argue persuasively that sales-only apportionment accurately
reflects where income originates. After all, there is nothing wrong with an income tax that
attributes income to the place where sales occur, provided that income originates where sales
occur. This seems to be a daunting task.
        In adopting formula apportionment as the methodology for attributing income, one must
accept that there is no objective standard for what is the correct apportionment formula. But one
can appeal to economic analysis, common sense, judicial precedent, standard practice, the
legislative history of sales-only apportionment, and federal law. None of these supports sales-
only apportionment.
        Common sense. The notion that only sales reflect where income is earned — that labor
and capital make no contribution — is far-fetched.
        Economic analysis. The common sense view that labor and capital contribute to the
creation of income reflects — indeed, is probably grounded in — economic analysis. Income is
the return to capital and labor. Sales are essentially to the realization of income, but they are not
enough, by themselves.21
        Judicial precedent. The U.S. Supreme Court has opined that income "may be defined as
the gain derived from capital, from labor, or from both combined."22 While this statement is now
          Second, Article XVI of GATT imposes general restraints on "any subsidy … which operates directly or
indirectly to increase exports." The more stringent discipline of Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures (the "SCM Agreement"), enacted as part of the Uruguay Round Agreements, prohibits "subsidies
contingent, in law or in fact, whether solely or as one of several other conditions, upon export performance." See
United States - Tax Treatment for "Foreign Sales Corporations," AB-2001-8 (14 January 2002) (report of the
Appellate Body) Whether or not sales-only apportionment constitutes a "subsidy … which operates directly or
indirectly to increase exports" or is "contingent, in law or in fact … upon export performance" will depend, in the
end, on a definitive interpretation by the WTO of the meaning of that phrase in the context of subnational measures
and, in particular, whether "foreign" in that context should be construed to embrace all out-of-states sales.

          Third, even if one were to conclude that (1) the "national treatment" analogy is inapposite because it deals
with indirect taxes on goods rather than subsidies for direct taxes and (2) the language of the Article XVI of GATT
and the SCM Agreement requires a comparison between a state's treatment of all domestic sales and all foreign sales
rather than between in-state and out-of-state sales, the more that the states adopt sales-only apportionment, the
stronger the case becomes for establishing a violation of GATT. Indeed, if every state adopted sales-only
apportionment, the subsidy "to increase exports" or "contingent … upon export performance" would be self-evident,
however one defined exports.


21
  Indeed, some economists have argued that sales should be dropped altogether from the apportionment formula; see
Harriss (1959); Studenski (1960), pp. 1131-32. We cite these authorities not because we necessarily agree with them
but only to demonstrate the absurdity, from an economic standpoint, of the position that capital and labor may be
ignored altogether in an income apportionment formula. Musgrave (1984) considered both “supply” and “supply-
demand” based formulas. Although the former approach considers using only labor and capital as apportionment
factors, the latter includes sales. Musgrave does not consider using only sales to apportion income.
22
 Eisner v. Macomber, 252 U.S. 189, 207 (1920) (quoting Doyle v. Mitchell Bros. Co., 247 U.S. 179, 185 (1918)
and Stratton's Independence, Ltd. v. Howbert, 231 U.S. 399, 415 (1913)).



                                                          7
regarded as an unduly narrow view of income, the notion that capital and labor should be ignored
completely in determining the source of income flies in the face of the Court's observation that
"the standard three-factor formula can be justified as a rough, practical approximation of the
distribution of either a corporation's sources of income or the social costs which it generates."23
We recognize, of course, as we observed at the outset of this note, that single-factor sales
apportionment has survived scrutiny as a matter of federal constitutional law. But that was no
ringing endorsement of single-factor sales apportionment as a method for apportioning income.
To the contrary, the Court permitted a deviation from the "benchmark"24 three-factor formula in
Moorman only because to do otherwise would require "extensive judicial lawmaking"25 and that
because Congress rather than the Court was the appropriate body to fashion such rules.
         Standard practice: As noted earlier, until recently the equally weighted three-factor
formula was the standard formula. "The three-factor formula … has gained wide approval
precisely because payroll, property, and sales appear in combination to reflect a very large share
of the activities by which value is generated."26, because it was thought to reflect reasonably well
where income originates, and even now only a few states have shifted to sales-only
apportionment. Canada uses payroll and sales, equally weighted, to apportion corporate income.
         Legislative history. The states that have made the shift have almost certainly done so
only to improve their competitive position.27 As a key economic advisor to the Governor of
Georgia observed in explaining the state's adoption of a double-weighted sales factor, the legislation
"offer[s] economic incentives for business expansions and locations here. . . . By promoting the
activities of firms that have a physical presence---property and labor---in Georgia, [the legislation]
should clearly have a stimulative effect."28 It seems unlikely that any state has made the shift
because it thought sales-only apportionment accurately reflects where income is earned.
         Federal law. Under the Internal Revenue Code, when a taxpayer manufactures goods
within the United States and sells them outside the United States or manufactures goods outside
the United States and sells them within the United States, the income "shall be treated as derived
partly from sources within and partly from sources without the United States."29 The

23
     General Motors Corp. v. District of Columbia, 380 U.S. 553, 561 (1965).
24
     Container Corp. of America v. Franchise Tax Board, 463 U.S. 159, 170 (1963).
25
     Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 278 (1978).
26
     Id. at 183.
27
  The following argument is typical of this line of reasoning: “[U]nder current tax policy, a company with multi-state
operations faces a higher tax bill in New York if it locates jobs and investment here. For tax purposes, New York
now allocates a company’s income to this state based on three factors: in-state sales (which is counted twice), in-state
payroll, and in-state property. By basing corporate taxation solely on in-state sales, New York can reward, rather
than punish, employers that create jobs here. . .” The Wire, newsletter of the Business Council of New York State.,
Inc., November 24, 2000, quoted in Mazerov (2001).
     28
    Georgia Department of Revenue, Georgia Revenue Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 1, at 1 (1995) (quoting Dr. Henry
Thomassen, economic advisor to Governor Zell Miller). Politicians and business groups in other states have expressed
similar sentiments in supporting legislation to change their three-factor formulas with a double-weighted sales factor to a
single-factor sales formula. See, e.g., Pratt and Goldberg (2002); (California) Plattner (2002) (New York)..
29
     I.R.C. § 863(b).


                                                             8
implementing regulations describe two methods that may be used for dividing the income from
these transactions between foreign and domestic sources. Under the so-called "'50-50" method,
one half of the income from these transactions is allocated to production activities and one half is
allocated to the sales function -- essentially a two-factor apportionment formula of property and
sales.30 Under the independent factory price (IFP) method, the taxpayer may elect to allocate
income between foreign and domestic sources on the basis of an independent factory price that is
"fairly established" by sales to unrelated third parties.31 These rules are significant because they
provide yet another piece of evidence as to what constitutes a reasonable standard for
determining the source of income derived from manufacturing in one jurisdiction and selling in
another. Whatever room for debate there may be about whether the formulary "50-50" method is
superior to the "arm's-length" IFP method, one thing is clear: Under no circumstances, under
federal law, can a taxpayer who manufactures in one jurisdiction and sells in another assign all of
the income to the jurisdiction of the sale, which is exactly what sales-only apportionment does.

VI. Does the GATT Constrain State Tax Policy?

         The GATT generally has been regarded as applicable to subnational governments. GATT
Article XXIV:12 provides that "[e]ach contracting party shall take such reasonable measures as may
be available to it to ensure observance of the provisions of this Agreement by the regional and local
governments and authorities within its territories." As an eminent American authority on GATT has
observed, "Article XXIV:12 obligates the United States to compel state adherence to [GATT] . . .
.".32 Indeed, over the years a number of disputes involving subnational measures have arisen under
GATT, including an American challenge to the practices of Canadian provinces regarding imports
of beer ("Beer I")33 and a Canadian challenge to various U.S. national and subnational taxes and
regulations applicable to alcoholic beverages ("Beer II").34 It was precisely because the
international trade rules embodied in GATT and related agreements applied to subnational taxing
measures that the American states expressed considerable misgivings about the impact on their


30
   Reg. § 1.863-3(b).The property factor is determined by reference to the location of the taxpayer's "production
assets" within and without the United States. Reg. § 1.863-3(c)(1). The sales factor is determined by reference to the
location of sales within and without the United States based on where rights, title, and interest of the seller are
transferred to the buyer. Reg. §§ 1.863-3(c)(2), 1.861-7(c).
31
  Reg. § 1.863-3(b)(2)(i). Under a third approach, the taxpayer may apportion income from § 863 sales by the
method it uses in keeping its books and records if it has received advance permission from the Internal Revenue
Service to do so. Reg. § 1.863-3(b)(3).
     32
      Hudec (1986), p. 221. see also Schaefer (2001), p. 630. Whether the trading partners of the United States can
convince it to enforce their complaints against sales-only apportionment does not affect the basic issue of whether
that method contravenes the GATT.
     33
     Canada - Import, Distribution and Sale of Certain Alcoholic Drinks by Provincial Marketing Agencies, GATT
Doc. No. DS17/R (18 February 1992) (report of the panel).
     34
      United States - Measures Affecting Alcoholic and Malt Beverages, GATT Doc. No. DS23/R (Feb. 7, 1992)
(report of the panel). See also Territory of Hawaii v. Ho, 41 Haw. 565 (1957) (GATT has same effect as treaty and
therefore Hawaii law in violation of GATT is preempted under Supremacy Clause).



                                                          9
taxing authority of the agreements reached during the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations.35 While the preexisting understanding under the language and practice of GATT was
that its rules applied to subnational measures, the new rules developed during the Uruguay Round
for services (the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)) were explicitly made applicable
to subnational measures.36 The states, speaking through the Multistate Tax Commission (MTC)37
and the Federation of Tax Administrators (FTA),38 objected both to the restrictions imposed by the
GATT/GATS on their traditional taxing powers and on the impact of the new dispute settlement
procedures under the WTO Agreement.39 Whatever the merits of those objections, the crucial point
for present purposes is the simple fact that the states made them, for it constitutes powerful
evidence, if any were needed, that states are subject to the substantive discipline of the GATT trade
rules.40

            VII. What Now?

        Our purpose has been to stimulate debate, by suggesting that sales-only apportionment is
a prima facie violation of the GATT. If that suggestion stands up to further analysis, one would
expect that the European Union and perhaps other trading partners of the United States will lodge
complaints in the World Trade Organization, contending that sales-only apportionment
constitutes a prohibited export subsidy. If those contentions are sustained, sales only
apportionment will have reached its high-water mark. If states want to improve their competitive
position, they will need to do it honestly and transparently, by reducing corporate tax rates,
perhaps replacing lost revenues with revenues from taxes levied explicitly --rather than implicitly
-- on payroll, property, or sales.41

   35
        See Aune (2002); Hellerstein (1995).
   36
      See GATS Art. I:3(a) (defining "measures by Members" as meaning "measures taken by . . . central, regional or
local governments and authorities").
  37
     The MTC is the administrative arm of the Multistate Tax Compact. The Compact seeks to facilitate proper
determinations of state and local tax liability of multistate taxpayers, promote uniformity or compatibility of state tax
systems, facilitate taxpayer convenience and compliance, and avoid duplicative taxation. The MTC frequently supports
the states' interests before judicial and legislative bodies. There are nineteen state members and fourteen state associate
members of the Multistate Tax Compact.
  38
       The FTA frequently represents the interests of states and state tax administrators before legislative bodies.
  39
   MTC and FTA spokesmen have expressed these concerns formally and informally to the Executive Branch, to
Congress, and to the tax community through oral and written submissions. Their views are summarized in MTC and
FTA (1994) and FTA (1994).
   40
      The United States submitted a number of reservations to the new GATS rules (as distinguished from the
preexisting GATT rules), including reservations relating to the states' use of formulary apportionment. See supra
note 1. In addition, in enacting the Uruguay Round Agreements, Congress provided a number of procedural
protections from GATT/GATS-based attacks on state laws, including a provision barring any "private" right of
action challenging a state law under GATT or GATS. See 19 U.S.C. § 3512. Only the United States may bring such
an action for the purpose of declaring a state law invalid under the Uruguay Round Agreements.
41
   Of course, those that levy sales taxes could also eliminate tax on sales to business; see McLure (2001).



                                                               10
        If sales-only apportionment is proscribed, what formula would be allowable under the
GATT? This question is difficult to answer; as we noted above, the decision is, to some extent,
arbitrary. It seems, however, that a formula that double-weights sales would be found
acceptable; as noted above, Canada uses a two-factor formula that places half the weight on
sales, as does the United States, at least in the context of goods manufactured by the seller.




                                               11
                                       REFERENCES

Aune, Katie "Enforcing the Standards of the GATT/WTO Challenges to U.S. State Taxes," Tax
      Notes International, Vol. 25, No. * (Jan. 14, 2002), pp. 179-184.

Federation of Tax Administrators, "U.S. Trade Agreements Could Greatly Affect States," Tax
       Administrators News, Vol. 55, No. 5 (May 1994), pp. 52-54 ["FTA"].

Harriss, C. Lowell, "Interstate Apportionment of Business Income," American Economic
       Review, Vol. 49 (June 1959), pp. 398-401.

Hellerstein, Jerome R., and Walter Hellerstein, State Taxation (New York: Warren, Gorham &
       Lamont, 3rd ed., 1998).

Hellerstein, Walter, "Implications of the Uruguay Multilateral Trade Agreements for American
       Subnational Taxation of International Commerce," Bulletin for International Fiscal
       Documentation, Vol. 49, No. 1 (January 1995), pp. 3-9.

Hellerstein, Jerome R., and Walter Hellerstein, State and Local Taxation (St. Paul, Minn: West
       Group, 7th ed., 2001).

Hudec, Robert E., "The Legal Status of GATT in the Domestic Law of the United States," in
       Meinhard Hilf, Francis G. Jacob & Ernst-Ulrich Petersmann (eds.), The European
       Community and GATT (1986), pp. ___-___-.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, and Joanna Shelton Erb, Subsidies in International Trade (Washington:
      Institute for International Economics, 1984).

Mazerov, Michael, “The Single-sales-factor Formula: A Boon to Economic Development or a
      Costly Giveaway?” State Tax Notes, Vol. 20, No. 21 (May 21, 2001), pp. 1775-1817.

McLure, Charles E., Jr., "The State Corporate Income Tax: Lambs in Wolves' Clothing,"in
      Henry J. Aaron and Michael J. Boskin, editors, The Economics of Taxation (Washington:
      Brookings Institution, 1980), pp. 327-346.

McLure, Charles E., Jr., “SSTP: Out of the Great Swamp, But Whither? A Plea to Rationalize
      the State Sales Tax,” State Tax Notes, Vol. 22, No. 14 (December 31, 2001), pp. 1077-
      1086.

McLure, Charles E., Jr., “The Nuttiness of State and Local Taxes — And the Nuttiness of
      Responses Thereto” forthcoming in State Tax Notes.

Multistate Tax Commission and Federation of Tax Administrators, "Ensuring That States Treat
       Foreign, U.S. Taxpayers Equally Under GATT and GATS," State Tax Notes, Vol. 6, No.
       24 (June 13, 1994), pp. 1523-1529 ["MTC and FTA"].


                                               12
Musgrave, Peggy B., "Principles for Dividing the State Corporate Tax Base," in Charles E.
      McLure, Jr., editor, The State Corporation Income Tax: Issues in Worldwide Unitary
      Combination (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press (1984), pp. 228-246.

Pierce, William J., "The Uniform Division of Income for State Tax Purposes," Taxes, Vol. 35,
        No. 10 (1957), pp. 747-750, 780-781.

Plattner, Robert D., "Democratic Candidate Attacks Governor's Tax Record," State Tax Notes,
        Vol. 24, No. 4 (April 22, 2002), p. 294.

Pratt, Allison, "California Assembly Tax Panel OKs Single-Sales-Factor Apportionment," State
        Tax Notes, Vol. 24, No. 8 (May 20, 2002), p. 665-667.

Pratt, Allison and Lenny Goldberg, "Assembly Tax Panel Hears Single-Factor Debate," State Tax
        Notes, Vol. 24, No. 7 (May 13, 2002), p. 567.

Schaefer, Matthew, "State Investment Attraction Subsidy Wars Resulting from a Prisoner's
       Dilemma: The Inadequacy of State Constitutional Solutions and the Appropriateness of a
       Federal Legislative Response," in Claus Dieter Ehlermann & Michelle Everson, eds.,
       European Competition Law Annual 1999: Selected Issues in the Field of State Aids,
       (2001), pp. 605-646.

Special Subcomm. on State Taxation of Interstate Commerce of the House Comm. on the
       Judiciary, "State Taxation of Interstate Commerce," H.R. Rep. No. 1480, 88th Cong., 2d
       Sess. (1964); H.R. Reps. Nos. 565 and 952, 89th Cong., 1st Sess. (1965) ["Willis
       Committee Report"]

Studenski, Paul, "The Need for Federal Curbs on State Taxes on Interstate Commerce: An
       Economist's Viewpoint," Virginia. Law. Review, Vol. 46, No. 6 (October 1960),
       pp. 1121-1149.

Weiner, Joann M., “Using the Experience in the U.S. States to Evaluate Issues in Implementing
      Formula Apportionment at the International Level,” Tax Notes International, Vol. 13,
      No.* (December 23, 1996), pp. 2113-2141.




                                              13
