                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ACADEMIC EARMARKS AND THE RETURNS TO LOBBYING


                                        John M. de Figueiredo
                                          Brian S. Silverman


                                         Working Paper 9064
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9064


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




We would like to thank Steve Ansolabehere, Frank Baumgartner, Ernie Berndt, Jerry Hausman, Simon
Johnson, Paul Joskow, S.P. Kothari, Abigail Payne, Jim Savage, Jim Snyder, Jesper Sorensen, Scott Stern,
and participants in seminars at Harvard, MIT, Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, George Mason, Toronto,
Washington University, USC, Caltech and the National Bureau for Economic Research for very helpful
discussion and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by John M. de Figueiredo and Brian S. Silverman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Academic Earmarks and the Returns to Lobbying
John M. de Figueiredo and Brian S. Silverman
NBER Working Paper No. 9064
July 2002
JEL No. K0, H1



                                              ABSTRACT

        Despite a large literature on lobbying and information transmission by interest groups, no prior
study has measured returns to lobbying. In this paper, we statistically estimate the returns to lobbying by
universities for educational earmarks (which now represent 10 percent of federal funding of university
research). The returns to lobbying approximate zero for universities not represented by a member of the
Senate Appropriations Committee (SAC) or House Appropriations Committee (HAC). However, the
average lobbying university with representation on the SAC receives an average return to one dollar of
lobbying of $11-$17; lobbying universities with representation on the HAC obtain $20-$36 for each
dollar spent. Moreover, we cannot reject the hypothesis that lobbying universities with SAC or HAC
representation set the marginal benefit of lobbying equal to its marginal cost, although the large majority
of universities with representation on the HAC and SAC do not lobby, and thus do not take advantage
of their representation in Congress. On average, 45 percent of universities are predicted to choose the
optimal level of lobbying. In addition to addressing questions about the federal funding of university
research, we also discuss the impact of our results for the structure of government.




John M. de Figueiredo                                    Brian S. Silverman
MIT                                                      University of Toronto
Sloan School of Management, E52-546                      Rotman School of Management
50 Memorial Drive                                        105 St. George Street
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347,                                Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6
Harvard Law School,                                      Canada
and NBER                                                 silverman@rotman.utoronto.ca
jdefig@mit.edu
                            Academic Earmarks and the Returns to Lobbying

                              John M. de Figueiredo and Brian S. Silverman
                                               May 2002

     "The education industry has long shown a masterful skill in obtaining public funds; for example,
     universities and colleges have received federal funds exceeding $3 billion annually in recent years, as
     well as subsidized loans for dormitories and other construction.... [But] the premier universities have not
     devised a method of excluding other claimants for research funds, and in the long run they will receive
     much-reduced shares of federal research monies."

        -- Stigler, George (1971), “The theory of economic regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics, pp. 4-5.



        Lobbying expenditures exceed $2 billion per year in the United States, more than three
times the campaign contributions given by political action committees or PACs (Timothy
Groseclose et al 2000). Many voters view such spending with suspicion, and the popular press
frequently cites it as prima facie evidence of the power of “pressure groups, each promoting its
own special interests, [to] prevent elected politicians from adopting policies that are in the
interest of the electorate as a whole” (Economist 1999). Yet remarkably little is known about the
economic returns actually obtained by lobbying organizations. Despite sixty-five years of
theoretical and empirical investigation,1 and a steadily increasing interest by the press and
electorate, there are no large-scale statistical studies of the returns to lobbying.2
        The dearth of statistical studies of lobbying is largely due to four challenges in data
collection and measurement. First, it is difficult to measure lobbying expenditures. Second,
many government policies lack identifiable pecuniary returns, thus making it difficult to measure
the monetary value of policy outcomes that have been influenced by lobbying. Third,

1
  There are robust sets of theories on information transmission in lobbying, focusing on who lobbies and gains
access (David Austen-Smith 1995; Gary S. Becker 1983; Randall L. Calvert 1985; John Mark Hansen 1991), who is
lobbied (Austen-Smith 1993; E.E. Schattschneider 1935; Julio Rotemberg 2002), how legislators receive and
process the information (Scott Ainsworth 1993; Rui J. de Figueiredo et al 1999; Lester W. Milbraith 1963, Kay L.
Scholzman and John T. Tierney 1986), and the organizational form of lobbying (Mancur Olson 1965; John M. de
Figueiredo and Emerson H. Tiller 2001). For a good overview of interest group lobbying theory and evidence, see
John R. Wright (1996).
2
  Since Schattschneider’s (1935) work on trade policy 65 years ago, scholars have sought to measure the impact of
lobbying on policy outcomes. Most of the empirical work is composed of case studies (e.g. Raymond Bauer et al
1963). Statistical work has comprised measures of lobbying which are coarse at best: a count or intensity measure
of lobbying contacts from surveys of lobbyists (Austen-Smith and Wright 1994; Wright 1990; Ken Kollman 1997),
the presence of a Washington office and lobbyists (Douglas Schuler 1999; Scholzman and Tierney 1986), and




                                                          1
organizations typically employ multiple instruments to exert political influence, including
lobbying, PAC contributions, and grassroots lobbying, creating statistical challenges to
estimating the returns to lobbying. Finally, it is difficult to control for the intrinsic quality
differences among competing lobbying interests.
        In this paper, we overcome these challenges by studying the returns to lobbying in a
particularly conducive context: lobbying efforts by universities to obtain “earmark” grants.
Earmarks, which are written into appropriations bills by legislators, allocate money directly to
projects at specific universities, thus bypassing the competitive peer review process. This
context enables us to overcome the empirical challenges described above. First, the Lobbying
Disclosure Act of 1995 allows us to measure university lobbying expenditures, and other
techniques described below allow us to allocate lobbying expenditures to the pursuit of earmark
grants. Second, earmarks are specified in dollar terms in legislation and targeted to particular,
identifiable educational institutions, overcoming problems of measurement of the dependent
variable. Third, universities seeking to influence legislators have few options besides lobbying,
because most universities, as non-profit institutions, are legally prohibited from using PAC
contributions or grassroots political organization to convey their preferences to legislators,
overcoming the estimation and confounding causal issues. Finally, we are able to control for
quality differences in interest groups with different systems of departmental rankings of
universities.
        Although our interest in academic earmarking is driven primarily by our desire to
estimate the returns to lobbying, the funding of academic research is an important topic in its
own right. The U.S. higher education system is widely seen as key engine of U.S. economic
growth, both through the training of students and through research discovery (Claudia Goldin
and Lawrence F. Katz 1999; David C. Mowery & Nathan Rosenberg 1993). Federal funding of
academic research has been a central component of the United States university system for
decades, providing roughly 60 percent of all university research funds since World War II
(Richard R. Nelson & Nathan Rosenberg 1994), and reaching $17 billion in FY2001. Most of
this funding is distributed at the discretion of central funding organizations unaffiliated with
Congress, such as the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation, and rely

proxies such as PAC contributions (Ian Maitland 1983; Randall S. Kroszner and Phil Strahan 1999). For an
overview of the empirical papers, see Frank R. Baumgartner and Beth L. Leech (1998).



                                                       2
on peer review (or other competitive selection processes) of research proposals to allocate funds.
In contrast, academic earmark requests are evaluated and granted by elected legislators and their
staffs. Expenditures on academic earmarks have risen over the past 20 years and now account
for almost 10 percent of government funding of university research (Jeffery Brainard and Ron
Southwick 2001). It is therefore not surprising that academic earmarking has received increasing
attention in the policy literature recently (James D. Savage 1999; David Malakoff 2001a, 2001b).
Despite this increased interest, there has thus far been no published systematic statistical analysis
of the earmarking process.3
        Finally, the debate over academic earmarking also fits within the broader literature on the
structure of government. Broadly speaking, the debate over earmarking mirrors the literature on
“good government” and the effect of rent-seeking on government productivity. Kevin M.
Murphy et al. (1993) demonstrate that rent-seeking behavior is subject to increasing returns,
suggesting that an initially small amount of rent-seeking behavior can spiral upward toward a
high-rent-seeking equilibrium. High levels of rent-seeking effort can “crowd out” other, more
productive efforts. One mechanism for stemming such behavior is for a government to commit
to “high quality” policies that effectively preclude its giving in to rent-seeking parties (Rafael La
Porta et al. 1999). While central, peer-reviewed agencies would likely be considered a form of
commitment, lobbying for earmarks might be characterized as rent-seeking, and thus crowding
out other productive efforts of government.
        Within the broad literature on the structure of government, the paper addresses the
congressional committee structure of government, and how it relates to federal discretionary
spending. In this literature, there are conflicting views as to whether representation on a
committee results in that committee spending more of the committee budget in committee-
members’ districts than in non-committee members’ districts.4 No study, however, has
examined the effect information transmission through lobbying has on such discretionary
spending. Wright (1985) does show that PAC contributions are sometimes effective in obtaining
favorable policy, only to the extent that the PAC is located in the member’s district. Whether

3
  Scholars have begun to study research outcomes associated with peer reviewed vs. earmarked projects (A. Abagail
Payne 2001; Payne and Aloysius Siow 2002).
4
  Those finding committee effect on spending include Richard L. Hall et al (1990) and Charles R. Plott (1969).
Those finding no effect include Kenneth R. Mayer (1991) and Bruce A. Ray (1980). Those having mixed results
include J. Theodore Anagnoson (1980) and R. Douglas Arnold (1981).




                                                        3
location matters in lobbying, and how lobbying might affect the results in the committee
structure-discretionary spending debate, remain open questions.
       We speak to three main issues in this paper: educational earmarks, the returns to
lobbying, and lobbying’s relationship to the performance of government and committees. We
begin by estimating the determinants of educational earmarks. We assess the importance of
political factors, district demographic factors, and institutional factors in determining the size of
earmarks that post-secondary educational institutions obtain. We include lobbying expenditures
by universities on the right hand side, and assess the impact of lobbying on earmarks, using a
number of different specifications, including instrumental variables. We also revisit the federal
appropriations process as it relates to educational earmarks, and explore the extent to which 1)
spending is targeted toward committee member districts, and 2) lobbying influences the amount
of money targeted toward institutions in the district. In doing so, we extend Wright (1985) to
include lobbying.
       We generate three main results. First, the size of academic earmarks is heavily
influenced by certain institutional characteristics, such as school ranking, or the presence of
Ph.D. degree-conferring departments or a medical school. We find evidence that, on average,
top research institutions are less likely than lower-ranked institutions to receive earmark funding.
This is consistent with claims that such institutions prefer to seek funding through the
competitive grant system rather than the political system.
       Second, political factors also heavily influence the size of earmarks. House and Senate
Appropriations Committee members send a disproportionate share of the academic earmarks to
their constituent universities, on the order of $105,000 to $130,000 for the Senate, and $80,000
to $145,000 by the House. Contrary to those who claim there is no relationship between federal
spending and committee membership, our study provides evidence to support the claim that
committee members do direct federal spending toward their districts.
       Finally, and most importantly, there is a complex relationship between lobbying and
earmarks, with respect to Senate Appropriations Committee (SAC) and House Appropriations
Committee (HAC) membership. In particular, the average returns to lobbying for an average
university are not statistically different from zero, when the institution is not represented by a
member of the SAC or HAC. But the returns to lobbying are very large when the institution is
located in the state (district) of a Senate (House) Appropriations Committee member. We



                                                  4
calculate the average returns to a dollar spent on lobbying for the average lobbying university
when there is representation on the SAC to range from $11 to $68, with almost all econometric
specifications yielding an estimate of the return from $11 to $17. With representation on the
HAC, the average lobbying university obtains an average return of $14 to $77 from a dollar
investment, with the baseline econometric estimates estimating a return of $20 to $36. Thus, the
returns to lobbying without SAC or HAC representation are near zero, but the average returns to
lobbying with SAC or HAC representation are indeed very large. Moreover, we cannot reject
the hypothesis that, on the margin, lobbying universities with SAC or HAC representation are
setting marginal benefit to marginal cost. Nevertheless, the vast majority of universities with
representation do not lobby, and thus are not obtaining the full benefit to having representation
on the HAC or SAC.
       This in turn indicates that lobbying is only effective to the extent that the legislator
representing the university is in a position to deliver an earmark, consistent with Wright’s
argument that location of political influence is important. SAC and HAC legislators are less
likely to send educational earmarks to districts they don’t represent. In this respect, HAC and
SAC members can be considered joint inputs into the earmarks production function. In addition,
the results are consistent with vote-seeking legislators doing their best to send money to their
districts, but relying upon their constituents to provide information to help them augment and
target that amount. Thus, we add to the discretionary spending debate by demonstrating that by
omitting lobbying from the calculus, scholars are omitting a potentially large factor driving the
discretionary spending behavior of legislators and committees. Finally, this also conforms to the
La Porta et al (1998) viewpoint of low commitment by legislators to the peer-review process,
giving certain interest-groups rent-seeking market power based on representation on certain
powerful committees.
       We structure the paper as follows. In the next section we offer some background on
educational earmarks and lobbying. In Section II we then discuss the empirical challenges in
measuring the returns to lobbying. In this section we discuss in depth the measurement of
lobbying and earmarks. Section III lays out the data and model. We provide the main results in
Section IV. In Section V, we discuss specification issues and possible alternative hypotheses for
the relationship between lobbying and earmarks, including how alumni networks affect the
results. We conclude in Section VI.



                                                  5
I. BACKGROUND ON EDUCATIONAL EARMARKS AND LOBBYING
         As Goldin and Katz (1999) note, American institutions of higher education emphasized
learning rather than research until late in the 19th century. However, as the scientific needs of
industry increased, so did the demand for academic research in applied sciences. Thus the
modern research-oriented university became widely established by World War I, with research
funded primarily by states and secondarily by local industry (Rosenberg and Nelson 1994).
Although the federal government funded roughly 25 percent of academic research by the 1920s,
this was largely in the form of agricultural research grants. These grants were awarded to land-
grant universities according to a formula that correlated the size of the grant to a state’s
agricultural output, rather than to the potential value of specific research proposals (Savage
1999).
         The exigencies of war led to a sea change in the mechanisms for federal funding of
academic research. As part of the war effort, the newly-formed Office of Scientific Research
and Development contracted with private sector organizations for wartime-related research. This
civilian agency, directed by Vanevar Bush, relied on scientists from academe and industry “to
recommend and to guide as well as to participate in scientific research with military payoffs”
(Mowery and Rosenberg 1989: 124). Largely due to the advocacy of Vanevar Bush, the practice
of awarding federal research funds to individual scientists via competitive project-based grants
became institutionalized by 1950. Under this system, the awarding of funds was managed by the
newly-created National Science Foundation and several other federal agencies, and awards were
made primarily on the basis of peer review of project proposals.
         By 2001, federal funding of academic research through competitive grants exceeded $15
billion. Numerous scholars of technology policy have argued that this system has ensured that
money is allocated toward the most promising research projects, and thus underpins the enduring
success of academic research in the United States (e.g., Nelson and Rosenberg 1993).
         Yet the competitive grant process has had its share of critics as well. A number of
prominent academicians and legislators have argued that peer review serves to concentrate
research funding in a few elite schools whose scientists populate the peer review boards (William
H. Gray 1994, John Silber 1987). Further, these critics have argued that peer review tends to
reward “safe” research projects that conform to accepted beliefs, thus starving truly breakthrough



                                                  6
research (Silber 1987). According to this view, the earmarking of federal funds through the
legislative process offers a potential counterbalance to the perceived defects of the competitive
grant process.
           The birth of academic earmarks can be traced to the late 1970s, when Jean Meyer,
President of Tufts University, engaged two lobbyists – Kenneth Schlossberg and Gerald Cassidy
– to help secure funding for a nutrition and aging center. In addition to demonstrating to other
universities that such funding could be obtained, this deal apparently gave Schlossberg and
Cassidy the entrepreneurial idea of systematizing the business of securing academic earmarks.
Over the next two decades Schlossberg and Cassidy, as well as several imitators, actively
pursued educational institutions as clients, holding out the promise of obtaining academic
earmarks (Savage 1999). The amount of money allocated through academic earmarks rose from
less than $17 million in 1980 (or $32 million if measured in constant 2001 dollars) to nearly $1.7
billion in 2001, a 100-fold increase in nominal terms (and a 52-fold increase in real terms). By
2001 academic earmarks represented nearly 10 percent of total federal funding of academic
research (see Figures 1a and 1b).


           ***********INSERT FIGURE 1a and 1b ABOUT HERE **********


           The rise of specialist lobbying firms to secure earmarks also routinized the earmark
“production schedule.” The “life cycle” of lobbying and obtaining an earmark is as follows.5 In
January, a university’s administrators meet with its lobbyist to formulate their requests and
lobbying strategy for the upcoming fiscal year earmarks. This entails prioritizing potential
requests by the likelihood of success, and identifying elected officials to lobby. In most cases,
the lobbyist will approach the Representative and/or Senator from the university’s district.
Beginning in March and April, the university begins lobbying the targeted representatives to
have its request included in the appropriations legislation. After the August recess, there is a
large push to have the request included in one of the thirteen appropriations bills. The cycle
ends, usually in November or early December, as the appropriations bills are sent to the
President. According to our interviewees, requests from one year do not carry forward to the

5
    According to interviews with staffers on the appropriations committees and lobbyists.




                                                           7
next year and the process starts again. This is mainly because the appropriations process, unlike
the budget process, is not a multiyear process.


II. CHALLENGES IN MEASURING THE RETURNS TO LOBBYING
         As noted in the introduction, estimating the returns to lobbying poses a number of
challenges. First, it is difficult to measure the monetary value of lobbying expenditures. Until
recently, systematic data on lobbying expenditures has not existed. Consequently, nearly every
published statistical study has relied on proxy measures, survey data, or dummy variable
measures for lobbying, rather than direct measures of lobbying expenditures.6
         Recent legislation passed by Congress has created lobbying expenditure disclosure
requirements for universities (and all interest groups) and thus allows us to overcome this
measurement problem. The Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 mandates that any individual who
spends more than 20 percent of his or her time lobbying administrative agencies, Congress, or
the Executive, must file a report disclosing the amount of money expended on this activity. Each
organization that lobbies Congress or an administrative agency, and spends more than $20,000
doing so, also must file a report with the Clerk of the House disclosing the name of the lobbyist,
the clients of the lobbyist, and the amount of money spent on lobbying by the client (to the
nearest $20,000).7 One complication that arises, however, is that firms and interest groups
typically lobby across a range of issues (and multiple organizations lobby on the same issue).
Even when a firm’s aggregate lobbying expenditure is known, it is difficult to identify how this
expenditure is allocated across different issues.
         We overcome this by examining academic earmark funding. Nearly all of university
lobbying is directed at two objectives: “earmark funding” and “science and research policy,”
and the vast majority is directed at the former objective.8 The first legislative item for which top
and lower tier universities lobby is “earmark funding” (discussed further below). A small number
of universities and umbrella groups also lobby for “science policy” -- to increase the amount of
competitive grant funding that congress allocates to research in the form of budgets for the

6
  Common proxies are PAC contributions, presence of a Washington office, 0-1 variable on “did you lobby on this
issue” from survey instruments or archival research, and the presence of trade associations or trade unions.
7
  The lobbyist must include in this report all expenses related to the lobbying, including the costs of lobbying
contacts and efforts in support of such contacts, including background work that is intended for use in contacts and
coordination with the lobbying activities of others (Office of the Clerk of the House, 2001). This includes salaries
and benefits costs, overhead, expenses, and third-party billings.



                                                          8
National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and agencies such
as the Department of Energy (DOE) and the Department of Defense (DOD). The organizations
that lobby for “research policy” include the top 50-100 research universities in the U.S., and
associations such as the American Association of Universities (AAU) and the Science Coalition.
The remaining 6,400 post-secondary institutions generally do not. (This fact will become
important when we consider how to control for universities that lobby for “science policy.”)
        Since the vast majority of universities’ lobbying expenditures (and virtually 100 percent
of lobbying expenditures by universities that are not among the top 50-100 research institutions)
is devoted to the pursuit of earmarks, concerns about allocating lobbying expenditures across
multiple policy objectives are ameliorated. Thus, we use the dollar amount of lobbying
expenditure as the key independent variable in our analysis below. In econometric specification
tests, we allow for different measures of lobbying.
        Second, it is difficult to measure the monetary value of policy outcomes that have been
influenced by lobbying. Many policies that governments legislate – such as saving the forests,
mitigating lawsuits, creating a new regulation, and eliminating a disclosure rule – lack
identifiable pecuniary returns. Even those government programs that do have discrete,
measurable dollar benefits often distribute these benefits among many groups (such as
telecommunications legislation). This makes the precise allocation of benefits to individual
groups or companies difficult. Coupled with the difficulty in identifying and measuring the dollar
value of lobbying expenditures, this challenge has made it nearly impossible to measure the
economic returns to lobbying efforts.
        We overcome this challenge by studying an easily measurable benefit. Earmark grants
specify the university that is to receive funding, the amount of the funding, and the purpose of
the funding.9 These earmarks are non-competitive grants given to universities, colleges, and
community colleges, for specific research and other projects attributable to the post-secondary
institution (Amy Finkelstein 1995). These projects range from research on corn, to the
development of underwater propulsion mechanisms, to the study of Irish management

8
 We have conducted interviews with lobbyists and they confirm this viewpoint.
9
 For example, “$10,000,000 for the construction and equipping a new space dynamics lab Utah State
University….”;
“$10,000,000 for NASA to establish an independent verification and validation center in conjunction with West
Virginia University” (Savage 1999: 8)




                                                        9
techniques. The dollar value of these earmarks is identifiable, measurable, and easily allocated
to a specific institution, consequently overcoming the measurement challenges noted above.
Thus, we use the dollar amount of these earmarks as the dependent variable in our analysis
below.
         A third challenge for scholars of lobbying is to disentangle lobbying’s impact from that
of other instruments of political influence. There are a myriad of ways in which interest groups
and firms influence legislation. The three most prominent are a) PAC contributions; b) lobbying;
and c) grassroots organizing. It would be incorrect to attribute policy outcomes to only one of
the factors when all three are being used or are available. More challenging, interest groups
should be simultaneously optimizing across all three tools at their disposal. Thus, when the
United Auto Workers (UAW) wants to influence the passage of certain labor legislation, it
should consider how to optimally allocate its resources among campaign contributions,
membership mobilization, and direct lobbying, to create the most favorable outcome. In
statistical studies of lobbying, therefore, one cannot simply include PAC contributions and
grassroots organization as variables on the right-hand side of the equation, but rather must
employ instruments that are correlated with PAC contributions and uncorrelated with lobbying,
and correlated with grassroots organizing and uncorrelated with lobbying. These are not trivial
instruments to derive and measure in a large sample statistical study.
         A study of university lobbying directly addresses this challenge. As non-profit
institutions, universities are not permitted to create and fund political action committees, and
thus give no money in PAC contributions or “soft money” to political candidates or political
parties.10 In addition, universities are not allowed to engage in grassroots organization of its
members for political purposes. Lobbying is clearly the dominant, and in most cases the only,
avenue for universities pursuing earmarks.
         A fourth and final challenge in measuring the returns to lobbying relates to variance in
the quality of the groups lobbying. Let us suppose, for example, that IBM lobbies for legislation
regarding disk drive construction. Winchester and Seagate also lobby, but for a different
legislative outcome. IBM’s preferred policy is passed by Congress. It is not clear to the
researcher whether this results from IBM’s lobbying effort, or from its superior technology in




                                                 10
disk drives. If one is to measure the returns to lobbying, then one must be able to control for the
optimality of the policy, relative to the alternatives. This is quite difficult to do, because it is
difficult to determine if IBM is the best disk-drive maker, and it is likely even more difficult to
determine a ranking of all disk drive makers in the industry for a statistical analysis. The
compounded challenges become even more onerous if one considers other policies such as
saving dolphins, reforming campaign finance, or drilling in the Arctic, where a measuring of
social welfare or ranking of groups is required as well.
         This challenge is easily surmounted in a study of universities. Using ranking data by
independent sources, such as the National Academy of Science, we can control for quality of
university by department.


III. DATA AND MODEL


     A. DATA
         The dependent variable is the amount of money Congress earmarks to a given academic
institution.11 A full description of all the variables can be found in the Appendix.
         The primary independent variable of interest is the amount of money an academic
institution of higher learning spends on lobbying. We have obtained the 1997-1999 data from
disclosures made by institutions in compliance with the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995, as
described in the previous section.12

10
   Universities could form non-affiliated PACs. For example, there could arise a Harvard PAC, but this PAC would
be independent from the university, and the university would not be permitted to fund the traditional 40 percent
overhead these PACs have. However, this is extremely rare.
11
   Some earmarks are shared amongst more than one university. In almost every case, we have been able to identify
the universities that share the earmark, and have allocated the earmark funding to the universities in an equal
proportion. For those handful of shared earmarks for which we cannot identify all the institutions which share, we
have assumed that there are 2.5 institutions sharing the earmark and have allocated 2/5 of the shared earmark to the
institution.
12
   One concern about the data is that the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 requires interest groups to file the amount
of all of their lobbying of the federal government. This includes both administrative agency and congressional
lobbying. However, this study is only concerned with congressional lobbying. If an institution engages in a
substantial amount of administrative agency lobbying, then there would be an error in variables problem. To
address this problem we conducted a number of interviews with university lobbyists at 20 institutions of various
geography and rankings, to discuss their institution’s lobbying patterns. All noted that the focus on their lobbying
efforts is on Congress. Two elite institutions did note that some of their lobbying is at the administrative agency
level over disclosure and safety rules, but they characterized this as small in magnitude and significance relative to
their congressional lobbying efforts. To a good first approximation, the lobbying data does reflect congressional
lobbying. In addition, we pursue econometric solutions to this potential problem in the next section.



                                                         11
           The third set of data employed is a set of characteristics for each congressperson and
senator in each year from 1997 to 1999. We include the Representative’s ADA score, the two
Senators’ mean ADA score, dummy variables for appropriations committee assignments, dummy
variables for chairmen and ranking members, and dummy variables if the Senator or
Representative has previously held a job as an educator. We also match the legislators with their
alma maters, to test for any effect on the outcomes of earmarking. This set of data controls for
congressional influence over the earmarking process.
           A fourth set of data comes from the Bureau of the Census. The Census Bureau maps the
results of the Census into congressional districts. In employing this data, we study whether
Congress targets earmark grants to universities in districts with specific characteristics. We
include data on population density, age, education, employment, and income of individuals in the
district.
           To control for university quality, we employ the National Academy of Science (NAS)
university rankings. Every 10 years, the NAS ranks 41 different departments at all research
universities on their research quality. Each department is given a score on a 1 to 5 scale (with
decimals), and then is given an ordinal ranking relative to all other schools.
           Finally, we employ a database of other university characteristics. This database is
popularly called the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, or IPEDS database. Each
year, the Department of Education certifies post-secondary institutions that are eligible for Title
IV (or financial aid) funds. Students who attend certified institutions can apply to the federal
government to receive Pell grants, Stafford Loans, and other forms of federally subsidized
financial aid. We mapped these institutions into congressional districts by nine-digit zip code to
create a concordance with the congressional data. The main variables we use here to control for
institution characteristics are whether the institution is private, has a medical school, has a Ph.D.
program, or has athletic aid scholarships. We also control for student enrollment. We also use
the IPEDS data and zip code data to determine the number of institutions in the state and the
congressional district.
           One challenge in this study is determining which institutions to include in the sample
frame. An examination of the data reveals that there are over 6,453 post-secondary institutions
in the 50 states13 that are certified by the Department of Education, and whose students are

13
     Only institutions in the 50 states have been included in this study.


                                                             12
eligible to receive financial aid. These range from prestigious research institutions such as
Harvard University, to one-year certification programs such as AAA School of Hair Styling.
Although these could all be considered “credible” institutions of post-secondary training,14 not
all such institutions may be in the “risk set” to receive earmarks. To further cull the dataset, we
eliminated all institutions that are not ranked by the Carnegie Foundation as institutions of higher
education. We eliminate another 49 institutions because of incomplete data. Finally, we
eliminate all for-profit schools (because they are not in danger of losing their tax exempt status if
they engage in other forms of political activity). This leaves us with 2,382 institutions under
scrutiny. In later sections of this paper, we consider the possibility of further restricting the
sample.
         Table 1 presents descriptive statistics. We bifurcate the table into all universities all
years (n=7,146), and only those that lobby (n=423).15 The average annual earmark amount for
all institutions is $230,290 with a maximum of $44.5 million for Loma Linda University.
Annual lobbying expenditures for this group have averaged $7,442, ranging from no lobbying to
$760,000 by Boston University. For the sub-sample that lobby, the average earmark is $1.92
million and the average lobbying expenditure $125,726. It is the fact that earmark grants are 15-
35 times lobbying expenditures that have led many casual commentators to note that interest
groups receive so much for their minor lobbying efforts.


                     ***********INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE **********




     B. LOBBYING AND EARMARKS
         We begin by exploring the relationship between committee structure, lobbying and
earmarks. Figure 2a presents a graph of earmarks on lobbying for all years, all institutions, with

14
   The Department of Education frequently revokes the status of institutions usually in response to high default rates
on student loans.
15
   There are four institutions where the governing board lobbies. For example, the California Community College
System lobbies the federal government. We allocated this lobbying effort into each school with an IPEDS number
in the California Community College System evenly, and by enrollment. In no case, however, did the allocation
exceed a $3,000 per school. Because the cut-off in observable lobbying for all other schools is $20,000, we coded
these a zeroes. Note, if we eliminate schools in these four systems from our sample, it does not change our results.
If we include the allocated amounts, the results presented in this paper are slightly smaller in magnitude, but with
greater statistical significance.



                                                         13
the state in which the institution is located indicated. A review of the figure shows that both
earmarks and lobbying and distributed across a range, with a large concentration at smaller
amounts. There is no obvious systematic pattern in the data.
       In Figure 2b, we replace each state indicator with a legislator indicator. If the institution
is represented by a House Appropriations Committee member, the point receives an H; a Senate
Appropriations Committee member, an S; both a House and Senate Appropriations Committee
member, an HS; and no appropriations committee members, an O. A pattern now begins to
emerge. Those institutions that are high are the earmark-scale tend to have Senate and/or House
appropriations committee membership. Those institutions that are low on the earmark scale
(even if high on the lobbying scale) tend to be more highly represented by no appropriations
committees members. This is suggestive of the importance of appropriations committee
representation.


            ***********INSERT FIGURES2a and 2b ABOUT HERE **********


       Table 2 shows the average levels of lobbying and average size of earmark per university
in the 1997-1999 time period by appropriations committee membership. The table shows the
statistics for all universities, and also for the “lobbier” (lobbying expenditures > 0) sub-sample.
In the full sample, the results show that the average university with no representation on the SAC
spent $9,430 lobbying, and received an earmark of $144,693. The unconditional average return
was over $15 for every $1 spent on lobbying. However, universities with representation on the
SAC lobbied about 40 percent less than their non-represented counterparts, yet received just over
two times the earmark, for an unconditional return on investment of almost $56 for every $1
spent on lobbying. A similar pattern can be found in the House. The return for universities
without representation on the HAC is just over $25 for every dollar spent in lobbying. Their
counterparts who happen to be in districts where the representative is on the Appropriations
Committee, lobby almost the same, on average, and receive an earmark of almost $320,000
more, for a return of $66 for each dollars in earmark for every dollar spent on lobbying.


                  ***********INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE **********




                                                 14
           When we limit our analysis to institutions that actually lobby, the relative results are
roughly the same. A lobbying university with SAC representation receives on average, three
times the return of a university that is not presented by a SAC member. In the lower chamber,
lobbiers with HAC representation also receive three times the amount of earmarks, on average,
than lobbying universities without HAC representation. This evidence is consistent with the
hypothesis that committee membership is crucial in determining who receives federal
educational earmarks. Moreover, it does suggest that universities do alter their lobbying and
expectations for federal outlays in a statistically significant way, based on the representation they
have in Congress.
           While the static unconditional means provide the first chapter of an interesting story, we
have a short time series in the data (1997-1999), that might also help to add insight. There are
very few individuals who switch on or off of the appropriations committees during this time
period. All of the switching occurs after the 1998 election. In Table 2 we illustrate two of the
switchers. Senator Faircloth (R-NC) is defeated in 1998 by Senator John Edwards (D-NC), and
thus loses his position on the SAC. He is not replaced by Edwards or by Jesse Helms (R-NC), so
North Carolina loses its representation on the SAC. One can see the impact of such a switch in
the first two columns of Table 3. There is large jump in lobbying by North Carolina universities
between 1998 and 1999, but the earmarks to North Carolina are cut in half in 1999. A
contrasting example is the retirement of Dale Bumpers (D-AR) who served on the SAC until his
retirement in 1998. As in the case of North Carolina, Arkansas actually witnessed an increase in
lobbying after Bumpers stepped down from the SAC, but also saw an increase in earmarks.16


                        ***********INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE **********


           Arizona provides information on the opposite effect. Jon Kyl is (R-AZ), is elected in
1994 and is elevated to the SAC in 1999, giving Arizona new representation on the Committee
as the Committee’s most junior member from the majority party. Though average lobbying stays
level during between 1998 and 1999, educational earmarks for the average university in Arizona
increase by 41 percent. Likewise, Senator Durbin (D-IL) is elevated to the SAC in 1999
(replacing Bumpers). This results in an increase in lobbying and an increase in earmarks. Thus,

16
     This may be partially a President Clinton effect, as the President nears the end of his second term.


                                                            15
in three of the four cases of committee switchers, we see the both lobbying and earmarks
responding to changes in SAC membership.
        While this section provides evidence that examining the unconditional means supports
the committee power story, and that universities change their lobbying in response to
representation in Congress on the appropriations committees, it is difficult to determine a causal
relationship from this data alone. In order to do this, we conduct a statistical analysis.


     C. METHOD
        We begin by assuming a diminishing marginal return to lobbying. How lobbying enters
into the equation, however is not certain, so we consider (Lobbying)γ, where γ is the power
function that determines the concavity of the function and the rate of diminishing marginal
returns to lobbying.17 Thus, we wish to estimate the following equation:


                     Earmark $ it = α it + β 1 ( Lobbying it ) γ + β 2 HAC it + β 3 SAC it +
                     β 4 ( Lobbying it ) γ * HAC it + β 5 ( Lobbying it ) γ * SAC it
                     + ωΧ it + δΩ i + η t + ε it


where Earmark$ is the dollar value of the earmark university i, received in year t, (Lobbying)γ is
the lobbying expenditure of institution i in time t raised to the power γ which is a factor of the
degree of diminishing marginal returns, HAC and SAC are dummy variables for representation
on the HAC and SAC, Χ it is a matrix of time-varying institutional-specific factors, and Ω i is a

set of time-invariant institutional factors. We include interactive variables of lobbying with the
two appropriations committees as well.
        To account for the committee structure hypothesis, we include direct effects of HAC and
SAC, in the way they are traditionally included in the model. If House and Senate members are
responsive to the needs of their own districts and tend to send money to their own districts, then
the β 2 and β 3 parameters will pick up the magnitude of this effect.

17
  We begin by considering a function of linear relationship between earmarks and the log of lobbying expenditures
as the base case, and consider other functional forms in later models. A trans-log or polynomial model might be a
natural candidate specification. However, given that we have interactive variables that are endogenous, severe
multicollinearity problem arises in attempting to instrument for many higher power endogenous interactive terms.




                                                        16
         We also include the interactive effect to see if members in positions of power are more
responsive to lobbying than those who are not. That is, controlling for committee assignments,
leadership, and district composition, does lobbying a powerful legislator who represents you
result in any additional benefit to lobbying. We rely on β 4 and β 5 to measure the effect. A
positive coefficient would suggest a larger return to lobbying to universities that are located in
key districts.18
         In order to find γ we conduct a grid search, allowing γ to vary on the interval [0, 1] (no
effect to constant returns), and minimize the sum of squared errors (SSR). We find a minimum
of the sum of squared errors at γ = 0.23. This is nearly equal to the log transformation of
lobbying. We cannot reject that the log transformation and the γ = .23 transformation yield the
same results. Because of the intuitive and attractive properties of the log transformation, we
present the baseline econometric results using Ln(Lobbying).19 In later specifications in Table 6,
we consider γ = .23 and censored regression models. All standard errors are robust in the single
panels, and clustered on institutions in the multiple time period panels.
         One concern with the specification above is that the coefficient estimates might be
biased. This may occur because the set of schools that lobby may not be a random selection of
institutions. Thus, we would have an unobservable factor that is correlated with both the
outcome and the error term. Hence, we consider instrumental variables to solve this problem.
We look for a variable that is correlated with the independent variable but uncorrelated with the
error term. We have four candidate variables that might meet this criterion, two of which are
used in the baseline estimations.
         The first instrument used in the baseline models is the overhead rate for the university.
All federal research grants to universities have indirect costs (commonly known as overhead)
which are attached to the grant. Overhead rates, negotiated with government contracting
authorities, are designed to pay for operating costs and infrastructure of the university for
research. Two characteristics of this variable make it an attractive instrument. First, because
overhead is usually attached to earmarks, the higher the overhead rates, the higher the incentive
of an organization to seek an earmark. Second, the higher the overhead rate, the more money the

18
  The instrument that is omitted from each equation for these interactive variables is the interaction of the chosen
instrument with HAC and SAC.




                                                          17
university has to engage in lobbying activities, and the more likely it is to engage in lobbying.
Indeed, in the political realm, it is has been shown that companies tend to give more PAC
contributions to politicians the higher are their profits and sales (Kevin B. Grier et al. 1994). We
use a similar logic here with lobbying. The instrument is likely to be positively correlated with
lobbying, yet it is unlikely to be directly correlated with earmarks, because the politicians are
unlikely to know the overhead rates for each post-secondary institution in the district.
        We obtained the overhead rates from the Division of Cost Allocation of the Office of
Grants Management of the Department of Health of Human Services (HHS).20 Universities
usually sign global agreements to cover research funded by the federal government for a
specified overhead rate for a given year. While 90 percent of the contracts are signed with HHS,
about 10 percent of contracts are signed with the Department of Defense (DOD) and Department
of Education (DOEd). HHS collects all of these contracts in the only comprehensive, centralized
database of overhead rates of which we are aware. We obtained the contracts from HHS and
have taken the relevant overhead rate in April of the year of interest.21 Table 1 shows that
overhead rates range from 8 percent to 85 percent, with 22 percent as a mean. The first stage
regression of lobbying on the RHS variables and overhead rate indicates that a 10-point rise in
overhead rates results in between a 2 percent to 10 percent rise in lobbying expenditure at the 90
percent to 99 percent level of statistical significance, depending upon the precise first stage
specification.
        The second potential instrument is lag of Ln(Lobbying).22 Lobbying is a sticky cost that
universities incur from one year to the next. There is also high positive correlation between lag
of lobbying and lobbying. An important criterion, however, is that lobbying in the previous
period not be correlated with earmarks in this period. To explore whether this is a reasonable
assumption, we interviewed congressional staffers. As noted above in Section I, lobbying during

19
   We add one to the value of lobbying so that the RHS variable will not reach negative infinity. In Model 7, we
relax this transformation of the RHS and use γ = .23, where zeroes are recorded for zero levels of lobbying.
20
   Special thanks to Charles Seed and Otto Kent for assistance with the data.
21
   Most overhead rate contracts go from summer to summer, though a few are on a calendar year schedule, and are
generally sticky from year to year. In most cases, we use the on-campus research rate for the main campus. For
universities that did not have this rate, we used the closest category available.
22
   Although one might be concerned about the “quality of projects” being funded, writers have noted that academic
earmarks are really just a form of discretionary spending and transfers (Savage 1997), independent of project
quality. If universities move along with some steady pattern of lobbying, and then in one particular year, have a
good project for an earmark, their lobbying may suddenly shoot up. We would like to have instrument to control




                                                        18
one year has no effect on appropriations decisions the following year, per se. We find further
evidence in Savage (1999: 109), who cites the marketing material of one of the top earmark
lobbyists that the cycle for obtaining an earmark is 1-2 years. To the extent that the
appropriations process is characterized by a “memory-less” annual cycle, it is unlikely that
lobbying in one period has an effect on the appropriations in the current period. A doubling of
lobbying in the previous period results in an 86 percent increase in lobbying in this period at the
99 percent level of statistical significance. Though there is a potential theoretical argument to
use this instrument, a Hausman specification test for overidentification indicates we should
include this second instrument at the 99 percent level of confidence. Nevertheless, in Table 6 as
an extension to the baseline results, we remove this instrument and estimate the just-identified
model with only overhead rates.
         We considered two additional instruments, but their disadvantages led us to exclude them
from the analysis. The first is a free cash measure. For a sub-sample of the universities, we have
information on their total revenue and total expenditures. We could use the log of the difference
as a measure of free cash. The more free cash the university has, the more likely it is to engage
in lobbying for favors. The logic is the same as that for overhead rates. We opted not to use this
because the coverage is not as good as overhead rates, and the effect is likely to be the same.
The second additional instrument is endowment levels and returns. Unfortunately, this
instrument has a number of problems. Only some universities have endowments. This is not
necessarily a problem; however, finding comparable and comprehensive data is difficult. As with
the free cash flow measure, the endowment data collected by the Department of Education
IPEDs survey is present for less than 1/3 of the sample. Moreover, in both cases, a Hausman
specification test allows us to reject the hypothesis that there is systematic variation in the
coefficients using these instruments.


IV. RESULTS
         In Table 4 we present our initial results. Model 1 presents the simple OLS model using
the general framework proposed by most scholars.23 We include a direct effect for lobbying and

for the “quality of idea”, and the lag of lobbying serves as that kind of instrument, because it is correlated with the
baseline quality of ideas being generated from the institution.
23
   This includes examining the effectiveness of lobbying as a direct effect, without considering the nature of joint
inputs with the legislator or the recipient of the information.



                                                           19
a direct effect for SAC and HAC membership, and no interactive effects. In this model, we see
the effect posited by some scholars of federal spending—that committee members direct
spending to their home districts and states. SAC members earmark $178,184 more per university
to their states than do members who do not hold these seats. HAC members earmark $287,390
more per university to their districts than do members who do not hold those seats. These
coefficients are statistically significant at the 99 percent level of significance. Thus, we see that
in the case of educational earmarks, committee membership is associated with larger
discretionary spending being targeted to the district in this specification. The direct effect of
lobbying is also substantial in this traditional model. For a university that spends the average
amount on lobbying ($7,450), the average return to lobbying is $100.96 for every dollar spent,
after controlling for congressional representation, district characteristics, university quality, and
university characteristics. For the average lobbying university ($125,726), the return is $7.88.
This, too, is statistically significant at the 99 percent level. The magnitude of the coefficient and
its statistical significance confirms the general belief that there are enormous returns to lobbying
for everyone given the investments made. However, this is unlikely to be the correct model.


                  ***********INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE **********


       In Model 2, we test what we believe to be a more accurate model of lobbying. This
estimation indicates that the high returns to lobbying are confined to those who are fortunate
enough to be located in the districts of powerful congressmen, and lobby those powerful
legislators. In Model 2, we include the interactive variables (Lobbying*House Appropriations
Comm and Lobbying * Senate Appropriations Comm). The inclusion of these two omitted
variables changes the estimated effectiveness of lobbying. Although the coefficients on the
direct SAC and HAC variables are still measured with statistical significance of 99 percent, their
impact is cut by 40 percent. That is, the direct returns to having a SAC or HAC member are now
$106,509 and $146,923 respectively, to the average university in the district. The coefficient on
lobbying plummets to less than 1/10 of its value in Model 1. Allowing for its log formulation,
lobbying efforts by the average university yields average returns of $7.74 for each dollar spent.
If we consider the average lobbying university, the average return to its $125,726 investment in
lobbying is $0.60 for every dollar spent. More problematic for believers of the direct effect of



                                                  20
lobbying, the coefficient is no longer measured with precision, and it is not statistically
significant in this model or in any subsequent models. We cannot reject the hypothesis that there
is zero direct effect to lobbying.
       The interactive variables, however, have coefficients that are positive and statistically
significant at the 95 percent and 90 percent level of significance. Lobbying is much more
effective if the lobbyist is located in the district of the key decision-makers. Thus, in this model,
controlling for all previously-mentioned effects, the average returns to lobbying for a university
that spends the average amount on lobbying ($7,442) and is represented by a HAC member is
$275.28; a university with average lobbying and representation on the SAC can expect $150.10
on average for every dollar spent. If we evaluate, however, what SAC representation does for
lobbying investment of the average lobbying university ($125,726), the return is $11.11 for SAC
representation and $21.48 for HAC representation. This result is consistent with the intersection
of two hypotheses: the location hypothesis and the informational hypothesis of lobbying. Thus
the returns to having a House or Senate member in the key position is composed of a direct effect
unrelated to lobbying and an additional effect tied to the amount of lobbying undertaken.
       Model 2 indicates that average returns to lobbying for universities with HAC or SAC
representation are extremely high, exceeding 1000 percent. This raises the question: if the
average returns to lobbying are so high, are universities “underinvesting” in lobbying? We
address this question by examining the marginal returns to lobbying and determining whether
universities are setting the marginal returns equal to the marginal costs. We categorize the
universities that lobby into three groups: those with no representation, those with HAC but no
SAC representation, and those with SAC but no HAC representation. For each category, we
identify the average lobbying expenditure by universities, and then calculate the return that the
average lobbying university would obtain if it spent one additional dollar on lobbying. We base
this calculation on the coefficients from Model 2. Table 5 presents the results.


               **********INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE ***********


       Table 5 shows that, conditional on lobbying, the average return to lobbying universities is
$15.64 for universities with HAC representation and $11.79 for universities with SAC
representation. At the same time, the marginal return for those with HAC representation is $1.29



                                                 21
for every dollar spent, and the marginal return for those with SAC membership is $1.00 for every
dollar spent.24 We then conduct a statistical test to answer two questions: can we reject the
hypothesis that the marginal return to lobbying for every additional dollar spent is zero? Can we
reject the hypothesis that the marginal return to lobbying for every additional dollar spent is one?
The final two columns of Table 5 answer these questions. For lobbying universities with HAC or
SAC representation, we can reject the hypothesis that the marginal benefit is zero, but cannot
reject the hypothesis that the marginal benefit is equal to one at the 95 percent level of
confidence using a Wald test. Thus, for universities that enjoy either HAC or SAC
representation, we cannot reject the hypothesis that universities are setting MB = MC. The
divergence of the marginal condition and the average condition also suggests that universities
with representation face a steep benefit from lobbying, which flattens out quickly. Table 5 also
shows that, for lobbying universities without HAC or SAC representation, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the marginal return to lobbying is zero, and we can reject the hypothesis that the
MB is equal to one. While the vast majority of universities-year observations (93 percent, n =
2,805) without HAC or SAC representation do not lobby, universities without representation that
do lobby (7 percent, n = 219) may be engaging in excess lobbying when there is no HAC or SAC
representation. We can contrast this to those universities with representation on the HAC or
SAC. Here, we see the reverse effect. About 5 percent (n = 172) of university-year observations
that do have HAC or SAC representation do lobby and take advantage of their privileged
representation in Congress while 95 percent (n = 3,353) do not. On average, we estimate that
approximately 45 percent of universities are lobbying optimally, 6 percent are engaged in
excessive lobbying, and 49 percent of universities are lobbying less than is optimal. One reason
for systematic under-lobbying may be that there is not yet a consensus in the university
community as to whether this is a “legitimate” form of government funding of university
research.
         One concern about these marginal calculations is their robustness. The marginal return
calculation is sensitive to the functional form, which thus far has been specified as the log of
lobbying. However, we can return to our original formulation and examine over what range of
diminishing marginal returns (γ) we will still not reject the hypothesis that MC = MB = 1. The

24
  To calculate the marginal returns, we calculate the return to lobbying at the average level of lobbying. Then we
add one dollar to this amount and calculate the returns to lobbying for the average plus one dollar. This amount is



                                                         22
last column of the Table 5 shows the results. We can reject that the coefficient is equal to zero,
and cannot reject (with a Wald test at the 99 percent level) that the coefficient implies MC = MB
= 1, for universities with HAC representation for the range γ = [.01, .23], and for universities
with SAC representation for the range γ = [.02, 1.00]. Put differently, for reasonable ranges of
diminishing marginal returns to lobbying, we cannot reject the hypothesis that universities are
optimizing on the margin. These results help to explain why we see such large returns to
lobbying—namely that the universities are optimizing, in general, on the margin, but are
obtaining a large return on average. The popular press and many academics tend to focus on the
average return, rather than the marginal return.
        The results of Model 2 show that a university that spends the average amount on
lobbying ($125,726), and is average in all other respects, will obtain an earmark of $110,000 if it
has no representation in either appropriations committees, $1,613,000 if it has representation on
only the SAC, and $2,881,000 if it has representation on only the HAC.
        Model 3 presents the results using instrumental variables, namely the overhead rate and
lagged lobbying expenditure. As in the previous model, the coefficients on the lobbying
variables with Senate and House interactions are statistically significant at the 95 percent and 90
percent level, and the direct effect of lobbying is not statistically significant. The coefficients of
both interactive variables increases about 50 percent compared to Model 2. The direct effect of
SAC maintains its economic and statistical significance, but the coefficient for the direct effect
of HAC is almost half its magnitude compared to Model 2 and not statistically significant.
        In Model 4, we deal with the problem of institutional capabilities and idiosyncracies. For
example, universities could differ in their unobserved abilities to obtain earmark grants. These
might be related to the quality of internal lobbyists, alumni networks, and the charisma of the
university chancellor or president. To solve for this problem, we repeat the estimation procedure
using university random effects in a random effects instrumental variables estimator.25 This
accounts for both the endogeneity of lobbying and for the unobserved institution-specific effects.
The result is presented in Model 4. The coefficient on the direct effect of lobbying is around six
times larger than the previous two models, and is, again, not statistically significant. The
coefficients on both interactive variables (HAC*Lobbying and SAC*Lobbying) are about

the marginal benefit, and should be equal to one if the MC=MB.




                                                      23
halfway between the values in the previous two models. Both coefficients are statistically
significant at the 99 percent level of confidence. Taken at the average level of lobbying for
lobbying universities, having SAC representation results in is $13.61 larger returns to lobbying
compared to those universities without SAC representation, while HAC representation results in
$28.89 greater return to lobbying than those without HAC representation. The direct effects of
HAC and SAC are close to the previous model. Our test of marginal returns for Model 4 yields
results that are similar to those presented in Table 5 for Model 2.
        Only a handful of the control variables are measured with statistically significant
coefficients. Institutions with PhD programs receive $600,000 more in earmarks. However,
each top-ranked research department an institution has lowers the earmark by about $50,000.26
Together these suggest that earmarks are being directed to middle and lower-tier institutions with
Ph.D. programs. Institutions with medical schools receive $1.4 - $1.8 million more in earmark
funding than do universities without these higher education programs. In some specifications,
the political and district variables have a statistically significant impact on the size of earmarks.
In Model 4, alumni on the HAC and SAC raise the value of an earmark by $321,000 and
$617,000 respectively. Finally, the earmark that a university receives increases with the number
of universities in its district, with each additional university in the district increasing the earmark
by $15,000 to $25,000.
        Overall, the results suggest that there is a zero or small return to lobbying for earmarks in
the absence of having a congressional representation on the HAC or SAC. In the presence of
HAC or SAC representation, however, the returns to lobbying for the average lobbying
university are $11-$17 and $20-$36, respectively.


V. SPECIFICATION AND ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES


        A. SPECIFICATION
        A number of steps were taken to test the accuracy of the assumptions underlying the
model as well as the robustness of the results to different specifications. Using an F-test, we can,

25
   One might also employ a fixed effects estimator to address this unobserved heterogeneity. However, given the
short panel (t=3), this is infeasible in the current study.
26
   This may be attributable to a conscious decision by these top schools not to pursue earmarks. The problems this
may cause, and corrections for this effect, are discussed in the next section.



                                                        24
in all of the models, reject the hypothesis that the coefficients of the model are jointly equal to
zero at the 99 percent level of confidence. In addition, we consider a number of possible other
specifications using Model 4, the random effects instrumental variable specification, as the point
of comparison. The results are presented in Table 6. In all specifications presented in Table 6,
the coefficient on the direct effect of lobbying is statistically insignificant, while the coefficients
on both of the interactive effects are statistically significant, consistent with the results in Models
3 and 4.


                     *********INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE********


        First, we consider how specific classes of universities may affect the results. In Model 5,
we take out all universities in California, Illinois, and Massachusetts, states with the outlier
universities from Figure 2. The coefficients on the interactive effect of lobbying with HAC
drops by about 60 percent, but the interactive effect with SAC is almost the same as earlier
models. In both cases, the coefficients are statistically significant. In Model 6, we take out the
community colleges (as it is unlikely they are engaged in research) and examine only 4-year
colleges and post-graduate institutions. The coefficients on the interactive effects are almost the
same as in Model 4, and are statistically significant.
        Second, we consider how changes in functional form might affect our results. In Model
7, we present the results for γ = .23, which was the value of γ that minimized the sum of squared
residuals in the grid search. Again, the coefficients are of the same magnitude as in Model 4.
We can compare this result to a simple model of lobbying where γ = 1 (linear in lobbying) in
Model 8. Here the average return to lobbying is -$1.40 without representation, and additional
$14.15 with only HAC representation, and $11.88 with only SAC representation. The direct
effect of lobbying is not statistically significant, but the average returns to lobbying calculated in
Model 8 with SAC representation are in the range of the baseline models, while the average
return to HAC representation is about 25 percent less than the baseline models. This suggests
that results are robust to various degrees of diminishing marginal returns.
        A third issue is instrumentation. As noted before, a Hausman test does not reject the
hypothesis of overidentification in instruments. Nevertheless, one may be concerned about using
a lagged dependent variable as an instrument, especially if one believes that lobbying is in fact a


                                                  25
cumulative investment rather than an investment that depreciates after one year (a critique we
deal with in the next section). Therefore, in Model 9, we present the results for the just-
identified random effects instrumental variable model, with Ln(Lobbying)t-1 omitted as an
additional instrument. With the exclusion of this instrument in the first stage, we obtain
coefficients that are roughly double the size of the coefficients in Model 4, and still statistically
significant.
         A final potential specification issue is that the dependent variable has a large number of
zeroes, thus causing problems with the error distribution. To address this concern, we use a
Heckman selection model. In this model, we assume that there is a latent variable, which is how
close one is to obtaining an earmark. The latent variable underlies the observed variable, and is
continuous, even though we observe only zeroes. Once an institution receives an earmark,
however, the latent variable is observed. Thus, there is a selection effect operating. In Model 10
we present the results for Heckman selection model, which selects on lobbying.27 Here, again,
the direct effect of lobbying is statistically insignificant, and the coefficients on the interactive
effects are positive and statistically significant at the 90 percent level of confidence. In Model
10, the magnitude of the coefficients on the HAC and SAC interactive variables are about three
times the effect estimated in Model 4.
         In all, the six alternative specifications yield results that are consistent with those of
Table 4, though in two of the specifications, the point estimates of the coefficients are somewhat
larger than the base econometric estimates. In all alternative specifications, the estimated
interactive variable coefficients of interest are statistically significant, while the coefficients on
the direct effects of lobbying are all statistically insignificant.


     B. ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES
         Our first concern is measurement error. As was noted earlier in the paper, top
universities may create problems for the analysis in many ways. First, some do not lobby for
earmarks, but instead lobby for federal “science” budget of NIH, NSF, DOD, NASA, and DOE.
Second, those that do lobby for earmarks may also be lobbying for science budgets.28 Third,

27
   We use all the exogenous variables in the second stage equations as first stage RHS variables plus the overhead
rate variable.
28
   On these first two points, there are three potential sources of measurement error. The first potential source is that
the AAU may lobby for specific earmarks, and thus individual university lobby does not correctly assess the



                                                          26
some of the top schools are engaged in regulatory policy-making, and the lobbying expenditures
associated with these efforts will appear in the lobbying data. Finally, top schools are just very
different in nature than other schools. To address these concerns, we exclude all institutions that
have any department ranked in the top 20 in its respective field. This represents 84 top caliber
research institutions. We repeat Model 4 without these institutions, and present the results in
Model 11 of Table 7.


                    ***********INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE **********


        Eliminating these top research institutions changes the magnitude of the coefficients, but
do not change their sign or statistical significance. The coefficient on the direct effect of
lobbying is still not statistically significant. The remaining coefficients of interest are
statistically significant. The effect of lobbying when there is SAC and HAC increases by 23
percent and 36 percent, respectively. These results together suggest that while on the whole, the
results of the earlier models carry through, there are some small differences. Moreover, the
direct effect of lobbying for lower ranked institutions is higher than for top institutions. This is
consistent with an information story in which representatives know less about lower ranked
institutions than they do about higher-ranked ones with higher visibility and status. Thus,
lobbying for earmark grants has higher returns for these lower-ranked institutions.
        A second alternative explanation is that lobbying is more like an investment in a stock,
rather than a flow. This would be consistent with James Snyder’s (1990, 1992) theory and
analysis of PAC contributions. Snyder shows that PACs give money to candidates early in their
careers – targeting individuals who are most likely to rise to more powerful positions – thus
investing in politicians so that they earn a return at a later date. Edward O. Laumann (1987) has
also noted that relationships are at the basis of successful lobbying.
        We believe that in the case of educational earmarks, this is not a debilitating issue. First,
as noted earlier, each funding cycle seems distinct when it comes to educational earmarks. The

magnitude of the lobby effort. The second source is that universities make contributions to the AAU which are
recorded as lobbying on the university’s books. The third source of measurement error arises from the fact that top
universities lobby for science policy and earmarks, but all lobbying expenditures are being allocated to earmarks.
The first two sources of measurement error are not problematic. The AAU and other trade associations do not lobby
for individual university earmarks. Also, contributions universities make to trade associations are not reported as




                                                        27
slate is “wiped clean” with respect to education earmarks each year, thus making lobbying less
cumulative. Second, nearly every institution in our data has hired outside lobbyists. To the
extent that the locus of the “relationship” is the lobbyist and not the institution per se,
relationships are available for hire. Presumably, the stronger the relationship between the
lobbyist and the appropriations committee, the more valuable that relationship is on the market.
This should then be reflected in the lobbying expenditure data as the price paid by the university
for lobbying.
         Nevertheless, we explore this issue statistically by examining only those institutions that
have not lobbied in the past and have switched to lobbying, and those institutions that have never
lobbied. By examining switchers, we can begin to separate out the effect of cumulative lobbying
and one-period lobbying. We assume that if an institution has not lobbied for two time periods,
and lobbies in the third time period, it is new to lobbying and has not built up any reputation or
relational capital in the current time period. Thus, we eliminate all institutions that lobbied in the
first two time periods of the data. We then examine the third year of lobbying as cross sectional
data, using instrumental variables. All those remaining with positive observations of lobbying
are switchers, and in Model 12 we compare their returns to those who have not lobbied.
         In Model 12, the coefficient on the direct returns to lobbying is still statistically
insignificant, though it has changed sign. The coefficient on the HAC*Lobbying variable is
roughly the same as in Model 4, but is measured imprecisely. This is likely due to the fact that
there are only 2 new entrants to lobbying in 1999 (2 positive observations) in HAC districts,
making tight standard errors extremely difficult to estimate. However, the coefficient on the
SAC*Lobbying variable is nearly eight times that of the same coefficient in Model 4, and is
statistically significant at the 99 percent level of confidence. The results seem to lend credibility
to the argument that at least some aspects to lobbying are not cumulative. In particular, the
Senate effect seems to be substantive in the one-period lobbying game, and the House effect is of
the same magnitude as earlier models, but measured imprecisely. Overall, by utilizing the
change in behavior by new entrants to lobbying, we generate some evidence that there is an
individual year effect to lobbying, provided the university has representation on the HAC or
SAC.

part of their lobbying expenditures. The third source of measurement error is more problematic. It is difficult to
separate out how these top research universities allocate their lobbying efforts to science policy and earmarks.



                                                         28
       A third concern, related to the first two in this section, is that although universities
maintain well-staffed internal government relations departments, such internal lobbying efforts
are focused on administrative regulation and general policy issues. Instead, the real academic-
earmark lobbying is handled by external “guns for hire”. That is, there are a number of firms
(such as Cassidy & Associates) that are well known for their ability to gain earmarks for their
clients, and these are really responsible for all earmark lobbying. Indeed, Boston University,
known for its focused earmark lobbying effort, uses only external lobbyists to obtain earmarks.
       A correlation analysis reveals that top schools are more likely than lower-ranked schools
to have internal lobbying departments (ρ = .61). In order to address the larger critique of
mismeasurement in lobbying, we re-run our earlier base econometric models using only
expenditures made by universities on external lobbyists. The results are presented in Model 13.
Again, the coefficients are slightly larger than those generated by our earlier models. The
average and marginal returns to lobbying are close to those of Model 4.
       A final critique of the model is that in conducting this analysis, we miss the value of
alumni networks. We have four replies to this critique. First, to the extent that enrollment is
correlated with size of alumni network, and NAS Top Ranked School is correlated with “quality”
of alumni, we control for the alumni effect. When we re-run Model 4 with an interactive term of
the two variables, the coefficient is not statistically significant. Second, to the extent that alumni
networks are effective, they are most likely to be effective with members of congress who are
alumni of certain institutions. We include these variables in the models and show, indeed, there
is a HAC and SAC alumni effect in some estimations. Third, the random effects estimator
presented in Model 4 should control for unobserved institution-specific effects, including alumni
networks. Finally, the marginal benefit calculations in Table 5 of this paper show that although
we cannot reject the possibility that MB=MC=1 for every dollar spent on lobbying, the point
estimates of these coefficients in Model 2 imply a marginal return of $1.00 when lobbying with
SAC representation and $1.29 when lobbying with HAC representation. We can ask how much
more lobbying would have to occur to obtain a result where marginal return to lobbying is $1.00
with HAC representation. This would represent an additional $53,000 in “unobservable”
lobbying, or $230,000 in total lobbying, on average. If universities with HAC representation
lobbied at this level, then the average return would be $12.09 for every dollar spent on lobbying,
nearly equivalent to the estimated average return with SAC representation. We can conduct a


                                                  29
similar exercise for Model 4, and find that unobservable lobbying would be $160,000 for
universities with HAC representation and $50,000 for universities with SAC representation. The
magnitude of the calculated “unobserved lobbying” could account for the resources that alumni
networks put into lobbying the government, but which is not disclosed. Thus, unobservable
lobbying, provided it is correlated with actual lobbying, would cause the results to be smaller,
but still substantially significant.


VI. CONCLUSIONS
        Although scholars have made great progress during the last 65 years in analyzing the
nature of interest group participation in government, measuring the returns to investments in
lobbying has been elusive. This paper has conducted a statistical analysis to measure the returns
to lobbying by examining one aspect of interest group participation: lobbying for educational
earmarks. Our results suggest an intriguing pattern in lobbying and earmarks. The amount of
educational earmark funding an institution receives is largely determined by the presence of a
medical school and graduate programs, its overall departmental rankings, its lobbying efforts,
and its representation in Congress. Universities that are fortunate enough to be located in
districts with elected representatives on the HAC and SAC are likely to receive enormous returns
to their lobbying efforts. The average return to lobbying for the average well-situated university,
controlling for other factors, is 11-36 times its expenditures on the activity. Despite this large
average return to lobbying, we cannot reject the hypothesis that such universities invest in
lobbying up to the point where the marginal benefit of further lobbying equals its marginal cost.
We estimate that approximately 45 percent of universities are lobbying optimally, 6 percent are
engaged in excessive lobbying, and 49 percent of universities are lobbying less than is optimal.
Indeed, this paper suggests that the benefit curve to lobbying with representation is initially very
steep, and then flattens out quickly, indicating that a small amount of lobbying can have
substantial effects if institutions are represented by HAC and SAC members. On the other hand,
lobbying is relatively ineffective in obtaining earmarks for those universities represented by less
powerful legislators. We estimate that the return to lobbying for an average university without
representation on the HAC or SAC is not statistically different from zero. Universities without
such representation may find their money better spent lobbying for placement of their




                                                 30
representatives on the HAC and SAC, rather than lobbying for the earmark directly in the current
period.
          Our work, moreover, addresses the literature on committees. When we control for the
endogeneity of lobbying with instrumental variables, and control for the unobserved
characteristics of lobbiers with a random effects model, we find that HAC and SAC members do
send money to their districts in the absence of lobbying, although the effects of the HAC
members are less robust that those of their Senate counterparts. This is consistent with both a
distributive and information story of committees—committee members do send money to their
districts, and they rely on lobbying to inform them of how much to increment the earmark and
where to target the money. Thus, we believe that theories that combine distributional theories of
congressional committees with informational models of lobbying may be a useful route for
theorists to pursue.
          Although we have focused our work on lobbying for academic earmarks, we believe it is
generalizable to a whole class of interest group rent-seeking, especially when federal spending is
involved. In these cases, politicians are likely to be exposed to re-election pressures, and sending
targeted money to one’s own district is likely to enhance the probability of re-election (Steven D.
Levitt and Snyder 1997). In addition, unlike non-profit universities, most groups have multiple
political instruments available to them: lobbying, PAC contributions, grassroots organizing,
political advertisements, and the like. To the extent that groups can choose the most effective
combination of instruments (where there may be complementarities between instruments) to
achieve their goals, they may actually see higher returns to lobbying and political investment
than do universities, which are largely constrained to only lobbying.
          With respect to the funding of universities, this paper has demonstrated that with the right
representation, universities can see substantial returns to their investments in lobbying for
earmarks. Politicians are responsive to this kind of information and influence. This paper also
demonstrates that earmarks do redistribute research funds from universities that are top-ranked
by the National Academy of Science to universities that have representation on the HAC and
SAC. The paper does not take a stand on whether earmarked academic funding or peer-reviewed
competitive funding is a preferable distribution system. Nevertheless, with 10 percent of the
federal budget for university research currently distributed through earmarking, it would seem




                                                   31
that academic administrators and politicians alike should be concerned about how this
mechanism might change the nature of research at U.S. universities.




                                              32
                                        REFERENCES

Ainsworth, Scott (1993). “Regulating Lobbyists and Interest Group Influence,” Journal of
Politics 55:41-56.

Anagnoson, J. Theodore (1980). “Politics in the Distribution of Federal Grants: The Case of the
Economic Development Administration.” In Political Benefits: Empirical Studies of American
Public Programs, edited by Barry S. Rundquist. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Arnold, R. Douglas (1979) Congress and the Bureaucracy. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Austen-Smith, David (1993). “Information and Influence: Lobbying for Agendas and Votes.”
American Journal of Political Science 37: 799-834

Austen-Smith, David (1995). “Campaign Contributions and Access.” American Political Science
Review 89: 566-581.

Austen-Smith, David, and John R. Wright (1994). “Counteractive Lobbying,” American Journal
of Political Science, 38: 25-44.

Baumgartner, Frank R., and Beth L. Leech (1998). Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups
in Politics and Political Science. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bauer, Raymond A., Ithiel de Sola Pool, and Lexis Anthony Dexter (1963). American Business
and Public Policy. New York: Atherton.

Becker, Gary S. (1983). “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political
Influence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(3): 371-400.

Brainard, Jeffery, and Ron Southwick (2001). “A Record Year at the Federal Trough: Colleges
Feast on $1.67-Billion in Earmarks,” Chronicle of Higher Education, August 8, 2001.

Calvert, Randall L. (1985). “The Value of Biased Information: A Rational Choice Model of
Political Advice,” The Journal of Politics 47(2): 530-555.

de Figueiredo, John M., and Emerson H. Tiller (2001). “The Structure and Conduct of Corporate
Lobbying: An Empirical Analysis of Corporate Lobbying at the Federal Communications
Commission,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 10(1): 91-122.

de Figueiredo, Rui J., Pablo Spiller, and Urbiztondo (1999). “An Informational Perspective on
Administrative Procedures.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15: 283-305.

The Economist (1999), “Politics Brief: Ex Uno, Plures,” August 21, pp. 44-45.

Finkelstein, Amy (1995). Politics and Science. Harvard B.A. Government Honors Thesis.



                                              33
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz (1999). “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative
Years in the United States, 1890 to 1940.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13: 37-62.

Gray, William H. (1994), “Pork or Providence? A Defense of Earmarked Funds for Colleges,”
Washington Post, February 27, 1994.

Grier, Kevin B., Michael C. Munger, and Brian E. Roberts (1994). “The Determinants of
Industry Political Activity, 1978-1986,” American Political Science Review 88: 911-926.

Groseclose, Timothy, Jeff Milyo, and Daniel Primo (2000). “Corporate PAC Campaign
Contributions in Perspective,” Business and Politics 2(1): 75-88.

Hall, Richard L., and Bernard Grofman (1990). “The Committee Assignment Process and the
Conditional Nature of Committee Bias.” American Political Science Review 84: 1149-1166.

Hansen, John Mark (1991). Gaining Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby, 1919-1981.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kollman, Ken (1997). “Inviting Friends to Lobby: Interest Groups, Ideological Bias, and
Congressional Committees,” American Journal of Political Science 41(2): 519-544.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Phil Strahan (1999). “What Drives Deregulation? The Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
(November), pp. 1437-67.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1999). "The
Quality of Government," Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15: 222-279.

Levitt, Steven D., and James M. Snyder (1997). “The Impact of Federal Spending on House
Election Outcomes,” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 1. pp. 30-53.

Laumann, Edward O. (1987). The organizational state: social choice in national policy domains.
(Madison, Wis. : University of Wisconsin Press).

Maitland, Ian (1985). “Interest Groups and Economic Growth Rates,” Journal of Politics 47(1):
44-58.

Malakoff, David (2001a). “Hawaii Rides the Wave of Research Earmarks,” Science 292: 835-
836.

Malakoff, David (2001b). “Tools of the Trade,” Science 292: 833-834.

Mayer, Kenneth R. )1991). The Political Economy of Defense Contracting. New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Milbraith, Lester W. (1963). The Washington Lobbyists. Chicago: Rand McNally.



                                              34
Mowery, David C. and Nathan Rosenberg (1989). Technology and the Pursuit of Economic
Growth. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Mowery, David C. and Nathan Rosenberg (1993). “The U.S. National Innovation System.” In
National Innovation Systems, edited by Richard R. Nelson, New York: Oxford University Press.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1993). "Why Is Rent-Seeking So
Costly to Growth?" American Economic Review, 83: 409-414.

Nelson, Richard R. and Nathan Rosenberg (1993). “Technical Innovation and National
Systems.” In National Innovation Systems, edited by Richard R. Nelson, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Office of the Clerk of the House (2001). Lobby Disclosure Act Guidance and Instructions.

Olson, Mancur (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Payne, A. Abigail (2001). “Congressional Representation of Alma Maters and District: The
Political Economy of Federal Funding to Research Universities,” mimeo.

Payne, A. Abigail, and Siow Aloysius (2002). “Estimating the Effects of Federal Research
Funding on Universities Using Alumni Representation on Congressional Appropriations
Committees,” Department of Economics, University of Toronto Working Paper.

Plott, Charles R. (1969) “Some Organizational Influences on Urban Renewal Decisions.”
American Economic Review 58: 306-321.

Ray, Bruce A. (1980). “Congressional Promotion of District Interests: Does Power on the Hill
Really Make a Difference?” In Political Benefits: Empirical Studies of American Public
Programs, edited by Barry S. Rundquist. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Rosenberg, Nathan and Richard R. Nelson (1994), “American Universities and Technical
Advance in Industry.” Research Policy, 23: 323-348.

Rotemberg, Julio (2002). "Commercial Policy with Altrustic Voters,” Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming.

Savage, James D. (1999). Funding Science in America: Congress Universities, and the Politics
of the Academic Pork Barrel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schattschneider, E. E. (1935). Politics, pressures and the tariff; a study of free private enterprise
in pressure politics, as shown in the 1929-1930 revision of the tariff. New York: Prentice Hall.,




                                                 35
Schlozman, Kay L., and John T. Tierney (1986). Organized Interests and American Democracy.
New York: Harper & Row.

Schuler, Douglas (1999). “Uncovering the Dimensionality of Corporate Political Involvement,”
Business and Politics 1(1).

Silber, John (1987), “Testimony of Dr. John Silber, President of Boston Uinversiry, Before the
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, United States House of Representatives,”
Washington DC, June 25.

Snyder, James (1990). “Campaign Contributions as Investments: The U.S. House of
Representatives, 1980-1986,” Journal of Political Economy 98: 1195-1227.

Snyder, James (1992). “Long-Term Investing in Politicians; Or, Give Early, Give Often”
Journal of Law & Economics 35: 15-43.

Wright, John R. (1985). “PACs, Contributions, and Roll Calls: An Organizational Perspective,”
American Political Science Review 79: 400-414.

Wright, John R. (1990). “Contributions, Lobbying, and Committee Voting in the U.S. House of
Representatives,” American Political Science Review 84(2): 417-438.

Wright, John R. (1996). Interest Groups and Congress: Lobbying, Contributions, and Influence.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.




                                             36
                                   Figure 1a: Total Federal Funding and Earm ark Funding for Universities and Colleges


                          20,000

                          18,000

                          16,000

                          14,000
  constant 2001 dollars




                          12,000
                                                                                                                         Total Funding
                          10,000
                                                                                                                         Earmarks
                           8,000

                           6,000

                           4,000

                           2,000

                              0
                                80

                                81

                                82

                                83

                                84

                                85

                                86

                                87

                                88

                                89

                                90

                                91

                                92

                                93

                                94

                                95

                                96

                                97

                                98

                                99

                                00

                                01
                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              20

                              20
1980-2001 [Source: Total funding - NSF, National Patterns of R&D Resources;
Earmarks - Savage (1999); Chronicle of Higher Education]
                                                          Figure 1b: Total Federal Funding and Earm ark Funding for Universities and Colleges, Indexed


                                                     60
  index (1980 = 1); based on constant 2001 dollars




                                                     50


                                                     40


                                                                                                                                                         Total Funding
                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                         Earmarks


                                                     20


                                                     10


                                                     0
                                                       80

                                                       81

                                                       82

                                                       83

                                                       84

                                                       85

                                                       86

                                                       87

                                                       88

                                                       89

                                                       90

                                                       91

                                                       92

                                                       93

                                                       94

                                                       95

                                                       96

                                                       97

                                                       98

                                                       99

                                                       00

                                                       01
                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     19

                                                     20

                                                     20
[Source: Total funding - NSF, National Patterns of R&D Resources;
Earmarks - Savage (1999); Chronicle of Higher Education]
                                 Figure 2a: Distribution of Earmarks and Lobbying by State
                                                                  CA
                             44500
                                                                                       Loma Linda University


                                                             CA



                                        MO
             Grants ($000)




                                        HI
                                                                                                                                        Northwestern University
     Earmark eartotal




                               22250     AK
                                              WV

                                       AL
                                       AL                            MS
                                       WV WV
                                       MS
                                        NH
                                       NM                                      CA
                                       NM       AK                                                           TX
                                        MS
                                       IA                             FL                                                                            IL
                                               NH                                     IA
                                                                                      MT        NJ                                                                            Boston
                                       PA
                                       MN
                                       NH                                  NJ MTMT                                                                                IL
                                       KY
                                       PA AL                   NM MN                                       TX                                                                University
                                                  MT                 AL               CA      LA                                     MA
                                       OR
                                       WV                        KYMT                IN       AZ
                                       MS
                                       KY
                                       CA
                                        WV
                                       NM KS FL                   COWAAL                         IA                                      MD
                                       NC
                                       MO    CA
                                             TXSCFLWV            GA FL IA                                                                                          IL
                                       MN
                                        KS
                                        IL   NYSC  OK       NY              ID LA                                           MD
                                        ILNY
                                       WV
                                       CA
                                       MA
                                       NC
                                       FL
                                       NC
                                       NY
                                       ND
                                       MS
                                       CA
                                       CA
                                       PA
                                       MN    LAAL
                                               PAFL           FL
                                                             FLCA             NY   IAIDNY NY
                                                                                      AL    AZ                     MA
                                        DE
                                       NC
                                       PA
                                        AL
                                       WV
                                       MS
                                        IL     CA
                                               CA
                                               RI  AL  AR     AL
                                                             OR VTCONCTX
                                                                 ND          FL WI WA       AZ
                                                                                             NV                                               FL                        MA
                                       NH
                                       OH
                                       WV
                                       AL
                                        MT
                                       OH
                                       NY
                                       ME TX
                                          PA
                                          AK   WV  CA            CO    UT
                                                                      WA   MD    MI
                                                                           IL WI PAFL   MI   CT                          PA          FL
                                       TX
                                       NC
                                        IA
                                        NY
                                       RI
                                       SD
                                       MT
                                       OR
                                        PA
                                       NY
                                       MN
                                       WV NC
                                          NY
                                          AK
                                          NC KY
                                             NYNC
                                               LATX
                                               IL              ND
                                                              ND FLMS
                                                                 NV
                                                                 FL   FL
                                                                     GAKY
                                                                       MNIN
                                                                         NM
                                                                         IN
                                                                         MD              GA NM   AZ
                                                                                                CT
                                                                                                TX   NJ
                                       MT
                                       TX
                                       PA
                                       KS
                                        OH
                                       TN
                                       MD
                                       AR
                                       MA
                                       PA
                                       NY
                                       MS
                                       NC
                                       NY
                                       SC
                                       MA
                                       OR
                                       CA
                                       LA
                                       TX
                                       CO
                                       AR
                                       MS
                                       PA NY
                                         TX
                                        CO
                                        IL
                                       LA
                                       MOIA PA SC
                                               OH
                                               FLNE
                                                CA
                                               NC            FLOH
                                                              FL
                                                              TX
                                                              NMIN TX
                                                                  IL   FLGA
                                                                        MI
                                                                        IN GA
                                                                           IN
                                                                            NDNJ IN
                                                                                FL
                                                                                 VA   MIVA
                                                                                     VA PA
                                                                                         NY      CA
                                                                                                  NY CA
                                                                                                  FLLA      LA   TXMA    PA        NY MD
                                       PA
                                        NY
                                       WI
                                       NY
                                       NC
                                       VA
                                       NY
                                       NY
                                       OR
                                       OH
                                       MA
                                       CA
                                       NH
                                       NE
                                       OH
                                       TX
                                       SC
                                       WV
                                       ME
                                       OK
                                       LA
                                       NE
                                       MD
                                       AR
                                       AR
                                        CT
                                       MI
                                       CA
                                       PA
                                       CA
                                       FL
                                       PA
                                       MI
                                        KS
                                        AL
                                       WA
                                       MN
                                       CT
                                       OH
                                        TX
                                       WV
                                       AZ
                                        NJ
                                       NM
                                       KS
                                       TN
                                        NY
                                       FL
                                        ND
                                       WA
                                        WI
                                       AL
                                       RI
                                       AK
                                        CO
                                       CA
                                       HI
                                       TX
                                        SC
                                        AK
                                       CO
                                       KY
                                       NH
                                       MA
                                       KS
                                        OH
                                        AR
                                       OH
                                       WA
                                       MS
                                       OR
                                       MD
                                       MO
                                       NC
                                       IN
                                       GA
                                       AK
                                        IN
                                       CO
                                        IL
                                       MO
                                        IL
                                       VT
                                        NC
                                       UT
                                       MD
                                        MI
                                       NE
                                       SC
                                       NY
                                       AR
                                       GA
                                       NY
                                       AR
                                        GA
                                       CA
                                       NE
                                        DE
                                       MA
                                       NC
                                       IA
                                       VA
                                       WV
                                       SD
                                       NH
                                       WI
                                       ID
                                       ME
                                        AL
                                       MN
                                       OK
                                       SC
                                       MN
                                       NM
                                       OH
                                       PA
                                       KS
                                       TN
                                       OR
                                       MT
                                       CT
                                       FL
                                       MI
                                       KY
                                       TN
                                       MT
                                       MS
                                       AZ AL
                                          IL
                                          ND
                                         MS
                                        MOPA
                                          MI
                                         CA
                                        TNFL
                                         IA
                                          NM
                                          IN
                                          IL
                                          HI
                                          NY
                                          MN
                                          KS
                                          TN
                                          CT
                                          AL
                                          AZ
                                         VA
                                          CO
                                          AR
                                          LA
                                          ND
                                         OR
                                        MO
                                        KY
                                        MNWI
                                          SC
                                          OH
                                          MD
                                          OR
                                          TX
                                         TX
                                        MA
                                        WA
                                        PA
                                         PA
                                        NY
                                       SD   CO
                                             NY
                                            OH
                                             SD
                                             ID
                                             WV
                                            KS
                                           NJ
                                          NC
                                          GA
                                          CA IL
                                            KY
                                             VA
                                            IN
                                             AL
                                             OK
                                             CT
                                            MT
                                             FL
                                             NY
                                             TX
                                             GA
                                             CA
                                             SCSD
                                               KY
                                                HI
                                               AL
                                                WV
                                                NY
                                                FL
                                                IL
                                               IN
                                               MO
                                               MN
                                               AR
                                               HI
                                               MS
                                               MI
                                               KS
                                               T
                                               IL
                                               KY
                                               AZAL
                                                IN
                                               IA
                                               TN
                                                MT
                                               AK
                                               NY  FL X WA IN
                                                            OH
                                                           OH
                                                           MO
                                                            LAMI
                                                             PAFLMA
                                                                PA
                                                               NC
                                                              ALUT
                                                                 TXOK
                                                                   MI
                                                                  OH
                                                                  AL
                                                                 OH OK
                                                                     MS
                                                                     OK
                                                                    LANY
                                                                     TN
                                                                     WA
                                                                    OH
                                                                    IN
                                                                   NY  NY
                                                                       NCMD
                                                                         FL TX
                                                                           IN
                                                                          MA
                                                                           MD NY  FL
                                                                                 NY
                                                                                 VT AZ
                                                                                   NY
                                                                                    NYILCA
                                                                                      WA
                                                                                      NY  OR
                                                                                          AZ PAPA
                                                                                            FL   PANY
                                                                                                   NV
                                                                                                   NC
                                                                                                   CAIA
                                                                                                     MALA
                                                                                                       MI NJ        CT PAMA  PA
                                       CA
                                       MN
                                       NJ
                                       TX
                                       OK
                                       KY
                                       UT
                                       MA
                                       GA
                                       AL
                                       WA
                                        FL
                                       CA
                                       VA
                                       MO
                                        MD
                                       FL
                                        SC
                                        CA
                                       NV
                                       HI
                                       CT
                                        VA
                                       WA
                                        IA
                                       ND
                                       NC
                                       PA
                                        TX
                                       NH
                                       OH
                                       WV
                                       GA
                                        UT
                                       AR
                                       AZ
                                       RI
                                       CO
                                       AR
                                        OK
                                       MO
                                        NJ
                                       MO
                                       KS
                                        NC
                                       NJ
                                       VT
                                       OH
                                       MA
                                       SD
                                        MI
                                       AL
                                       WI
                                       NE
                                       MD
                                       NE
                                       ND
                                       WA
                                        KS
                                       KS
                                       FL
                                        MN
                                        NY
                                       NM
                                        IL
                                       OK
                                       NC
                                       WI
                                       IA
                                       MT
                                       LA
                                        MD
                                       UT
                                       MI
                                       VT
                                       CA
                                       SD
                                       VA
                                       TX
                                       CA
                                       VA
                                       WY
                                       MA
                                       MS
                                       CA RFL
                                          CT
                                          NH
                                          DE
                                          MO
                                          TN
                                          MA
                                          MI
                                          NM
                                          ME
                                          LA
                                          NE
                                          NC
                                          CO
                                          MD
                                          CA
                                          ID
                                         AR
                                          OR
                                          NJ
                                          NY
                                          AZ
                                          AR
                                          WV
                                          AL
                                          PA
                                         UT
                                        CA
                                        WAIA
                                          VA
                                          MO
                                          MSMNC
                                            MA
                                            CO
                                           ALG
                                             MT
                                             MI
                                             OR
                                             F
                                             AR
                                             TN
                                             MN
                                             VA
                                             WY
                                             NE
                                             OH
                                             NJ
                                            PA
                                             UTNJ
                                               CA
                                               LA
                                               V
                                               CCO
                                               WI
                                               VT
                                                IA
                                              ICO
                                               FL
                                               PA
                                               NWI
                                               MD
                                               TXNY
                                                 IL
                                                 RI
                                                MI
                                                AL
                                               OR
                                                T
                                               MI
                                               OH
                                               W
                                               NC
                                               AL
                                               IN
                                               DE
                                               NH
                                               MAL
                                                 IF
                                                KY
                                               MN
                                               KSIL IIY
                                                    L A IJA
                                                        K O
                                                          XC AL
                                                            VA
                                                           OH  TX
                                                              FL
                                                              CA
                                                               FL MI
                                                                 PA NY
                                                                   NYAL
                                                                     VAFL
                                                                      LA  ALKYMD
                                                                               WI   VA
                                                                                   NY     GA  INCAUT     NY
                                                                                                          UT     UT
                                        KY
                                       CT
                                       NC
                                       MD
                                       IN
                                        OH
                                       NM
                                       ME
                                       MA
                                        ME
                                        WI
                                       PA
                                       ID
                                       AK
                                       GA
                                       NY
                                       SC
                                       KY
                                        ND
                                       PA
                                       WA
                                        TN
                                       SC
                                       MO
                                       NC
                                       AZ
                                       WV
                                       DE
                                       MT
                                       NJ
                                       OR
                                       OH
                                       NY
                                        TX
                                       OH
                                        CO
                                       TX
                                       OH
                                        MO
                                        AR
                                       MN
                                        GA
                                        K
                                       NM
                                       OK
                                       RI
                                       GA
                                       SD
                                       WI
                                       TN
                                        GA
                                       MN
                                       ME
                                       DE
                                       MD
                                       CO
                                       ND
                                        VA
                                        SC
                                       NV
                                       AR
                                        NM
                                       NE
                                       KY
                                       OK
                                       NH
                                       OR
                                       NC
                                       AL
                                       MT
                                       KS
                                       FL
                                       LA
                                       MI
                                       NY
                                       NH
                                       WY
                                        NC
                                       DE
                                       NE
                                       CO
                                       ND
                                       AK
                                       KS
                                        VT
                                        WV
                                       VA
                                        AZ
                                        SC
                                       MA
                                       SD
                                       ND
                                       MS
                                       WA
                                       MN
                                       SD
                                       TX
                                       MN
                                       PAN
                                        AK
                                        MO
                                       AL
                                        AR
                                       GA
                                        OH
                                       NJ
                                       CA
                                       WI
                                       AZ
                                        MS
                                       MN
                                       CO
                                       LA
                                       OK
                                       OH
                                       NM
                                        MA
                                       WV
                                       MT
                                       VA
                                        TX
                                       RI
                                       VT
                                       CA
                                        IL
                                       FL
                                       KY
                                       IN
                                       NV
                                       NE
                                       TN
                                       GA
                                        OR
                                       CT
                                       TN
                                       NY
                                       IA
                                       OR
                                       NC
                                       SD
                                       CO
                                       KY
                                       SC
                                       KS
                                       HI
                                       MD
                                       MS
                                       NM
                                       AR
                                        NH
                                       PA
                                        MI
                                        SD
                                        LA
                                       MA
                                       MO NH
                                          MT
                                          TX
                                          MN
                                         IL
                                          WA
                                          TN
                                         VT
                                        MTKS
                                          AK
                                          MI
                                          CT
                                          ME
                                          IL
                                          NJ
                                          SC
                                         IFL
                                          MA
                                          NY
                                          NC
                                         OH
                                          CA
                                       INMI
                                       HI
                                        OR
                                       IA
                                        MA
                                        IL
                                       FL
                                        PA
                                        IN
                                       MO AZ
                                          IA
                                          PA
                                          LA
                                          WI
                                          T
                                         CA
                                        FL
                                        AL
                                         WI
                                        ME
                                       NE
                                        MD
                                       MI
                                       MD
                                       WY
                                       ALID
                                       ID
                                       UT MD
                                          CT
                                       CTIA
                                        WYIA
                                          AK
                                          NH
                                          SC
                                          TN
                                          NE
                                          OK
                                          FL
                                         WV
                                       CAIL
                                       NV
                                        MA
                                        GA
                                       WV
                                       ME
                                       MT
                                       NH
                                       AR
                                       MA
                                       KY
                                       AZ
                                       OH
                                       MS
                                       CA
                                       VA
                                       NJ
                                       WY
                                       WV
                                       WA
                                       NC
                                       AR
                                       CT
                                       WA
                                       OR
                                       AL
                                       NV
                                       ME NY
                                          WA
                                          WV
                                        ILIN
                                        NJ
                                        TN
                                        MN
                                         VA
                                        NE
                                        IL
                                        TX
                                        PA
                                        KY
                                        KS
                                        WA
                                        IDME
                                          KY
                                          KS
                                          MI
                                          O
                                         OR
                                          AR
                                          KY
                                          MA
                                          CA
                                        ILKS
                                        RI
                                        ND
                                        CA
                                        MD
                                        NJ
                                       NJIA
                                       OK
                                       PAIL
                                       SC
                                        WI
                                        NY
                                        OH
                                       TX
                                        IA
                                       MN
                                       NC
                                        IN
                                       OK
                                        OK
                                        CT
                                       SC
                                       MO
                                       NM
                                       MD
                                       OR
                                       GA
                                       NY
                                       TN
                                       VT
                                       WI
                                       MO
                                       OH
                                       PA
                                       KS IN
                                          MN
                                          AL
                                          NV
                                          ID
                                          HI
                                          IL
                                          LA
                                          N
                                          TX
                                          P
                                          NC
                                          OH
                                          PA
                                          CO
                                          MS
                                          NC
                                          PA
                                         NY
                                          MO
                                          NM
                                          W
                                         MO
                                        MTVA
                                          GA
                                          UT
                                          SC
                                          C
                                          AK
                                          VT
                                          AZ
                                          INGA
                                            T
                                            CKY
                                            FL
                                           IHI
                                             KS
                                            TX
                                             NY
                                             RI
                                             AR
                                             G
                                             O
                                             MO
                                             OK
                                             MD
                                             OR
                                             MN
                                             WY
                                             M
                                             NC
                                             A
                                             NH
                                            MA
                                             ME
                                             OH
                                            IWA
                                           HIIN
                                             IL
                                             NM
                                             WA
                                             TN
                                            CO
                                             VA
                                             WI
                                             KS
                                             VT
                                             P IA
                                               NC
                                               CT
                                               NE
                                               MO
                                               IL
                                              MA
                                               CT
                                               M
                                               T
                                               SD
                                               SC
                                             IOH
                                             R
                                             PA
                                             MD
                                             W
                                             OR
                                             M
                                            TN
                                           AL
                                          SD
                                          IA ND
                                            MN
                                             AL
                                            TX
                                             OK
                                            CO
                                            VNC
                                             LA
                                             WY
                                             GA
                                             T
                                             NY
                                             FL
                                             CA
                                             MI
                                             MO
                                             N
                                             IN
                                             SC
                                            OH
                                            MA
                                            IL
                                             UT
                                            ME
                                             NM
                                             AR
                                             NJ
                                             F
                                             AZ
                                             NH
                                             G O
                                               WA
                                               IN
                                               WA
                                               MI
                                               OH
                                               MI
                                               NH
                                               WV
                                               TX
                                               OK
                                               WY
                                               KY
                                               VTCT
                                                AR
                                                 FL
                                                 A
                                                 IL
                                                 TN
                                                AZ
                                                GA
                                               GA
                                               CA
                                               PA
                                               AZ
                                               TX
                                               OK
                                               S
                                               MD
                                               ID
                                               TX
                                               VT
                                               WIIN
                                                 P
                                                 LA
                                                ITX
                                                AL
                                               MT
                                               FL
                                               MSPA
                                                CA
                                                 F
                                                KS
                                               NY
                                              CO
                                               VA
                                               WAY
                                                 NJ
                                                 N
                                                KY
                                                 OH
                                                 AL
                                                 MI
                                                 KS
                                                 NY
                                                 VT
                                                MA
                                                 ID
                                                 VA
                                                SC
                                               NJWI
                                                OK
                                                CO
                                                VA
                                                 AR
                                                 DE
                                                 T
                                                MN
                                                 C
                                                 IN
                                                 SC
                                                 PA
                                                 UT
                                                 ME
                                                 SD
                                                 OH
                                                 AZ
                                                 K
                                                 HI
                                                CT
                                               IN
                                               FL
                                               SD
                                               TN
                                               CA
                                               MS
                                               DE
                                               HI
                                               MO
                                               MT
                                               NE
                                               MN
                                               OR
                                               GA
                                               TX
                                               S
                                               MD
                                               ME
                                               NC
                                               V
                                               A
                                               NY
                                               MC
                                               IA
                                               OH
                                               IL
                                               AZ
                                               NJ
                                               LA
                                                H
                                               MI
                                               NM
                                               T
                                               AR
                                               KTN
                                               PA
                                               GDTX
                                                CA
                                                 IL
                                                MS
                                                 O
                                                SD
                                                 AL
                                                 IL
                                                 VT
                                                PA
                                                 NE
                                                AR
                                                NJ
                                                IN
                                                MCA
                                                MI
                                                FL
                                                 RI
                                                GA
                                                 CT
                                                VT
                                                 L
                                                 KY
                                                 FL
                                                 VA
                                                 N
                                                NM
                                                NIA
                                                 MI
                                                KS
                                                GNH
                                                OR
                                                LA
                                                AZ
                                                PTN
                                                WI
                                                 TX
                                                WA
                                                MA
                                               MA
                                               AL
                                                NC
                                                NY
                                               MT
                                               IA
                                               WI
                                               NH
                                                A
                                               CT
                                               NK
                                               UT
                                               C
                                               WA
                                               CO
                                               SC
                                               VT
                                               IL
                                               DEKS
                                                 NY
                                                 S
                                                ND IL
                                                   IA
                                                   IN
                                                   HI
                                                   X
                                                   AL
                                                  FL
                                                 IAY
                                                   X
                                                   RI
                                                   FL
                                                   IN
                                                   MI
                                                   IA
                                                 VAIN
                                                   NJ
                                                  ILA
                                                   HI
                                                   IL
                                                   IN
                                                   A
                                                   L
                                                   H
                                                   AOH
                                                    X
                                                    V
                                                    IL
                                                   WI
                                                    N X
                                                      T
                                                      RHR
                                                       IIA
                                                      JC
                                                      AX
                                                       OL
                                                        Y
                                                        A E
                                                          C
                                                          S
                                                          O
                                                          D
                                                          X
                                                          S
                                                          CL
                                                           N
                                                           D
                                                           A
                                                           L
                                                           FL
                                                           X
                                                           GA
                                                           L
                                                           K
                                                           R
                                                           H
                                                           A
                                                          IY
                                                           EH
                                                           FL
                                                           N
                                                           C
                                                           T
                                                           A
                                                           S
                                                          FL
                                                           DV
                                                            E
                                                           IYOH
                                                            MI
                                                            ALIA
                                                             NY
                                                             TX
                                                             NJ
                                                            OR
                                                            OH NY
                                                              MI
                                                              FL
                                                              FL
                                                              OR
                                                             OR
                                                             OH
                                                             IL
                                                            NY
                                                             MI
                                                             FL
                                                             IN
                                                            FL FL
                                                              RI GA
                                                                 OH
                                                                WA
                                                                RI
                                                                 MS
                                                                NY
                                                                WI
                                                               OR
                                                              MIRIVA
                                                                 MA
                                                                  OK
                                                                 GA
                                                                 NY
                                                                FL  ID
                                                                   NC
                                                                   WI
                                                                  GA
                                                                  NV
                                                                   NY
                                                                  NC
                                                                  UT
                                                                   ID
                                                                  MI  GA
                                                                     OH
                                                                     TX
                                                                     KY
                                                                      GA
                                                                      AL
                                                                      TN
                                                                      NC
                                                                     LA
                                                                      OH
                                                                     CA
                                                                     NYIN
                                                                       NC
                                                                       MA FL
                                                                         OH
                                                                        PA
                                                                         PA
                                                                        NY MD
                                                                          MA
                                                                         FLWI
                                                                           VA
                                                                          IL
                                                                         LAMA VT
                                                                             CT
                                                                             MI
                                                                              VA
                                                                             NV
                                                                            IL
                                                                           FL PA
                                                                             IL IL
                                                                               VA
                                                                               PA
                                                                               VA
                                                                               MA
                                                                               FL
                                                                              FL
                                                                             PAMDNC
                                                                                MAFL
                                                                                 VA
                                                                                MI
                                                                               PA
                                                                               FL   VA
                                                                                   MI
                                                                                  TN
                                                                                  PA
                                                                                  VAIL
                                                                                    PAPA
                                                                                      OH    NY
                                                                                            NY
                                                                                             FL
                                                                                          ILCA
                                                                                         NY   PA
                                                                                             NV  ILNY
                                                                                                OH   NJ
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                    OHCA
                                                                                                     FL
                                                                                                    NY
                                                                                                    PA  IL
                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                       CA NY MA NY MACT
                                                                                                                CA   MA      CT
                                                                                                                          MIMA
                                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                                            FLMANY
                                                                                                                                MI    MALA
                                                                                                                                       MA     NC                        MA
                                                                                                                                                                        MA
                                 0
                                                                                                               380000
                                        0                                                                                                                         760000
                                                                                              Lobbying Expenditures
                                                                                                       lobby        ($)
State of institution noted in graph
                          Figure 2b: Distribution of Earmarks and Lobbying by Committee
                                                     HS
                         44500
                                                                       Loma Linda University



                                                     HS


                                   S
         Grants ($000)




                                    S
                                                                                                                 Northwestern University
 Earmarkeartotal




                           22250   S
                                        HS
                                   S                HS
                                   S
                                   HS    HS
                                    S                     HS
                                    SS                                                   S
                                     SS          O
                                    SS                         S                                                                                         Boston
                                   HS                        SSS           S                                                H
                                     HSH           H       S                         S                                                       H          University
                                   HS
                                   HS S S S                        S
                                   HS                                   HSO                                   O
                                      O
                                    S S
                                    S        S S                O
                                   HS      HSO     SO
                                   HS
                                    SHS
                                   HS             HS         SS            S                           S
                                   H
                                   S
                                   OSO
                                     OO H O S                          HH                                         S
                                   O
                                   HSS
                                    HS
                                     SO
                                     HS
                                     HS
                                     H    HS
                                         HS S
                                        HS     O
                                               S  O    HS  O
                                                          SSS H O                                                                           S
                                   O
                                   HS
                                   S
                                   S
                                   OSH
                                     HS
                                     HS       HS S   H   O S                                  O
                                   H
                                   OO
                                   HS
                                    S
                                    O
                                   HS
                                    SH
                                    HSS HS     S OHS
                                                   SO   S OS O SSS                                 S        O       O                               O
                                   O
                                   HS
                                    SS OOSS O
                                            HS        SO
                                                     SHS                                                   O
                                   S
                                   HS
                                   O
                                   O
                                   HS
                                    S
                                   HS
                                    O
                                   HS
                                     O
                                     O
                                     O
                                     S
                                      S
                                     HS
                                      O
                                      S
                                      S
                                      S
                                      HS
                                      O
                                      O O OOO OOS
                                              S   SO
                                                   O
                                                   HSOSO
                                                      O
                                                      S S S  OOOOO      H
                                                                        OSOO
                                                                         O   OSSSO    OO                 S
                                   O
                                   S
                                   H
                                   O
                                   H
                                   SS
                                    O
                                   HS
                                   HSS
                                     S
                                     S
                                     O
                                    SS
                                    S
                                    OO
                                     HS
                                      OS
                                       H  S
                                         SS
                                         O  HS
                                            O  O
                                               O  OO
                                                   H
                                                   SOOO
                                                      OSO
                                                       O     OO     S
                                                                    OOOO    SHO
                                                                         S HS   S S
                                                                                H OSO                          S    O
                                   HS
                                   S
                                   OH
                                   HS
                                    O
                                    S
                                   HS
                                   HS
                                   SO
                                   HS
                                    O
                                    H
                                    SO
                                     S
                                    HS
                                     H
                                     H
                                     O
                                    SS
                                    SS
                                    O
                                    HS
                                   HS
                                   OO
                                   OS
                                   HS
                                   H SS
                                     HS
                                     S
                                     OH
                                      S
                                      O
                                      H
                                     HS
                                      O
                                      S
                                      S
                                      O
                                     HS
                                     HS
                                    HS
                                     S
                                    OOHSS
                                        OHS
                                         O OOO
                                            O  OO
                                               H
                                              OSOSO
                                                  O
                                                  OO
                                                   S
                                                   SO
                                                    S
                                                    OHSO HO
                                                          OO
                                                           O SOSS
                                                             O
                                                             S       OSO O  O
                                                                            HS
                                                                            S  SS   HS O SOH    H S OOO
                                   SO
                                   O
                                   S
                                   HS
                                    O
                                   HS
                                   HS
                                   HS
                                   O
                                   SS
                                   SS
                                   OO
                                   OS
                                   HS
                                   HSH
                                     H
                                     O
                                     S
                                     O
                                    HS
                                   HS
                                    SO
                                    S
                                    H
                                    O
                                    H O
                                      H
                                      O
                                      S
                                      S
                                      O
                                      S
                                     HS
                                     S
                                     O
                                   HSHH
                                     OS
                                     H
                                     H
                                     SO
                                     HS
                                    HS
                                     O
                                    SS
                                    OS
                                     OH
                                      O
                                      S
                                     HS
                                      O
                                      S
                                      S
                                      H
                                      O
                                     SS
                                    SO
                                   OO
                                   HH
                                   HS
                                   HS H
                                     SS
                                    SO
                                    SO
                                    SS
                                     SS
                                    SS
                                     OS
                                    SO
                                     OO
                                    HS
                                     HS
                                    OS
                                   HSH
                                   H
                                   HHS
                                   HH
                                   OO
                                   SO
                                   OS
                                    S
                                   SOO
                                    HH
                                   SOS O
                                       S
                                       H
                                       S
                                       O
                                       S
                                      HS
                                       HO
                                        S
                                        S
                                        O
                                        OO
                                         O
                                         S
                                         OS
                                          O
                                          O
                                          H
                                          S
                                          O
                                          H
                                         HSSOS
                                            OS
                                            S
                                            OOO
                                              O
                                              SO
                                               H
                                               O
                                               S
                                               OSO
                                                O
                                                O
                                                S HS
                                                  O
                                                  S
                                                  S
                                                  O
                                                  OS
                                                   S
                                                   OO
                                                    S
                                                    OH
                                                     O
                                                     O
                                                    HSO
                                                      S
                                                      S
                                                      SS
                                                       O
                                                       S
                                                       HOS
                                                         S
                                                        SS
                                                         OO
                                                          O
                                                          OO
                                                           S
                                                           H
                                                           O
                                                           O
                                                           S
                                                           S O
                                                            SSOO
                                                               O
                                                               SS
                                                                OOOH
                                                                 O SO
                                                                   O O SHSSHS
                                                                           SO
                                                                            O OO SOHS
                                                                             SO
                                                                              S        S   SOSO O SO OHO H     O
                                                                                                               OO                               O
                                                                                                                                                O
                             0
                                   0                                                        380000                                         760000
                                                                                        lobby
                                                                               Lobbying Expenditures ($)

O = no HAC or SAC representation; H = HAC representation; S = SAC representation; HS = HAC and SAC representation
                                                          TABLE 1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

                                                 All Universities, All Years (n = 7,146)                  Lobbying Universities, All Years (n = 423)

               Variable                  Mean          Std. Dev.          Min               Max       Mean        Std. Dev.         Min            Max

              Earmarks                  232.29         1,411.40           0.00         44,500.00     1,919.19     3,937.38          0.00        44,500.00
               Lobbying                 7,442.27       42,224.08          0.00        760,000.00    125,726.00   123,611.90      20,000.00     760,000.00
House Appropriations Committee (HAC)     0.14             0.35            0.00              1.00       0.14          0.35           0.00           1.00
Senate Appropriations Committee (SAC)    0.52             0.50            0.00              1.00       0.42          0.49           0.00           1.00
   House Chair or Ranking Member         0.08             0.27            0.00              1.00       0.04          0.19           0.00           1.00
   Senate Chair or Ranking Member        0.51             0.50            0.00              1.00       0.51          0.50           0.00           1.00
      Representative ADA Score           46.53           39.08            0.00             100.00     58.60         38.58           0.00          100.00
         Senator ADA Score               47.27           33.88            0.00             100.00     50.93         31.78           0.00          100.00
           House Educator                0.13             0.34            0.00              1.00       0.15          0.36           0.00           1.00
           Senate Educator               0.32             0.47            0.00              1.00       0.24          0.43           0.00           1.00
           Alumni on HAC                 0.03             0.16            0.00              1.00       0.18          0.38           0.00           1.00
            Alumni on SAC                0.12             0.32            0.00              1.00       0.47          0.50           0.00           1.00
           Alumni in House               0.01             0.12            0.00              1.00       0.11          0.32           0.00           1.00
           Alumni in Senate              0.03             0.18            0.00              1.00       0.24          0.43           0.00           1.00
      NAS Top Ranked School              0.31             2.43            0.00             39.00       3.08          7.42           0.00          39.00
             Degree PhD                  0.15             0.36            0.00              1.00       0.78          0.41           0.00           1.00
          Private University             0.41             0.49            0.00              1.00       0.42          0.49           0.00           1.00
            Medical School               0.04             0.20            0.00              1.00       0.37          0.48           0.00           1.00
              Athletic Aid               0.50             0.50            0.00              1.00       0.78          0.41           0.00           1.00
              Enrollment                5,489.00       6,678.00          17.00         51,445.00    16,309.00     11,644.00       402.00        51,445.00
         Rural Population (%)            0.31             0.22            0.00              0.87       0.22          0.22           0.00           0.72
      Ages 18-30 Population (%)          0.19             0.02            0.13              0.33       0.20          0.03           0.14           0.33
    College Degree Population (%)        0.08             0.03            0.02              0.22       0.08          0.03           0.03           0.17
 Employment in Education Sector (%)      0.04             0.01            0.02              0.07       0.04          0.01           0.02           0.07
            Median Income                29.19            7.66           15.06             57.22      28.64          6.88          15.26          56.06
   Number of Universities in District    7.33             3.52            1.00             20.00       6.65          3.40           2.00          20.00
    Number of Universities in State      83.20           54.46            6.00             202.00     80.32         50.91           7.00          202.00
         Overhead Rate (%)               22.13           20.95            8.00             85.00      43.73         17.50           8.00          75.00
                              TABLE 2: MEANS IN LOBBYING AND EARMARKS

    FOR ALL UNIVERSITIES IN DISTRICTS WITH AND WITHOUT APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE MEMBERS

                                             Average Lobbying Expenditures   Average Earmark

No Senate Appropriations Committee Member               $9,430                  $144,693
                 n=3442
 Senate Appropriations Committee Member                 $5,595                  $313,686
                 n=3704

No House Appropriations Committee Member                $7,414                  $187,331
                 n=6131
 House Appropriations Committee Member                  $7,612                  $503,839
                 n=1015




FOR LOBBYING UNIVERSITIES IN DISTRICTS WITH AND WITHOUT APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE MEMBERS

                                             Average Lobbying Expenditures   Average Earmark

No Senate Appropriations Committee Member              $131,410                $1,157,920
                  n=247
 Senate Appropriations Committee Member                $117,750                $2,987,555
                  n=176

No House Appropriations Committee Member               $125,225                $1,477,928
                  n=363
 House Appropriations Committee Member                 $128,765                $4,588,803
                  n=60
                             TABLE 3: SENATE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE SWITCHERS
                             UNCONDITIONAL MEANS FOR UNIVERSITIES IN THEIR STATES


            Faircloth R-NC                 Bumpers D-AR                   Kyl R-AZ                  Durbin D-IL
                n= 109                        n = 33                       n = 23                     n=109
       Lobbying         Earmarks     Lobbying        Earmarks    Lobbying         Earmarks   Lobbying         Earmarks

1997   $1,481          $148,863         $0          $104,863     $12,608         $294,129    $10,688         $139,961

1998   $3,425          $164,895         $0           $63,037     $14,782         $295,275     $9,555         $162,745


1999   $7,222          $86,112         $606         $141,261     $14,347         $405,523    $11,666         $174,935
                                        TABLE 4: BASE ECONOMETRIC RESULTS


                                                (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)
                                               OLS                 OLS              IV       Random Effects IV
                                        Popular Belief Model    Full Model     Full Model       Full Model

             Ln(Lobby)                       84.363***            6.467          4.834            28.380
                                             (23.929)            (21.840)       (28.090)         (17.536)
           Ln(Lobby)*HAC                                        223.554*       376.142*         309.390***
                                                                (129.591)      (219.659)         (36.059)
           Ln(Lobby)*SAC                                        118.954**      166.874**        145.695***
                                                                 (48.211)       (73.539)         (22.457)
House Appropriations Committee (HAC)        297.390***         146.923***        81.015           88.825
                                            (104.501)           (50.745)        (76.689)         (69.924)
Senate Appropriations Committee (SAC)       178.184***         106.509***     129.523***         104.833**
                                             (48.428)           (31.167)       (39.257)           (49.673)
   House Chair or Ranking Member              94.012             104.842        150.054          122.012
                                             (83.383)            (82.472)      (110.862)         (83.310)
   Senate Chair or Ranking Member             -2.043              4.165          6.654            41.377
                                             (44.459)            (40.254)       (48.663)         (42.030)
      Representative ADA Score                -1.377**           -1.239**       -1.656**         -1.563**
                                               (0.641)            (0.574)        (0.676)          (0.687)
         Senator ADA Score                     1.276              0.978          1.157             1.013
                                              (0.953)            (0.850)        (1.005)           (0.833)
           House Educator                     64.557              53.278         59.780           71.234
                                             (60.239)            (61.050)       (88.907)         (78.543)
          Senate Educator                     75.325              72.939         88.143           81.126
                                             (51.282)            (49.134)       (61.989)         (61.852)
           Alumni on HAC                      164.904            226.990        361.396          321.284*
                                             (330.846)          (300.570)      (389.718)         (180.550)
          Alumni in House                     -19.918            -40.380        -103.728          -98.518
                                             (117.102)          (119.863)      (156.312)         (96.191)
           Alumni on SAC                     974.785*            536.517        444.932          617.903**
                                             (539.549)          (575.290)      (711.908)         (281.734)
          Alumni in Senate                    -168.448           -55.126        -131.419          -125.517
                                             (250.376)          (225.149)      (317.724)         (179.458)
      NAS Top Ranked School                  -43.940*           -42.573*       -57.164**        -57.728***
                                             (23.207)           (22.544)        (28.846)         (12.950)
       PhD Granting Institution             536.519***         507.416***     602.172***        555.045***
                                            (118.794)          (113.647)      (148.217)          (97.005)
          Private University                  -62.152             -49.694        -80.519          -89.811
                                             (53.317)            (52.959)       (60.679)         (70.647)
           Medical School                  1,555.289***        1,478.922***   1,813.270***     1,825.021***
                                            (471.155)           (418.118)      (508.208)        (167.451)
             Athletic Aid                     -4.984              -1.984         -13.628          -8.804
                                             (46.792)            (42.502)       (54.074)         (56.884)
           Ln(Enrollment)                     27.408             38.470*         36.701           33.819
                                             (22.297)            (19.946)       (25.956)         (34.951)
        Rural Population (%)                  44.795             78.106         99.752            106.352
                                             (132.273)          (132.434)      (167.015)         (184.458)
      Ages 18-30 Population (%)               216.309            601.537        958.416           738.925
                                             (904.364)          (847.181)     (1,066.500)       (1,369.045)
        College Degree Population (%)                             -211.788                         -474.321     -1,111.680     -786.500
                                                                 (1,359.956)                      (1,463.817)   (1,848.057)   (1,518.414)
    Employment in Education Sector (%)                           -3,712.787                       -2,602.612    -4,027.615    -4,569.309
                                                                 (2,412.793)                      (2,438.962)   (3,173.299)   (4,063.190)
              Median Income (000)                                    -1.312                          0.636         4.974         4.111
                                                                    (5.546)                         (5.910)       (7.787)       (6.256)
       Number of Universities in District                          18.799**                        16.352*       25.287**      23.931**
                                                                    (9.393)                        (9.067)       (11.891)       (9.926)
        Number of Universities in State                              -0.577                          -0.669        -1.071        -0.878
                                                                    (0.617)                         (0.554)       (0.708)       (0.570)
                         1997                                    -169.626***                      -165.979***
                                                                   (30.731)                         (30.959)
                         1998                                     -72.460***                      -69.115***    -64.387**     -62.149**
                                                                   (25.995)                        (26.507)      (28.476)      (26.465)
                      Constant                                      -188.047                       -352.904      -494.892      -416.154
                                                                   (281.449)                      (251.070)     (310.070)     (419.423)

                     R-squared                                       0.19                           0.22          0.25            .
                     F-Statistic                                     6.14                           6.42          6.07            .
                         n                                           7,146                          7,146         4,764         4,764

Robust and clustered standard errors are presented beneath coefficient estimates.
*** 99% level of significance; ** 95% level of significance; * 90 percent level of significance
                                                TABLE 5: AVERAGE AND MARGINAL RETURNS




                 Average Expenditure                                                                                          Range of Gamma
                     for Lobbying        Calculated Average   Calculated Marginal                                            Where Cannot Reject
                 Universities in Group         Return               Return          Reject H0: MB=0?   Reject H0: MC=MB=1?       MC=MB=1

No HAC, No SAC        $125,481                 $0.61                $0.05                 no                    .                     .
HAC, no SAC           $177,782                $15.64                $1.29                 yes                  no                0.02 - 1.00
SAC, no HAC           $124,833                $11.79                $1.00                 yes                  no                0.01 - 0.23
                                        TABLE 6: ECONOMETRIC SPECIFICATION



                     Variable                                 Lobbying                 Lobbying*HAC    Lobbying*SAC



   (5) Take Out California, Illinois, and                       25.00                      126.78***     139.64***
       Massachusetts Universities                              (16.45)                      (38.14)       (23.21)

   (6) Take Out Community Colleges                              36.78                      308.39***     130.60***
                                                               (24.10)                      (49.51)       (30.01)

              (7) Gamma = 0.23                                  -4.80                      323.93***     166.13***
                                                               (14.29)                      (38.42)       (22.15)

  (8) Linear Lobbying (Gamma = 1.00)                             -1.40                      14.15***     11.88***
                                                                (1.06)                       (2.39)       (2.02)


     (9) Exclude Lag of Lobbying as                            173.34                      481.72***     390.72***
               Instrument                                     (172.86)                     (105.65)       (67.26)


(10) Heckman Selection Model -- Select                         -25.20                       852.24*      755.58*
           on Lobbying                                        (297.14)                      (506.60)     (419.88)


Robust and clustered standard errors are presented beneath coefficient estimates.
*** 99% level of significance; ** 95% level of significance; * 90 percent level of significance
Note: The coefficients on Model (8) are presented x1000 for easier interpretation.
                                     TABLE 7: MEASUREMENT AND ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES


                         Variable                                    Ln(Lobby)                   Ln(Lobby)*HAC               Ln(Lobby)*SAC



       (11) No Top Govt Funded Schools                                 20.34                         421.09***                 187.05***
                                                                      (19.94)                         (51.82)                   (28.03)
              (12) First Time Lobbiers                                -160.39                          324.53                  1164.03***
                                                                      (300.98)                        (524.99)                  (553.57)
            (13) External Lobbying Only                                22.57                         405.29***                 175.52***
                                                                      (18.64)                        (148.87)                   (25.90)



Robust and clustered standard errors are presented beneath coefficient estimates.
** 95% level of significance; * 90 percent level of significance
Note: The coefficients on lobbying for the external models (Model 10) is reported for external lobbying expenditures only.
                                        APPENDIX: DATA DEFINITIONS AND SOURCE


               Variable                                                      Definition (Source)
                                        Total dollar appropriation of all academic earmarks to institution (Chronicle of Higher
               Earmarks                 Education)
                                        Total lobbying expenditures on behalf on institutions disclosed (Center for Responsive
               Lobbying                 Politics, Clerk of the House) -- taken as log in most specifications.
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution is represented by a legislator on the House Appropriations
House Appropriations Committee (HAC)    Committee and =0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution is represented by a legislator on the Senate Appropriations
Senate Appropriations Committee (SAC)   Committee and =0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution is represented by a legislator who is a chair or ranking
   House Chair or Ranking Member        member of a House committee and =0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution is represented by a legislator who is a chair or ranking
   Senate Chair or Ranking Member       member of a Senate committee and =0 otherwise

      Representative ADA Score          The ADA score of the House member who represents the institution's district

         Senator ADA Score              The ADA score of the Senate member who represents the institution's district
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution is represented by a House member who was a teacher,
           House Educator               professor, or educational administrator before being elected to Congress, and =0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution is represented by a Senate member who was a teacher,
           Senate Educator              professor, or educational administrator before being elected to Congress, and =0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable = 1 if institution has an alumus/a on the House Appropriations Committee,
            Alumni on HAC               and = 0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable = 1 if institution has an alumus/a on the Senate Appropriations Committee,
            Alumni on SAC               and = 0 otherwise
                                        Dummy variable = 1 if institution has an alumus/a in the House of Representatives, and = 0
           Alumni in House              otherwise

           Alumni in Senate             Dummy variable = 1 if institution has an alumus/a in the Senate, and = 0 otherwise

                                        The number of departments at the institution that are ranked in the top 20 by the National
                                        Academy of Science's 1995 rankings (National Academy of Science and National Science
       NAS Top Ranked School            Foundation)

             Degree PhD                 Dummy variable =1 if the institution awards a Ph.D., and =0 otherwise (IPEDS)

          Private University            Dummy variable = 1 if the institution is a private, =0 otherwise (IPEDS)

            Medical School              Dummy variable =1 if institution has a medical school, and =0 otherwise (IPEDS)
                                        Dummy variable =1 if institution offers athletic scholarships to students, and =0 otherwise
              Athletic Aid              (IPEDS)

              Enrollment                Total student enrollment (IPEDS) -- taken as log.

         Rural Population (%)           % Rural Population in House District (Census)

      Ages 18-30 Population (%)         % Population ages 18-30 in House District (Census)

    College Degree Population (%)       % Population with College Degree in House District (Census)

 Employment in Education Sector (%)     % of Workers employed in Education Sector in House District (Census)

            Median Income               Median Income in House District (Census)

   Number of Universities in District   Count of the number of universities in the congressional district

    Number of Universities in State     Count of the number of universities in the state

            Overhead Rate               The federally negotiated on-campus overhead rate for universities in April (HHS)
