NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW’S LIFE? COMBINING INDIVIDUAL AND NATIONAL
VARIABLES TO EXPLAIN SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING

John F. Helliwell

Working Paper 9065
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9065

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by John F. Helliwell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How’s Life? Combining Individual and National
Variables to Explain Subjective Well-Being
John F. Helliwell
NBER Working Paper No. 9065
July 2002
JEL No. F0, I0, Z0, J1

ABSTRACT
This paper attempts to explain international and inter-personal differences in subjective
well-being over the final fifth of the twentieth century. The empirical work makes use of data from three
waves of the World Values survey covering about fifty different countries. The analysis proceeds in
stages. First there is a brief review of some reasons for giving a key role to subjective measures of
well-being. This is followed by a survey of earlier empirical studies, a description of the main variables
used, a report of results and tests, and discussion of the links among social capital, education, income and
well-being.
The main innovation of the paper, relative to earlier studies of subjective well-being, lies in its
use of large international samples of data combining individual and societal level variables, thus
permitting the simultaneous identification of individual-level and societal-level determinants of
well-being. This is particularly useful in identifying the direct and indirect linkages between social capital
and well-being.

John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6R 1C2
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca

How’s Life?
Combining Individual and National Variables to Explain Subjective Well-Being
John F. Helliwell1

1. Introduction

This paper attempts to explain international trends and differences in subjective wellbeing over the final fifth of the twentieth century. This will be done in several stages. First there
will be a brief review of some reasons for giving a central role to subjective measures of wellbeing. This will be followed by sections containing a survey of earlier empirical studies, a
description of the main variables used in this study, a report of results and tests, discussion of the
links among social capital, education, and well-being, re-estimation of the final model, and
1

Department of Economics, University of British Columbia. The first draft of this paper
was prepared when I was enjoying the hospitality of St Catherine’s College, Oxford, where I was
Christensen Visiting Fellow in the first half of 2001. I am grateful variously for advice,
assistance, corrections, and suggestions from Robert Amano, Sudhir Anand, Michael Argyle,
Aileen Battye, Andrew Clark, Kerstin Enflo, John Flemming, Bruno Frey, David Halpern, Tom
Healy, Brian Henry, Jane Jenson, Thomas Lemieux, Paul Kind, Avner Offer, Andrew Oswald,
Robert Putnam, Andrew Sharpe, Alois Stutzer, Tom Sander, Julia Simon, Sarah Stewart-Brown,
Ian Walker, Michael Woolcock, and from participants during presentations of earlier versions at
the Universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Warwick and York in the United Kingdom, the Bank of
Canada in Ottawa, the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs conference at Talloires, the
Policy Research Initiatives conference in Ottawa, the University of British Columbia, and the
University of Osaka. E-mail comments to john.helliwell@ubc.ca.

1

concluding comments.

2. Why Study Happiness?

The idea of using self-assessments of well-being, or of life satisfaction, as a way of
evaluating the quality of a society and its citizens goes back to Aristotle and beyond. It has been
argued that ancient ethics “gets its grip on the individual at this point of reflection: am I satisfied
with my life as a whole, and the way it has developed and promises to develop?” (Annas 1993,
28).
The Aristotelian view has central importance among ancient and modern views, in part
because of its attempt to balance different aspects of satisfaction regarded as antithetical by
others. “We may define happiness as prosperity combined with excellence; or as independence
of life, or as the secure enjoyment of the maximum of pleasure; or as a good condition for
property and body, together with the power of guarding one’s property and body and making use
of them. That happiness is one or more of these things, pretty well everyone agrees. From this
definition of happiness it follows that its constituent parts are: good birth, plenty of friends, good
friends, wealth, good children, plenty of children, a happy old age, and also such bodily
excellences as health, beauty, strength, large stature, athletic powers, together with fame, honour,
good luck and excellence. (Aristotle, Rhetoric, 1360b, 14-23)2”. These are views Aristotle
considers to be widely held. In developing his own ethical theory, Aristotle emphasizes the
importance of a lifetime’s virtuous activity, which in turn requires a sufficient supply of external
goods if anything is to be achieved. The material goods are a means and not an end3. Thus “The
2

Unless otherwise specified, any quotations from Aristotle are drawn from the Barnes
(1984) edition of the works of Aristotle, with page references keyed to Bekker’s standard 1831
edition of the Greek text.
3

For example: ‘Happiness, therefore, must be some form of contemplation. But, being a
man, one will also need external prosperity; for our nature is not self-sufficient for the purpose of
contemplation, but our body must also be healthy, and have food and other attention. Still, we
must not think that the man who is to be happy will need many things or great things, merely
because he cannot be blessed without external goods; for self-sufficiency and action do not
depend on excess, and we can do noble acts without ruling earth and sea; for even with moderate
2

Life of money-making is one undertaken under compulsion, and wealth is evidently not the good
we are seeking; for it is merely useful and for the sake of something else.” (Nicomachean Ethics
Book 1: 1096a 6-10). The Stoics differed from Aristotle in placing their whole emphasis on the
virtuous life, while Epicureans placed more emphasis than Aristotle on the importance of
pleasures, including among these the avoidance of pain in body and soul (Annas 1993, 336).

When faced with such widespread views about the constituents of happiness and the
sources of life satisfaction, Aristotle also made a strong appeal for empirical work: “We must
therefore survey what we have already said, bringing it to the test of the facts of life, and if it
harmonizes with the facts we must accept it, but if it clashes with them we must suppose it to be
mere theory.” (Nicomachean Ethics, Book 10, 1179, 20-23)

This paper takes up Aristotle’s challenge, as has much of the previous empirical work on
subjective well-being, especially in psychology. Beyond the inherent interest of mapping the
correlates of satisfaction, there are also policy-related reasons for paying attention to subjective
measures of well-being. One is that many public policies have effects on well-being that flow
through productivity and incomes as well as through other channels. Conventional economic
analysis can recognize the existence of these other channels, but if the effects are generally
positive via one channel but negative through another channel, the net effects of the policy
cannot be evaluated unless there is some method for comparing the sizes of the offsetting effects.
If there are ways of tracking the offsetting influences through to subjective well-being, then
measures of their relative size may be used to support inferences about the net effects of events
or policies under review.

Finally, the large international sample of individual well-being data permits the joint

advantages one can act excellently...’ (Nicomachean Ethics Book 10: 1178b 32-35, 1179a 1-5.)

3

estimation of individual and societal-level linkages. This two-level approach is vital for
estimating the extent to which there are external consequences of actions, attitudes, and public
policies. For example, to what extent are effects of higher income on well-being based on
comparisons with others in the same society? Do the benefits of living in a high-trust society
depend on your own assessments, or also on more widely shared estimates? Do individuals gain
satisfaction from society-wide measures of health in addition to their assessments of their own
health? If the national as well as the individual values of variables are both included in the
explanation of individual well-being, it is possible to show to what extent there are positive or
negative spillover effects that could affect the evaluation of alternative policies. Since it is not
always easy to find comparable measures at the individual and society-wide levels, and since the
estimation of two-level effects is limited by the number of countries and years for which surveys
are available, this paper provides illustrations rather than definitive conclusions on the existence
and size of the key national-level factors determining well-being.

3. Previous Research

The study of well-being has over the past century taken a distant second place to the study
of psychological illness. One count places the number of psychological abstracts since 1887
mentioning anxiety as 100 times greater than those mentioning life satisfaction (Myers 2000, 56).
Nevertheless there have been many studies of well-being accumulating over the years, and there
is evidence of a flowering of new interest, as shown by the more than 300 articles surveyed by
Diener et al (1999). The starting point of that survey of recent work is the earlier survey by
Wilson (1967) of the then much more limited evidence on the constituents of happiness.
Wilson’s list of attributes of the typical happy person has remarkable similarities to that proposed
by Aristotle, since he attributes happiness to the “young, healthy, well-educated, well-paid,
extroverted, optimistic, worry-free, religious married person with high self-esteem, job morale,
modest aspirations, of either sex and a wide range of intelligence.” (Wilson 1967, 214).

In the subsequent thirty years, there has been a flowering of new results, using
4

experiments, data samples and more complex statistical analysis to study partial effects, causal
pathways and non-linearities. Experiments have shown that pleasant affect, unpleasant affect, and
life satisfaction are separable constructs (Diener et al 1999, 277). Since the former two are more
responsive to short-term circumstances, much of the well-being literature has focused on
measures of life satisfaction. The same reasoning supports the use of a measure of life
satisfaction as the dependent variable for the empirical work in this paper.

Previous well-being research has emphasized the joint importance of personality, the
social environment and circumstances in determining levels of subjective well-being. Special
attention has also been paid to the importance of goals and aspirations, of comparison groups,
personal experience, and habituation as joint determinants of how changes in circumstances will
affect individual well-being. Personality has been shown to be substantially heritable. Personality
differences have been shown to affect self-assessments of well-being, and to influence how an
individual responds to unfolding events. Since the data available for large-sample analysis has
only limited power to identify personality types, the estimated responses to particular events will
necessarily be an average across many different personality types, so that the explanatory power
of equations based on individual responses is likely to be small.

Cultural and societal differences are likely to be important determinants of international
differences in subjective well-being (Diener 2000). Since suitable variables and degrees of
freedom are scarce, there may well remain international differences in subjective well-being that
are not fully explained by available measures of individual and societal differences affecting
well-being. One of the major aims of this paper will be to include both individual-level and
societal variables as determinants of well-being so as to be able to estimate their separate
influences on well-being.

Moving outside the psychology literature, there have been studies using measures of wellbeing in the analysis of economic and social policies. For example, Di Tella et al (2000) have
used survey measures of subjective well-being to evaluate the short-term welfare trade-off
5

between inflation and unemployment. They find, echoing earlier work by Clark and Oswald
(1994) and Oswald (1997), that individuals rate the subjective cost of unemployment far higher
than the corresponding loss of money income. They also find an apparently high subjective cost
of inflation. Although inflation and unemployment are both found to be costly, relative to the
well-being effects of higher incomes, the trade-off estimated from the well-being data attaches a
much higher relative weight to unemployment than was implicit in the oft-used misery index4.

Broadening the scope of analysis, Frey and Stutzer (2000, 2002) explain differences in
subjective well-being among Swiss cantons using individual variables plus measures of the direct
accountability of cantonal administrations, finding that those cantons with more accountable
government also show higher average measures of subjective well-being.

Putnam (2000, 2001) explains individual measures of well-being with individual-level
and state-level variables to provide preliminary estimates of the relative contributions of income,
health, social connectedness and family status to individual well-being. Some of the related
literature is surveyed in Helliwell (2001a).

4. Data and Key Variables
This paper analyzes measures of subjective well-being drawn from three successive
waves of the World Values Survey (WVS, Inglehart et al 2000). The first wave was in 1980-82,
the second in 1990-91, and the third in the late 1995-97. Although each wave covers a different
set of countries, there is sufficient overlap to enable some first assessments of the sources and
sizes of international differences and changes in subjective well-being. There are too many
changing factors to permit definitive answers, but the sample size is large enough (totalling
87,806 observations spread over three waves and forty-six different countries) to permit many of

4

In the absence of grounds for any easy alternative, the ‘misery index’ has been defined
as the sum of the percentage unemployment rate and the current annual rate of inflation.

6

the relevant factors to be taken into account in a consistent manner.

The first wave of the WVS survey provides data for the current research from 18
industrial countries, all of which were members of the OECD. The 1990-91 second wave
provides data from 38 countries and the 1995-97 third wave provides data for 30 countries,
excluding many of the previously surveyed OECD countries. The second and third waves,
especially the third, contain up to 15 countries or regions from Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union. The changing country coverage means that there is a potential shortage of degrees
of freedom for the estimation of national-level linkages simultaneously with the application of
two-way fixed effects. Thus there are 49 different countries or sub-national regions represented
in one of the three waves, but only 86 total country-wave observations, compared to the 147 there
would have been if each country were represented in each of the three waves.

To reduce the number of country fixed-effect variables, in order to leave more degrees of
freedom for the estimation of national-level effects, the countries are divided into six groups. The
base group, for which no separate variable is required, includes 14 industrial countries (Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain,
Switzerland, UK, and US, with a special sample for Northern Ireland). The other groups include
countries of the Former Soviet Union (FSU, including Russia, Ukraine, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Belarus, and special samples from Moscow and the Tambov administrative region),
other countries of Eastern Europe (EEUR, including Poland, Czech Republic, Slovenia, Hungary,
Bulgaria, East Germany and Romania), and smaller groups of countries from Latin America
(LATAM, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela), Asia
(including China, India, Japan and Taiwan), other developing countries (OTHDEV, including
Nigeria, South Africa and Turkey), and Scandinavia (SCAN, including Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden). Tests have confirmed that these sub-aggregates combine groups
with fairly similar values for well-being, both before and after adjustment for differing values of
the independent variables tested. As will be seen, the country groups differ considerably in their
average levels of well-being, especially before allowance is made for international differences in
7

individual and societal-level factors influencing well-being.

Table 1 (at the end of the paper) shows the means and ranges of the variables used in the
main results reported in this paper. The specifics of each variable, and references to earlier
research, are provided when that variable is first introduced to the analysis5. The transformations
of WVS variables used to select the observations and define the variables are recorded in SPSS
syntax files available on request.

5. Results

We start, in equation 1, with an explanation of subjective well-being based on each
individual’s own characteristics, leaving until equation 2 the introduction of variables relating to
the society in which the individual lives. In both cases the equations are estimated by least
squares, allowing for a slightly modified form of two-way fixed effects, including variables for
each survey wave and for each of the country groups. Alternative functional forms and estimation
procedures are considered later in the paper. The dependent variable in all equations is the
individual’s general satisfaction with life on a ten-point scale, with 10.0 representing the greatest
satisfaction, and 1.0 the greatest dissatisfaction6.

The first independent variable considered in equation 1 is the individual’s self-assessed
state of health measured on a five-point scale, with 1 representing very good health and 5 very
poor health. This variable is always the most significant of all of the explanatory variables. A
one-point improvement in health, on the five point scale, is associated with a 0.61 point increase

5

The transformations of WVS variables used to select the observations and define the
variables are recorded in SPSS syntax files available on request.
6

The distribution of the variable departs from normality by being left-skewed and in
displaying some tendency to bunch at the middle and end points. The percentage frequencies of
the ten responses, counting from 1 to 10 on the satisfaction scale, are 3.2, 2.2, 4.8, 5.4, 13.0, 10.4,
14.6, 20.7, 11.9, and 13.3.
8

in subjective well-being7. Given the means and scales of the variables, a 1% increase in average
reported health status is associated with just over 1% increase in subjective well-being. From the
wording of the life satisfaction and health questions, this presumably reflects primarily a longterm effect, which earlier research (e.g. Brickman et al 1978) has shown to be much smaller than
the short-term effect, since expectations and comparison groups adjust so as to cushion the wellbeing effects of changes in health status. Some earlier research has suggested some nonlinearities in the relation between self-assessed health status and subjective well-being, in
particular that a drop from ‘poor’ to ‘very poor’ health would have a larger well-being cost than
other one-point downward movements in health status. To test for this, the equation was reestimated using the central value (3= ‘fair health’) as the base case, with separate variables for
‘very good’, ‘good’, ‘poor’ and ‘very poor’. The results did show higher well-being equivalents
for below-average health than for above average health. Although all of the one-point differences
had coefficients that were significantly different from each other, they all lie within the range
0.46 to 0.86. In this sample of data the largest differences relate to differences between the base
case and either poor health (-.856) or good health (+.622). To be in very good rather than good
health adds a further 0.520 to subjective well-being, while being in very poor rather than poor
health is matched by an average additional drop of 0.462). The well-being equivalent of being in
very good health rather than very poor health is thus 2.46 points on the 10-point well-being
scale8. Since the other coefficients in the equation are not affected by splitting the health variable,
the further analysis will make use of the simpler form adopted in equation 1.

There is reason to expect that the health coefficient in equation 1 may overstate the size
7 Holding all other individual and societal variables constant in equation 2, a
disaggregation in the health variable between OECD and the rest produces almost identical
results: -0.608 for OECD and –0.609 for the rest.
8
This is smaller than five times the 0.61 estimated in equation 1 because the sample
responses are unequally divided, with more responses in the groups with larger differences from
adjacent groups. In particular, the distribution of responses among the five groups ranging from
very good to very poor are 22.7%, 37.2%, 31.3%, 7.3% and 1.6%. This may to some extent
reflect a lower sampling probability for those who would self-describe themselves as being in
very bad health.
9

of the long-term effect of objective health status on subjective well-being, since both are affected
in the same direction by personality differences. Individuals whose personalities are inherently
more optimistic are more likely to give positive assessments of their health status and their
subjective well-being (Okun and George 1984). Comparisons of identical twins raised together
and apart (Tellegen et al 1988, Lykken and Tellegen 1996) suggest that a large fraction of longterm interpersonal differences in personality is genetic in nature. Although this fact may bias
upwards estimates of the long-term linkages between health and well-being, optimism creates
real linkages as well, since there is ample research showing that those who are optimistic about
their health prospects, even unrealistically so, have better health outcomes than do those facing
the same prognosis with a less optimistic frame of mind (e.g. Schier et al 1989).

The second independent variable relates to the individual’s employed status, with
unemployment represented by 1.0, with a zero value for those who are either employed or out of
the labour force. Being unemployed lowers subjective well-being by as much as a one-unit drop
on the five-point health scale, averaging -0.61 on the ten-point satisfaction scale. Comparisons
with income and other effects will be made later, but even before that, it can be reported that
these results confirm the earlier findings by Clark and Oswald (1994) and Di Tella et al (2000)
that individuals report large well-being reductions from being unemployed. It is not possible to
tell from these data how long the surveyed individuals have been, or expect to be, unemployed,
so no attempts can be made to disentangle habituation effects, which would tend to lessen the
well-being effect of long-standing unemployment, from the offsetting build-up of debt and
despair, and the associated obsolescence of job-related human capital. The likely importance of
habituation effects may be part of the reason why the estimated effect of unemployment on life
satisfaction is significantly greater for respondents in OECD countries9.
9 The

coefficients in equation 2 (individual and societal variables together) are – 0.669 for
OECD and –0.523 for the rest, holding all other variables constant. This is consistent with Clark
(2001), which shows that the well-being effects of unemployment are smaller in those regions of
the United Kingdom where average unemployment rates are higher.

10

The next series of variables relate to family status. We lack information about any aspect
of respondents’ prior family history, including how long they have been married, separated or
divorced, or whether there have been previous marriages. Thus we have nothing to contribute to
the debate about whether findings of weaker correlations between well-being and marriage in
some previous studies may be due to rising proportions of the now-married who are veterans of
previous marriages and divorces. It is possible, however, to test whether, as some studies have
indicated (Argyle 1987), marriage contributes more to the subjective well-being of men than of
women. Separating the marriage effect by gender showed no difference between men and
women, so that the equation reported makes no such split. The relevant literature on both debates
is surveyed by Diener et al. (1999, 290). The results in equation 1 show a hierarchy of wellbeing, with those who are married being happiest, followed by the ‘living as married’, widows or
widowers, the divorced, and the separated. The difference between being married and separated
amounts to almost three-quarters of a point on the ten point scale, or more than being
unemployed. The fact that being separated is worse than being divorced may reflect habituation
and recovery effects that presumably have had more time to work for those who are currently
divorced than for those who are separated. Most divorces follow separations so that the average
divorced person has been either separated or divorced for longer than the average separated
person has been separated.

The results for the education variables may be surprising, since education has been found
to be the strongest systematic determinant of individual participation in a variety of social
activities, and social connections have been linked to increased health and well-being (Putnam
2000). In equation 1 the partial effects of differing levels of education on subjective well-being
are found to be small and insignificant. One explanation for this finding is that in equation 1 any
beneficial effects of education flowing though higher incomes, better health, and higher
perceived trust levels are already taken into account. Also it should be noted that the education
variables are among the weakest in the WVS data, being based solely on the ages at which
individuals finish their full-time education. This is a very imperfect guide to how much education
11

has been received or what results or qualifications have been obtained. Education ages and
quality also differ much from country to country, and much of the variance in the WVS sample is
across countries. However, it is reasonable to conclude, in a provisional way, that in this
international context those who have stayed in full-time education until a later age are not
systematically more satisfied with their lives, once account has been taken of the higher incomes,
wider participation and better health that might have been facilitated by their education. To
confirm that education does have important indirect effects on well-being requires additional
experiments, which have been undertaken and will be reported in the subsequent section.

What about age? Wilson (1967) surveyed the earlier literature, and characterized the
happy person as being young. Subsequent studies have been able to separate the age linkages
more systematically from those of income, health and other variables. More recent reviews
(Myers and Diener 1995, Diener et al 1999) have dismissed Wilson’s conclusion, and found no
systematic age pattern. Perhaps because the WVS sample is so large, and health and income are
separately accounted for, the WVS current results show a strong U-shaped pattern of the sort
previously found by Blanchflower and Oswald (2000) for Britain and the United States, and
replicated in other recent studies. The base group comprises those aged 18-24. Those in the next
three age groups are significantly less happy than those aged 18-24, providing some partial
support for the earlier view that life is happier for the young. However after reaching a low point
among the 35-44 year-old group, subjective well-being thereafter rises systematically and
significantly, with those 55 to 64 as happy as those aged 18 to 24, and those aged 65 and up
much happier still. The size of the changes is large, with those over 65 having well-being more
than one-half point higher (on the ten-point scale) than those 35 to 44, a difference almost as
great as that between the employed and unemployed.10

Earlier research has found a strong correlation between measures of religious activity and
10 The age coefficients for OECD are: 25-34: -0.224, 35-44: -0.383, -0.368, 45-54: 0.368, 55-64: -0.126, 65+: 0.267. The corresponding coefficients for the rest of the sample are:
25-34: -0.168, 35-44: -0.324, 45-54: -0.305, 55-64: - 0.0774, 65+: 0.06341. The general pattern
is the same in the two groups of countries, but old age is more satisfying in the OECD countries.

12

subjective well-being. There has been some debate as to whether this is due to the support
provided by religious beliefs and convictions or to the social and community networks provided
by regular participation in church activities. The WVS data permit these two channels to be
separately evaluated, since respondents are asked about the importance of God to their lives as
well as how frequently they attend church. The results show that both variables have strong and
easily distinguished linkages to life satisfaction. Those who report that God is very important to
their lives (33% of the sample) have life satisfaction measures higher by 0.34, with the effect of
weekly or more frequent church attendance (22% of the sample) also being significant, although
only one-third as large11. Tests of differences of these effects among religious faiths show that
they apply across all major faiths.

As a prelude to consideration of variables relating to measures of the quality of national
institutions, equation 1 considers individual assessments of some key elements of each nation’s
social capital. There are two variables relating to each individual’s own participation in
voluntary organizations of all types except church groups, since church affiliation and
participation is covered by a separate variable. One variable (MEM12) covers the first two waves
of the survey, while the other relates to the third wave (MEM3). Two variables are used because
the voluntary associations question was asked differently in the third wave, producing
significantly higher average participation rates (Inglehart et al. 2000). The different average
participation rate in the third wave will also be responsible for part of the coefficient on the fixed
effect for the third wave. The coefficients on both membership variables show that individuals
who are involved in more voluntary associations report higher average satisfaction with their
lives. The variable measures the total number of membership types for each respondent. The
11

The simple correlation between the two variables is 0.40. Of the roughly 29,000 for
whom God is very important, fewer than half go to church one or more times per week. Of the
20,000 who go to church at least once per week, two-thirds report that God is very important to
their lives.

13

coefficient on the variable for the first two waves suggests that someone with an additional
voluntary group membership, with an average degree of involvement, has well-being that is
higher by 0.05, about a tenth as much as marriage. The number is estimated to be twice as large
in the third wave. Since optimistic individuals are more likely to report themselves satisfied with
life, and to assume the best from new ventures, they are probably also more likely to join and
participate in voluntary associations. Thus the positive partial correlation between individual
memberships and well-being may reflect in part the common influence of personality differences,
just as was argued above for physical health. However, it will be shown later that societies with
high averages of social capital, as measured by membership densities, also show higher levels of
subjective well-being, other things held constant. This relation cannot be readily attributed to
personality differences amongst individuals, since these average out at the national level.

The ‘NOCHEAT” variable takes the value of 1.0 for every individual who thinks that it
is never justifiable to cheat on taxes. As shown in Table 1, slightly more than half of the
respondents think that cheating on taxes is never justifiable, and equation 1 shows that they
systematically report themselves more satisfied with their lives. The same is true for those who
reply ‘yes’ when asked if they think that, in general, people can be trusted, rather than the
alternative that you cannot be too careful when dealing with people. It is tempting to treat this
positive effect of trust assessments as representing the well-recognized individual benefits of
living in a high-trust society. However, it cannot be only that, as equation 2 will show shortly that
the coefficient on individual differences in trust assessments remains unchanged even after
national differences in trustworthiness are taken into account separately.

Perhaps this is one more instance where optimism produces higher assessments of both
trust and well-being. An alternative view is that individuals differ in their sub-national
communities, and their answers relate to the run of people with whom they interact, and not to
the nation as a whole. This alternative view would permit the interpretation of the positive effect
as representing the benefits of living in a high-trust community, assuming that most of the
interpersonal differences in trust assessments represented differences among communities in the
14

same nation in the average level of trustworthy behaviour.

Earlier studies and surveys of the literature on the effects of income on subjective wellbeing provide an ambiguous picture. For samples of data including individuals within the same
country, those with higher relative incomes generally12 show significantly higher measures of
subjective well-being, although the magnitude of the effect is often described as small (Diener et
al 1999, 287). It has also been noted that big increases in individual income or wealth, such as
those provided by a large lottery win, show well-being effects that are positive but declining with
time to fairly small residual levels (Smith and Razell 1975, Brickman et al 1978). Simple crosscountry correlations of GDP per capita and measures of subjective well-being show a significant
positive correlation (Myers and Diener 1995, 13), but countries with faster-growing GDP per
capita have not shown corresponding increases in well-being (Easterlin 1974, 1995, Myers and
Diener 1995, 13, Oswald 1997). In some countries there is evidence of increasing prevalence of
materialistic goals among the young (Astin, Korn and Riggs 1993), which might be thought to
lead to larger or more significant higher well-being effects from higher incomes. However, other
studies found that individuals attaching high subjective values to financial success have lower
values for subjective well-being, even when their financial aspirations were met. (Kasser and
Ryan 1993, 1996).

The WVS data offer some advantages and some disadvantages in identifying the linkages
between income and well-being. The advantages flow from the very large sample size, and the
inclusion of countries and individuals with very different levels of income. The disadvantages
relate to the difficulties of comparing relative incomes among countries and among individuals.
To compare incomes across countries, we use real GDP per capita, measured at purchasing
power parities, in the year of the survey, making use of the Penn World Tables, as updated in the

12

But Clark and Oswald (1994) do not find a significant effect in their sample of UK

data.

15

World Bank growth dataset. To capture individual incomes, the WVS asks respondents to place
their family incomes on a ten-point scale, where the ranges they are offered are supposed to be
based on the family income deciles in that country and year.

Theory and some previous research suggest that the effects of individual and national
incomes may be non-linear in nature, with smaller well-being effects attached to increases in
income beyond levels sets by each individual’s or society’s expectations and habits (Offer 2000).
Habituation effects are hard to establish with the WVS data, since there is no way to tell how the
family incomes reported relate to recent or normal levels. To search for non-linearity of the
individual relative income variable, the equation includes the decile value (where the range is
from .1 to 1, and the mean is 0.5) and the decile value squared. In equation 1, both take
significant coefficients, with signs that imply diminishing returns to higher relative incomes. For
an individual to move from the fourth to the fifth decile in the distribution of family incomes
raises well-being by +0.10 (=1.91*.1-.96*.09), while to move from the ninth to the tenth decile is
associated with an increase in well-being of only 0.01 (=1.91*.1-.96*.19). This is despite the fact
that for most countries the move from the ninth to the tenth decile involves a much larger
absolute and relative increase in income than to move from the fourth to the fifth decile. Thus
there are sharply decreasing well-being effects from higher incomes relative to those elsewhere in
the same country13
13

The situation is more complicated if one uses separate variables for each income decile,
with the lowest decile as a base case. The changes to subjective well-being from each of the nine
steps from the second to the tenth decile (with the basis for comparison being respondents in the
lowest decile) are +.091, +.190, +.138, +.113, +.024, +.125, +.015, -.012, and +.090. The general
pattern of declining increments is apparent, but there is some evidence of additional sense of
well-being from being in the top decile, which represents in many countries a substantial increase
in income from the deciles immediately below. Subsequent work has established a clear
distinction between the effects of relative income in the OECD and in the developing countries.
For the poorer countries, there continue to be significant increases in subjective well-being from
increases in relative income throughout the ten deciles, while for OECD countries, the increases
in well-being with income are concentrated in the first four deciles, with no significant increases
in subjective well-being beyond that point (holding constant all other variables, of course). When
the effects are estimated separately for OECD and non-OECD countries, they are: OECD: 0.0325 (not significant), +0.00179 (not significant), +0.124,+0.208, +0.195, +0.243, +0.232,
16

To extend the analysis internationally, and to try to disentangle the statistical effects of
absolute income levels from those of domestic and international relative incomes, it is necessary
to make the first addition of national variables, as reported in equation 2. Adding several national
variables alters the size and significance of the individual variables surprisingly little, even
where, as in the case of trust, the national value being used is the national average of the
corresponding individual variable.

The addition of variables describing the structure of the national society raises the
explained variance from 25.5% to 26.3% if the regional and time variables are in the equations,
or from 15% to 25.6% if they are not. Comparing the regional variables and the national societal
variables as means of explaining the variation in well-being not explained by individual factors,
the national variables are collectively slightly more powerful (25.6% of variance explained by the
national variables compared to 25.5% for the time and regional variables, with individual-level
variables included in both cases). The national societal variables and the regional variables are
partly substitutes and partly complements, in that both remain highly significant in equation 2
which contains both. Our main interpretation will centre on equation 2 rather than on equation 1,
which excludes regional effects. This is a not matter of much consequence, as comparison of the
two equations show that the inclusion of regional effects does not generally change the
coefficients on the societal variables. The main exceptions are those for education, due to low
well-being and high education levels in the FSU and Eastern European countries. Thus although
it is clear that there is ample scope to find new explanations for the remaining regional effects,
the current societal variables are not achieving their success merely as back-door ways of
capturing regional differences based on other factors. However, subsequent robustness checks
suggest that attempts to increase the number of country dummy variables, or to change the
numbers and natures of the country groupings, do have material effects on some of the contextual
variables. This is because of the relatively small number of observations of the national
+0.223, +0.333. REST: +0.158, +0.445, +0.584, +0.716, +0.771, +0.976, +1.071, +1.142,
+1.254.
17

variables- often as little as one per country – so that the power of the equation to identify the
effects of national variables is seriously affected by inclusion of larger numbers of country
variables. This suggests caution in interpretation of the sizes on some of the national variables,
and puts a premium on extending the data sample to include the millennial round of the World
Values Survey. In addition, the standard errors reported in equation 2 assume independence of
individual error terms within national samples. Allowing for with-country error correlations, as is
done later in the paper, raises the standard errors on the societal-level effects, and leads to a
corresponding reduction in the number of national level effects that can be separated to a high
degree of statistical significance.

Now that equation 2 has been introduced, we can return to the consideration of individual
and national income effects. The national income per capita variable is scaled by showing each
country’s average relative to the value for 1997 in the United States. The logarithm and the
square of this variable are then included, and both attract highly significant coefficients. This pair
of variables is strongly preferred by the data to simply the level and the square, or to any of the
three variables on their own. We find that national average income also has diminishing returns,
since the logarithm of average per capita income takes a positive coefficient, while the square
takes a negative coefficient. Use of dummy variables for each decile of the international
distribution of national average per capita incomes shows evidence of a double hump, with local
peaks about one-third and two-thirds of the way up the national income ladder. However, the use
of decile data reduces excessively the number of degrees of freedom available to identify
significant national income and other national-level effects. Grouping of deciles will be used
later in the paper to address this issue. It is much easier to use individual deciles to establish
relative income effects within each country, because the sample sizes are large enough to identify
fairly stable and very significant patterns, and to establish different patterns for the OECD and
developing countries. A fresh round of data from the larger end-of-century WVS survey should
help to better establish the cross-sectional and time series effects of differences in average
incomes.

18

The next societal variable to be added is the average level of interpersonal trust. This is as
estimated by the national average answer to the question: “In general, do you think that people
can be trusted, or alternatively, that you can’t be too careful when dealing with people?14” Knack
(2001) has shown that international differences in sample average responses to this question are
good predictors of international differences in the proportion of experimentally dropped moneyfilled wallets that are returned with their contents intact. Hence average individual assessments of
the extent to which people in general can be trusted mirror at least some key aspects of the
trustworthiness of their fellow citizens. It would be useful to have more specific information
about the radius of trust people assume when answering the question. The Knack (2001) finding
suggests that people are responding to their experience in and knowledge of their own national
societies, although there may well be admixtures of more local and more international experience
being taken into account.

Equation 2 shows that differences in national average trust over time and across countries
have a large and significant effect on subjective well-being. This does not flow from a false
relation linking optimism with assessments of general trustworthiness and of personal wellbeing, since the equation also includes the individual’s own estimate to which others can be
trusted. Hence the coefficient on the national trust variable has some claim to reflect the average
perceived benefits to individuals of living in an environment where other people can be trusted.
The coefficient of 0.32 implies that average well-being would increase by .03 on a ten-point scale
for each 0.1 increase in the proportion of the population judging that people can in general be
trusted. A difference of 0.1 in average trust levels is less than the sample standard deviation of
0.14, and less than one-third of the difference between trust levels in France and Norway, a
comparison used by Grjebine (2000) and Helliwell (2001a) in the analysis of international
14

This way of asking the trust question was used by Almond and Verba (1963) in their
pioneering study of democracy, and has been the main basis for comparative research for more
than forty years.

19

differences in traffic behaviour and road fatalities.

The next societal variable is based on a large World Bank effort to collect and analyze
measures of the quality of governance for more than 150 countries in the 1990s. The authors
(Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobatoni 1999a, 1999b) summarize and interpolate data collected
by others for an average of more than 25 different indicators of the quality of governance,
divided into six separate aspects: voice and accountability, stability and lack of violence,
government effectiveness, the regulatory framework, the rule of law, and the control of
corruption. For each group of indicators, the measures are scaled to have a mean of zero across
all of the countries included, and a range from +2.5 to -2.5. An aggregate formed by summing the
five measures to a single index of the quality of governance (GOVTOT) has a mean of 0.65 for
the countries represented in the WVS data, and ranges from 1.72 for Switzerland at the top to 1.00 for Nigeria at the bottom. There are many reasons why higher values for such a variable
would be associated with higher average levels of subjective well-being. Many services crucial to
individuals and families, ranging from education and health to justice and transportation, are
regulated and provided by governments. The quality of the services received, for any given
amount of resources expended, is likely to be higher where the overall quality of government is
higher. Perhaps more important, the confidence with which individuals face their future is likely
to depend considerably on the confidence with which they can rely on government services
being available when and where they are needed.

The coefficient of .32 (t=12.0) on the GOVTOT variable implies substantial well-being
benefits from improvements in the quality of governance. For example, an improvement in the
quality of government in Belarus (-.76) to that of Hungary (+.87) would (if the relation were
causal) increase the average well-being of a citizen of Belarus by more than marriage, by about as
much as the combined effect of religious belief and church attendance, and almost as much as
moving from the bottom to the top decile in the country’s income distribution.

Two societal variables were considered for physical health- the infant mortality rate and
20

the average life expectancy. Life expectancy had no significant effect. An earlier version of this
paper identified a significant effect of the infant mortality rate, which was eventually found to
have the wrong sign, and in any event be due for its significance to entirely to one country
(Japan) which had the lowest infant mortality rate (4.3 per 10,000, compared to 7.1 per 10,000 in
the United States, and a high of 81.1 in Nigeria), and also with subjective well-being lower than
its circumstances would otherwise have suggested. More research is required to gather better
societal level measures of averages levels and distribution of states of physical health. When the
next round of WVS data becomes available, there will be more degrees of freedom to identify
different patterns of national and possible even sub-national level contextual effects.

6. Social Capital, Education and Well-Being
It has already been shown that the national values of the trust variable have systematic
positive effects on well-being, reflecting some of the benefits flowing to individuals living in
societies where trust replaces suspicion and fear. These direct benefits on well-being are in
addition to those that may flow through greater efficiency in economic affairs and government,
since these channels are already directly modelled. Higher values of trust are often thought of as
one of the main channels through which increases in the right types of social capital improve
economic and social well-being. Sometimes measures of trust are included as part of what is
meant by social capital, although there is some evidence of emerging consensus to treat trust as
an immediate consequence of the right types of social capital, where the latter is more narrowly
defined, for example to include “networks together with shared norms, values and
understandings which facilitate co-operation within or among groups” (OECD 2001). We are
now in a position to see if increases in the national density or quality of these norms and
networks increase individual well-being beyond the widely-recognized benefits of individual
participation, and in addition to the effects flowing through higher national average values of
trust.

A first fairly obvious norm to consider is whether the members of a society readily agree
to pay their allotted shares of the costs of their collective actions. A natural measure for this is the
21

national average fraction of respondents who think that it is never appropriate to cheat on their
taxes. We have already seen that individuals who think that cheating on taxes is wrong have
higher subjective well-being. Now we are in a position to see if their well-being is systematically
higher if they live in a society in which people generally think that it is wrong to cheat on taxes.
The coefficient on the national average measure (NOCHEATN) is 0.26 (t=4.3), implying
significant further benefits to shared high standards for communal responsibility. Adding the
national variable only slightly reduces the coefficient on the individual’s own opinion of tax
cheating. The sum of the two coefficients is almost 0.5, suggesting that the benefits of a widely
supported set of tax rules go beyond direct savings in collection and enforcement costs. People
who cheat appear to be less happy. Widespread acceptance of cheating lowers average
satisfaction, whatever one’s own willingness to condone cheating.

We have already seen that those who are more connected, whether through participation
in churches or other voluntary organizations, are more satisfied with their lives. What remains
now to be seen is whether their participation makes others better off as well. To assess this
possibility, equation 2 includes national average levels of the weekly-or-more church attendance
variable, and national average memberships in other voluntary associations. As already noted, the
other memberships question took a different form in the third wave of the WVS, and elicited
higher average responses, so that separate variables are used for the third wave. The results
suggest that on average the benefits of high church attendance flow mainly to the church goers
themselves, since the variable takes a smaller coefficient than is attracted by the variable for
other memberships. Both variables for other memberships take significant positive coefficients.
The evidence from all types of memberships suggests that there are positive spillovers to the
well-being of others. Previous research did not find any such spillovers from memberships to
economic growth (e.g. Knack and Keefer 1997, Helliwell 1996a, Knack 2001), and in any event
income levels are already accounted for in equation 2, so the national membership effects in
equation 2 would seem to flow directly to well-being rather than through income or trust. The
estimated effects are large and significant. If everyone joined one additional group, the resulting
increase in well-being would exceed that from marriage. Using the third wave coefficients, for
22

example, the average well-being would increase by .06 from the individual effect and .58 from
the national effect, for a total effect of 0.64. Of course, such an increase would be historically
unprecedented, and represents a larger difference than that between the most and least
horizontally connected of the national societies included in the data. The most important feature
of these results is that the spillover effects on the well-being of others are estimated to be
substantially larger than the direct benefits, even after taking into account any benefits that may
have flowed through higher trust or higher incomes.

Turning to education, equation 2 includes a measure of the average educational
attainment in each society, measured in completed years. The data are based on the de la Fuente
and Donénech (2000) estimates for the OECD countries and the Barro and Lee (1996) estimates
for other countries. The two sources should be consistent, since the OECD data are intended to
improve on the Barro and Lee data for the OECD countries while keeping the same basic
methodology. Their data for 1980 are used for the first wave of the WVS, and their 1990
estimates are used for both waves in the 1990s, in the absence of more recent data15. The national
attainment data show no net impact on well-being.

How can these neutral results for the partial effects of own and national education be
squared with earlier research (e.g. Wilson 1967) suggesting that the typical happy person is welleducated? To see if there is a conflict, equation 3 replicates the sort of direct estimate that was
frequently employed in early studies. The equation simply adds the individual and national
education attainment variables to the most basic equation including only time and regional fixed
effects. The results are quite striking. One’s own education has a strong positive effect on wellbeing, and the strong positive effect from the national average variable indicates the existence of
positive spillovers to others. Equation 4 adds the full set of individual determinants of well15

Alternative measures based on secondary and tertiary enrolment rates, and their
average, were also assessed, and proved empirically weaker. The attainment data are in any case
theoretically preferable, since average well-being should depend on average attainment, and not
on the current pace of educational investment.
23

being. The individual education effects are largely removed, while the national spillovers remain
strongly significant. Only when the other national variables are included, as in equation 2, do the
spillover effects of education disappear. The inference to be drawn is presumably that the
individual well-being benefits of education flow primarily through their well-documented effects
on participation, health, perceived trust, and higher incomes16. In a parallel way, the beneficial
spillovers apparent from equations 3 and 4 are fully captured by the channels captured by the
national norms and networks variables17. Thus these results suggest once more the importance of
separating direct and indirect influences, and making conclusions conditional on particular sets of
other variables and channels of influence. The well-documented benefits of education appear to
flow less through a direct impact on life satisfaction than through its positive effects on the
creation and maintenance of human and social capital18.

Other variables assessed but not used in equation 2 include a measure of nationwide
income inequality and a simple variable designed to capture generational effects19. There is some
cross-section evidence that increased income inequality is associated with lower rates of
economic growth (Persson and Tabellini 1994), and worse health outcomes20. Equation 2 would
16

Tests show that the individual variables for income, health, memberships, trust and tax
cheating all played a role in reducing the positive effect of one’s own education. On the effects of
education, social capital and other aspects of socioeconomic status on health, see Wolfe and
Haveman (2001) and Michalos et al (2000).
17

Tests show that the national variables for trust and quality of government were the
biggest contributors to reducing the coefficient on national educational attainment.
18

See OECD (2001) for a survey of the evidence.

19

The generational variable was a variable that took the value 1.0 for each respondent
born prior to 1950. Putnam (1995, 2000) has found that in the United States those who were born
prior to 1950 show significantly higher community involvement and trust. Such effects may be
captured in equation 2 by the inclusion of the membership and trust variables. However, the
generational variable did not contribute directly to the international well-being equation whether
or not the trust and membership variables were included.
20

On the effects of income inequality and social capital on health outcomes, see
Wilkinson (1992), Kawachi et al (1997), Ben-Shlomo et al (1996), Gravelle (1998), Wolfson et
24

capture these effects through the health status and income variables. Adding a World Bank
estimate of the Gini coefficient for each national economy added no explanatory power to the
well-being equation. There are, however, some well-being effects of income inequality implied
by the non-linear way in which personal and national average incomes enter the well-being
equation. Because the quadratic terms are negative both for the decile position of individuals and
the average national income, an economy with a more equal distribution of income will achieve a
higher average level of well-being, for any given level of average per capita incomes. The size of
these effects depends on the functional forms being used, and may well differ by country
(Alesina 2001). More tests and perhaps better data are required to permit more confident
conclusions.

Finally, a word about the remaining regional effects, which in equation 2 are still
substantially negative for the countries of the former Soviet Union, with a negative effect almost
half as large for the countries of Eastern Europe. Subsequent tests, reported in the next section,
show that this simple average hides important changes over time. In 1990 the negative residuals
are equally large in the FSU and Eastern Europe, between 1990 and the mid-1990s survey they
grow even larger for the FSU and largely disappear in Eastern Europe. The three Baltic countries
have been included in the FSU variable, although their experience before, during and since their
time as parts of the Soviet Union is very different from that of other republics. However, tests
show the coefficient for the Baltics to be similar to that for the rest of the FSU. There are
significant positive regional effects in Latin America and Scandinavia, and negative effects in
Asia and the Other Developing category. It is interesting to compare these post-modelling
residual regional effects with what would be implied by the basic data. If an equation is run
including only the regional and time fixed effects, the negative regional effects in the FSU and
Eastern Europe are far larger, at -2.34 (t=99) and -1.20 (t=43), as are those in Asia (-.502, t=18)
and for other developing countries (-.686, t=22). The Scandinavian positive effect in the simple
regression is much higher in the simple equation (+.612, t=23), while that for Latin America is al (1999), and Rose (2000).

25

.173 (t=6).

Adjusting for the international differences in personal and especially national variables
has the effect of sharply reducing the otherwise unexplained regional effects, and of shifting the
Latin American effect from negative to positive. In all cases the comparisons are with the
remaining OECD countries. This implies that relative to the main body of OECD countries, the
key explanatory variables are less favourable in all of the developing regions, and especially in
the FSU and Eastern Europe, than in the OECD. The reverse is true for the Scandinavian
countries, which have more beneficial values for most variables than is the case elsewhere in the
OECD. Even after allowing for these effects, self-assessments of well-being in Scandinavia
remain higher than elsewhere in the OECD. In Latin America, even though self-assessed wellbeing is lower than in OECD countries, the differential is less than our model would predict, so
that when the full model is applied the surveyed Latin Americans are more satisfied with their
lives than their circumstances would suggest.

6. Robust Estimation of a Revised Equation
In some respects, the results in equation 2 seem too good to be true, showing
independently significant effects of a wide range of individual and national effects. With respect
to the national effects, such scepticism is justified. The least squares estimation adopted for
equation 2 assumes that each observation is drawn from the same distribution, thus providing a
very large number of degrees of freedom. However, there are no doubt systematic differences
among countries in the error terms as well as in the key variables used in the equation. Thus it is
appropriate to adopt an estimation strategy that calculates robust standard errors recognizing the
correlation of error terms among respondents in the same country (Moulton 1990). This has the
effect of reducing to about 50 the number of independent observations available for estimating
the effects of national variables. This does not change the values of the coefficients, but does
increase, almost threefold, the standards errors on the national variables. This increase in
standard errors removes some of what previously were significant differences among sub-groups,
and suggests a slimmer specification of key national variables.
26

Equation 5 shows the results of re-estimating the full model with robust standard errors.
This equation also embodies several of the insights that were discovered through the various
specification tests that have already been described in the text and footnotes. The final equation
also makes further refinements to the estimation strategy, by using an ordered probit in place of
the linear model employed for equation 2, and allows appropriately for the differing sampling
weights in each country survey. The probit form is more general than the linear form, since it
does not have to assume that each move from one level to the next of the life-satisfaction index
has the same importance to the individual. However, the differences between cut-lines, shown
below the equation, are of roughly equal size, suggesting that the linear assumption was not
seriously incorrect. Thus the results do not depend importantly on whether the measures of
subjective well-being are treated as ordinal or cardinal. The cut-line results also provide a handy
metric to interpret the size of the coefficients in the probit equation. Dividing each coefficient by
the average distance between cut-lines provides coefficients comparable to those in the earlier
equations. Roughly speaking, this involves slightly more than doubling the coefficients in
equation 5. Thus most of the key individual effects remain the same as in equation 2. Based on
earlier tests, the effects of unemployment on well-being are now estimated separately for OECD
and non-OECD residents. They are highly significant in both groups of countries, but are
significantly higher in the OECD. The effects are relative income are now shown in much more
detail, and separately for OECD and other countries. The bottom three deciles in the OECD, and
the bottom 2 in the rest of the countries are combined, because they are not significantly
different. As noted earlier in the paper, increases in individual incomes, relative to others in the
same country, are matched by continuing increases in subjective well-being in the poorer
countries, but not in the OECD countries, where average incomes are much higher.

Equation 5 includes only those national variables for which the coefficients remain
significant with the revised estimation techniques, plus three variables covering groups of
countries with different levels of national income per capita. The significant variables relate to

27

the overall quality of government21 and the average number of memberships. Since the
difference between the membership effects is not significantly different between survey waves, a
single effect is estimated, which is slightly larger than was the average effect in equation 2, after
allowing for the difference in the functional form of the equations. The national income effects
are now estimated by splitting the countries into four groups, with the base category being
countries with real per capita GDP less then 20 percent of that in the United States in 1996.
Separate coefficients are then estimated for the additional well-being for those in countries with
20 to 50% of US per capita GDP, 50 to 75%, and over 75%. As can be seen, the well-being
effects of living in higher income countries are small and insignificant, and do not show any
evidence of subsequent increase once GDP per capita exceeds half that in the United States in the
mid 1990s. Yet it remains the case that on average, subjective well-being is much higher in
OECD than in non-OECD countries, and the OECD countries are also much richer. Why this
apparent paradox? The reasoning is the similar to that in the case of education. A reduced-form
equation shows that subjective well-being is higher in the richer countries, but both education
and income effects fall out in the full model, which includes health, social connections, and the
quality of government, all of which are higher in the richer countries22. Those who have the
21 Consideration was also given a variable that takes the value of 1.0 for each respondent who
thinks that ‘most or all public officials (in the country) are engaged in bribe-taking and
corruption.’ This is perhaps the best individual-level assessment of governmental quality
available from the WVS survey data, and shows systematically higher subjective well-being
among those who do not view their governments as corrupt. There is a strongly significant
correlation between this individual-level measure and the aggregate measure of governmental
quality. Including the individual-level view of corruption does not drive out the aggregate
variable, which remains highly significant even with the revised estimation methods. However,
the final version of equation 5 leaves out this variable, since the question was not asked in all
countries and in all waves, so that its inclusion could bias the residual estimates of country and
region effects. The coefficient on corrupt was -.08 (t=5.8), with most other coefficients
unchanged to 3 or 4 significant figures.
22 To be more specific, when only the three average income variables are included in a linear
equation with robust standard errors, the well-being effects grow with each income group, being
+1.01 (t=3.0) for y2050 (relative to countries with y less than 20% of that in the United States),
1.61 (t=4.8) for y5075, and 1.87 (t=5.5) for yover75. Adding govtot to the equation cuts these
effects in half, and renders them insignificant. Adding health status makes the income effects
start to fall after the middle income range is reached. If average education and the income
variables are used in alternative equations, the education variable is stronger than the income

28

highest levels of subjective well-being are not those who live in the richest countries, but those
who live where social and political institutions are effect, where mutual trust is high, and
corruption is low.

Equation 5 also re-estimates the specific regional effects, which reflect international
differences in subjective well-being that remain significant even after allowing for all of the
model’s explanatory variables and the new methods of estimating standard errors. Scandinavia
remains a significant positive outlier. Following the tests reported earlier, the effects for Eastern
Europe and the Former Soviet Union have been split by time period. In 1990, subjective wellbeing was abnormally low in both regions, by even more in Eastern Europe than in the FSU. By
the mid-1990s, however, things had got even worse in the FSU, even relative to the declining
circumstances, but there was no significant negative residual in Eastern Europe. This pattern is
revealed strongly by the coefficients reported in Equation 5. Regional effects for other groups of
countries are no longer significant with robust standard errors, and are therefore not present in
equation 5.

7. Conclusions and Prospects
This paper has attempted to illustrate rather than exhaust the possibilities for using
international well-being data to measure and explain differences in well-being within and among
nations. International well-being data permit the combined use of individual and societal
variables. This in turn makes it possible to identify the consequences of societal or ecological
variables, whether they be the consequences of history, government policy, or community
choices. The well-being data themselves have fairly good claims as measures of individual
welfare. Insofar as these claims are justified, the coefficients can be used to combine what might
otherwise be incommensurable results into an overall welfare assessment of changes in policies
or institutions.

variable if the equation also includes the FSU and Eastern Europe effects. National education
does not perform so well in a simple equation without the FSU effects, since well-being is
29

The use of well-being studies for the comparison of societies and the evaluation of
alternative policies is still in its infancy. The firmest recommendation is thus for better data and
more research. Some researchers of well-being have argued that it is not too soon to think of
constructing national well-being indexes to supplement and improve the available measures used
for cross-national comparisons (Diener 2000). In a sense, this is what the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has already done with its measures of the quality of life, and
what others have done to develop broader measures of economic well-being (Osberg and Sharpe
2001). The availability of large samples of well-being data offers the prospect of much stronger
empirical grounding for attempts to devise measures and comparisons of well-being, and to
compare alternative policies intended to improve well-being.

One of the particular branches of social science that has much to gain from systematic use
of well-being data is the study of the causes and consequences of social capital. The widespread
interest among social scientists and policy-makers in social capital has much to do with
influential studies, especially those of Putnam (1995, 2000) that have shown sharp falls in trust
and participation over the past forty years in the United States, following a period of rapid rise
over the first sixty years of the twentieth century. The final decades of the twentieth century have
also seen rapid economic growth and greater inequality of income distribution in the United
States. Are these economic and social trends connected? If so, then how, and how can they be
jointly assessed?

especially low there, and education levels high.

30

The last decade of the past century started with the fall of the Berlin Wall. This led to
rapidly increased openness in the countries formerly behind the iron curtain. The fall of the Wall
was thought at the time to presage, with good luck and help from others, fairly rapid convergence
of economic and social conditions towards those in Western Europe (Marer and Zecchini 1991).
But in the succeeding decade, as the WVS and other data document starkly, things have gone
from bad to worse in many of the countries involved, and even in the luckiest and likeliest
countries the standards of material and overall well-being are now barely matching what they
were in 199023.

Both of these striking pieces of history invite attempts to assess their causes and
consequences, and to explain the extent to which they arise from common causes. Analysis of
well-being data provides means for combining income, employment, governmental effectiveness,
family structure and social relations together in ways that permit the external effects of
institutions and public policies to be assessed. To provide a specific example, many earlier
studies of the importance and quality of national legal systems and governance in general have
emphasized only the effects that flow through economic growth (e.g. Mauro 1995, Helliwell
1996a, Knack and Keefer 1997, Knack 2001). The well-being data show that the effects flowing
directly from the quality of the institutions may dwarf those that flow through productivity and
economic growth. Putnam (2001) provides an insightful example of how well-being data can be
used to compare the effects of income, education and social capital, using both individual-level
and state-level variables to help identify spillover effects at the state level. His example provided
impetus for this paper’s application of a similar method to international comparisons of national
data.
23 For

example, the 1999 Annual Report of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development estimated that of the 25 former East Bloc countries monitored by the EBRD, only
Poland and Slovenia had by 1998 regained their 1989 levels of real GDP, while the levels of real
GDP in Russia and Ukraine in 1998 were only 55% and 37%, respectively, of what they had been
in 1989.

31

There are many ways in which the preliminary research reported here invites further tests
and extensions. One feature missing entirely from this paper is consideration of the extent to
which geography matters. The paper has made use of regional variables, for example, on the
assumption (supported by the data) that well-being moves in similar ways in at least some groups
of neighbouring countries. The paper has made even more use of national variables, assuming,
with some justification but not much testing, that national borders do indeed define the edges
where societal cleavages are most abrupt. The WVS data do contain sub-national regions, so that
it should be possible to test more extensively whether intra-national well-being linkages are
tighter than those across national borders, much as has already been done for trade, capital, and
migration linkages24.

Finally, it is important to re-emphasize that in many cases the methodology used in this
and earlier studies can establish linkages or correlations but not prove the existence or direction
of causation. It is especially important to remember this caution when considering policy
initiatives that might help or hinder some type of activity that research has linked to measures of
well-being. Unless the causal chain does indeed run from the activity to well-being, the policy
change may not have the intended effects. Even if the chain does run in the intended direction, a
change in activity level that arises from the policy change may have different consequences from
24

McCallum (1995) discovered that trade linkages were twenty times tighter among
Canadian provinces than between Canadian provinces and US states. Helliwell (1998, 2000)
reports a broader range of evidence, covering many more countries, also suggesting that national
borders still mark much more important boundaries in economic and social space than is
generally believed. Keller (2000) shows that geography and borders both matter for technological
spillovers. Helliwell (1996b) makes a preliminary attempt to combine sub-national and
international data for social capital.

32

previous changes that arose for other reasons. Thus well-being research does not yet provide a
complete guide to choices for private behaviour and public policies. It does enrich substantially
the scope for considering the well-being consequences of a broad range of disparate trends, and
for using international evidence to illuminate national trends and issues.

References
Almond, Gabriel A., and Sidney Verba (1963) The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and
Democracy in Five Nations (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Annas, Julia (1993) The Morality of Happiness. (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Argyle, Michael (1987) The Psychology of Happiness. (London: Methuen).
Argyle, Michael (1996) “Subjective Well-Being.” In Avner Offer, ed. In Pursuit of the Quality
of Life (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 18-45.
Astin, A.W., W.S. Korn and E.R. Riggs (1993) The American Freshman: National Norms for
Fall 1993. (Los Angeles: UCLA Graduate School of Education).
Barnes, Jonathan (1984) The Complete Works of Aristotle. (Princeton: Princeton University
Press)
Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1996) “International Measures of Schooling Years and
Schooling Quality.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 86(2): 21823.
Ben-Shlomo, Y., I.R. White, and M.G. Marmot (1996) “Does the Variation in Socioeconomic
Characteristics of an Area Affect Mortality?” British Medical Journal 312: 1013-4.
Berkman, L.F. and S.L. Syme (1979) “Social Networks, Host Resistance, and Mortality: A NineYear Follow-Up Study of Almeda County Residents.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 109: 186-204.
Blanchflower, David G. and Andrew J. Oswald (2000) “Well-Being Over Time in Britain and the
USA.” NBER Working Paper No. 7487. (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Brickman. Philip, Dan Coates and Ronnie Janoff-Bulman (1978) “Lottery Winners and Accident
Victims: Is Happiness Relative?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 36(8):
33

917-27.
Brunstein, J.C., O.C. Schultheis and R. Grassman (1998) “Personal Goals and Emotional WellBeing: The Moderating Role of Motive Dispositions.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 75: 494-508.
Clark, Andrew (2001) “Unemployment as a Social Norm: Psychological Evidence from Panel
Data.” (Document No. 2001-17, DELTA, available at www.delta.ens.fr )(Forthcoming,
Journal of Labour Economics)
Clark, A.E. and A.J. Oswald (1994) “Unhappiness and Unemployment.” Economic Journal
104: 648-59.
De la Fuente, Angel, and Rafael Donénech (2000) “Human Capital in Growth Regressions: How
Much Difference Does Data Quality Make?” Economics Department Working Papers
No 262 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development)
Diener, Ed (2000) “Subjective Well-Being: The Science of Happiness and a Proposal for a
National Index.” American Psychologist 55(1): 34-43.
Diener, E., E.M. Suh, R.E. Lucas and H.L Smith (1999) “Subjective Well-Being: Three Decades
of Progress.” Psychological Bulletin 125(2): 276-302.
Di Tella, R., R.J. MacCulloch and A.J. Oswald (2000) “Preferences Over Inflation and
Unemployment: Evidence From Surveys of Happiness.” (Working Paper)
Easterlin, R. A. (1974) “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical
Evidence.” In P.A. David and M.W. Reder, eds., Nations and Households in Economic
Growth. (New York: Academic Press) 89-125.
Easterlin, R. A. (1995) “Will Raising the Incomes of All Increase the Happiness of All?”
Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization 27(1): 35-48.
Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer (2000) “Happiness, Economy and Institutions.” Economic
Journal 110(466): 918-38.
Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer (2002) Happiness and Economics. (Princeton: Princeton
University Press)
Gravelle, H.(1998) “How Much of the Relation Between Population Mortality and Unequal
Distribution of Income Is a Statistical Artefact?” British Medical Journal 316(7128):
382-5.

34

Grjebine, André (2000) “Tolérance zéro sur les routes.” Le Monde, May 26, page 19.
Helliwell, John F. (1996a) "Economic Growth and Social Capital in Asia." NBER Working
Paper No. 5470 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Helliwell, John F. (1996b) "Do Borders Matter For Social Capital? Economic Growth and Civic
Culture in U.S. States and Canadian Provinces." NBER Working Paper No. 5863
(Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Helliwell, John F. (1998) How Much Do National Borders Matter? (Washington DC:
Brookings Institution Press).
Helliwell, John F. (2000) Globalization: Myths, Facts and Consequences. (Toronto: C.D.
Howe Institute) (Benefactors Lecture 2000, available at www.CDHowe.org ).
Helliwell, John F. (2001a) “Social Capital, the Economy and Well-Being.” In Keith Banting,
Andrew Sharpe and France St-Hilaire, eds., The Review of Economic Performance and
Social Progress (Montreal and Ottawa: Institute for Research on Public Policy and
Centre for the Study of Living Standards).
Helliwell, John F. (2001b) The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained
Economic Growth and Well-Being Editor and contributor. (Ottawa: HDRC,
)(Proceedings of an OECD/HRDC conference, Quebec, March 19-21, 2000).
Inglehart, Ronald (1996) “The Diminishing Utility of Economic Growth: From Maximizing
Security Toward Maximizing Subjective Well-Being.” Critical Review 10(4): 509-31.
Inglehart, Ronald, et al (2000) World Values Surveys and European Values Surveys, 19811984, 1990-1993, and 1995-1997 (Computer File) ICPSR Version. (Ann Arbor,
Michigan: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research).
Iyengar S.S. and M.R. Lepper (1999) “Rethinking the Value of Choice: A Cultural Perspective
on Intrinsic Motivation.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 76: 349-66.
(Selecting from among fewer options increases satisfaction with the choices made)
Kasser, T. and R.M. Ryan (1993) “The Dark Side of the American Dream: Correlates of
Financial Success as a Central Life Aspiration.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 65: 410-22.
Kasser, T. and R.M. Ryan (1996) “Further Examining the American Dream: Differential
Correlates of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Goals.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
22: 280-7.

35

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Pablo Zoido-Lobatoni (1999a) “Aggregating Governance
Indicators.” World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper 2195.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Pablo Zoido-Lobatoni (1999b) “Governance Matters.” World
Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper 2195.
Kawachi, Ichiro, Bruce P. Kennedy, Kimberly Lochner, and Deborah Prothrow-Stith (1997)
“Social Capital, Income Inequality, and Mortality.” American Journal of Public Health
87(9) 1491-9.
Keller, Wolfgang (2000) “Geographic Localization of International Technology Diffusion.”
NBER Working Paper 7509. (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Knack, Stephen (2001) “Trust, Associational Life and Economic Performance.” In John F.
Helliwell ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic
Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC, )(Proceedings of an OECD/HRDC conference,
Quebec, March 19-21, 2000).
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer (1997) “Does Social Capital have an Economic Payoff? A
Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1251-88.
Lykken, D., and A. Tellegen (1996) “Happiness is a Stochastic Phenomenon.” Psychological
Science 7: 186-9.
Marer, Paul, and Salvatore Zecchini, eds. (1991) The Transition to a Market Economy:
Volume 1- The Broad Issues. (Paris: OCED).
Mauro, Paulo (1995) “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3): 681712.
McCallum, John (1995) “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns.”
American Economic Review 85: (June): 615-23.
Michalos, Alex C., Bruno D. Zumbo and Anita Hubley (2000) “Health and the Quality of Life.”
Social Indicators Research 51: 245-86.
Moulton, Brent R. (1990) “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
Variables on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72(2): 334-38.
Myers, David G. (2000) “The Funds, Friends and Faith of Happy People.” American
Psychologist 55(1): 56-67.
Myers, David G. and Ed Diener (1995) “Who is Happy?” Psychological Science 6(1): 10-19
36

Offer, Avner (2000) “Economic Welfare Measurements and Human Well-Being.” University of
Oxford Discussion Papers in Economic and Social History, Number 34 (March).
Okun, M.A. and L.K. George (1984) “Physician and Self-ratings of Health, Neuroticism and
Subjective Well-Being Among Men and Women.” Personality and Individual
Differences 5: 533-40.
Olson, Mancur (1982) The Rise and Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagflation and
Social Rigidities (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Osberg, Lars G., and Andrew Sharpe (2001) “Comparisons of Trends in GDP and Economic
Well-Being” In John F. Helliwell ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to
Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC, )(Proceedings of an
OECD/HRDC conference, Quebec, March 19-21, 2000).
Oswald, A. J. (1997) “Happiness and Economic Performance” Economic Journal 107(445):
1815-31.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2001) The Well-Being of Nations:
The Importance of Human and Social Capital (Paris: OECD)
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American
Economic Review 84(3): 600-21.
Putnam, Robert D. (1995) "Tuning In, Tuning Out: The Strange Disappearance of Social Capital
in America." PS: Political Science and Politics 28 (December): 664-83.
Putnam, Robert D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. (New York: Simon & Schuster).
Putnam, Robert D. (2001) “Social Capital: Measurement and Consequences.” In John F. Helliwell
ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic Growth
and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC, )(Proceedings of an OECD/HRDC conference, Quebec,
March 19-21, 2000).
Raiser, Martin (1997) “Informal Institutions, Social Capital and Economic Transition: Reflections
on a Neglected Dimension.” Working Paper 25 (London: European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development).
Rose, Richard (2000) “How Much Does Social Capital Add to Individual Health?: A Survey
Study of Russians.” Social Science and Medicine.

37

Schier, M.F. et al (1989) “Dispositional Optimism and Recovery From Coronary Artery Bypass
Surgery: The Beneficial Effects on Physical and Psychological Well-Being.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 57: 1024-40.
Smith, S. and P. Razzell (1975) The Pools Winners. (London: Caliban Books).
Tellegen, A., D.T. Lykken, T.J. Bouchard, K.J. Wilcox, N.L. Segal and S. Rich (1988)
“Personality Similarity in Twins Reared Apart and Separately.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 54: 1031-39.
Temple, J. (2001) “Growth Effects of Education and Social Capital in the OECD Countries.” In
John F. Helliwell ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained
Economic Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC, )(Proceedings of an OECD/HRDC
conference, Quebec, March 19-21, 2000).
Wilkinson, R.G. (1992) “Income Distribution and Life Expectancy” British Medical Journal
304(6820): 165-8.
Wilson, W. (1967) “Correlates of Avowed Happiness.” Psychological Bulletin 67: 294-306.
Wolfe, Barbara, and Robert Haveman (2001) “Accounting for the Social and Non-Market Effects
of Education” In John F. Helliwell ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital
to Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC, )(Proceedings of an
OECD/HRDC conference, Quebec, March 19-21, 2000).
Wolfson, M., G. Kaplan, J. Lynch, N. Ross, and E. Backlund (1999) “The Relationship Between
Inequality and Mortality is not a Statistical Artefact- An Empirical Demonstration.”
British Medical Journal 319: 953-7.
Woolcock, Michael (2001) “The Place of Social Capital in Understanding Social and Economic
Outcomes.” In John F. Helliwell ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to
Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC, )(Proceedings of an
OECD/HRDC conference, Quebec, March 19-21, 2000).
Zak, and P. Knack (1998) “Trust and Growth.” IRIS Working Paper 219. (College Park:
University of Maryland)

38

Table 1: Data Summary
life satisfaction
state of health
UNEMP
MARRIED
ASMARR
DIVORCED
SEPAR
WIDOWED
ED1619
ED2022
ED2329
AGE2534
AGE3544
AGE4554
AGE5564
AGE65UP
CHURCH
GOD
MEM12
MEM3
NOCHEAT
TRUST
INCREL
INCRELSQ
LINCNAT
INCNATSQ
TRUSTNAT
GOVTOT
NOCHEATN
CHURCHN
MEMN12
MEMN3
WAVE2
WAVE3
FSU
EASTEUR
LATAM
ASIA
OTHDEV
SCAN

Min
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.01
-3.34
0
0.05
-1
0.05
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Max
10
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
8
1
1
1
1
0.0
1.0
0.71
1.72
0.81
0.9
0.81
1.60
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Mean
6.79
2.28
0.0541
0.6217
0.05059
0.03876
0.0168
0.0641
0.3605
0.2654
0.06024
0.2337
0.2128
0.1512
0.1258
0.1098
0.2221
0.3294
0.1451
0.1988
0.546
0.3444
0.5001
0.3137
-1.1563
0.3137
0.3443
0.6483
0.5356
0.243
0.1596
0.2030
0.4721
0.3561
0.1672
0.09512
0.1137
0.1011
0.07061
0.09774

Std. Deviation
2.37
0.95
0.2263
0.485
0.2192
0.193
0.1285
0.2449
0.4802
0.4415
0.2379
0.4232
0.4093
0.3582
0.3316
0.3127
0.4156
0.47
0.4964
0.6717
0.4979
0.4752
0.2522
0.2756
0.8849
0.2756
0.1415
0.7671
0.1612
0.2214
0.1627
0.3726
0.4992
0.4789
0.3732
0.2934
0.3174
0.3014
0.2562
0.297

Number of observations: 87806

39

Equation 1: Well-Being Explained by Individual Variables

(Constant)
state of health
UNEMP
MARRIED
ASMARR
DIVORCED
SEPAR
WIDOWED
ED1619
ED2022
ED2329
AGE2534
AGE3544
AGE4554
AGE5564
AGE65UP
CHURCH
GOD
MEM12
MEM3
NOCHEAT
TRUST
INCREL
INCRELSQ
WAVE2
WAVE3
FSU
EASTEUR
LATAM
ASIA
OTHDEV
SCAN

Coefficients
t
B
Std. Error
7.384 0.045 163.523
-0.615 0.008 -74.601
-0.609 0.031 -19.497
0.418 0.022 18.962
0.25
0.036 7.048
-0.0269 0.041 -0.657
-0.317 0.057 -5.56
0.00405 0.037 0.109
-0.0480 0.018 -2.66
-0.0602 0.02
-2.961
0.06219 0.033 1.858
-0.178 0.025 -7.244
-0.332 0.027 -12.296
-0.305 0.029 -10.415
-0.0780 0.031 -2.521
0.237 0.034 7.018
0.104 0.019 5.544
0.34
0.018 19.283
0.05226 0.014 3.606
0.128 0.012 10.988
0.255 0.014 17.638
0.257 0.015 16.859
1.889 0.119 15.809
-0.89
0.108 -8.262
0.261 0.022 12.07
-0.158 0.026 -6.179
-1.649 0.025 -66.293
-0.748 0.027 -27.709
-0.0015 0.027 -0.056
-0.346 0.027 -13.058
-0.741 0.031 -23.539
0.528 0.026 20.13

Model Summary
R Sq
Adj R Square
0.255 0.255

Sig.
0
0
0
0
0
0.511
0
0.913
0.008
0.003
0.063
0
0
0
0.012
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.955
0
0
0

Std. Error of the Estimate
2.05

Dependent variable: Life satisfaction, on a scale of 1 to 10.

40

Equation 2: Well-Being Explained by Individual and Societal Variables

(Constant)
state of health
UNEMP
MARRIED
ASMARR
DIVORCED
SEPAR
WIDOWED
ED1619
ED2022
ED2329
AGE2534
AGE3544
AGE4554
AGE5564
AGE65UP
CHURCH
GOD
MEM12
MEM3
NOCHEAT
TRUST
INCREL
INCRELSQ
LINCNAT
INCNATSQ
TRUSTNAT
GOVTOT
NOCHEATN
CHURCHN
MEMN12
MEMN3
EDATTNAT
WAVE2
WAVE3
FSU
EASTEUR
LATAM
ASIA
OTHDEV
SCAN

Coefficients
t
B
Std. Error
6.965 0.077 90.10
-0.608 0.008 -73.92
-0.587 0.031 -18.84
0.429 0.022 19.56
0.238 0.035 6.71
-0.049 0.041 -1.23
-0.355 0.057 -6.26
0.013 0.037 0.15
-0.691 0.018 -3.74
-0.660 0.021 -3.20
0.0967 0.034 2.87
-0.193 0.024 -7.88
-0.350 0.027 -13.03
-0.333 0.029 -11.44
-0.0993 0.031 -3.22
0.192 0.034 5.57
0.144 0.02
7.37
0.373 0.018 20.95
0.0330 0.015 2.29
0.0636 0.012 5.15
0.225 0.015 15.49
0.240 0.015 15.87
1.903 0.12
15.87
-0.955 0.108 -8.82
0.265 0.025 15.87
-0.773 0.090 -8.54
0.319 0.112 2.84
0.317 0.026 12.03
0.263 0.061 4.29
0.161 0.054 3.01
0.578 0.076 7.57
0.576 0.038 14.98
0.0051 0.007 0.71
0.215 0.025 8.73
-0.280 0.040 -7.08
-0.815 0.058 -13.98
-0.465 0.045 -10.44
0.322 0.041 7.92
-0.054 0.045 1.21
-0.124 0.052 -2.39
0.445 0.040 11.10

Sig.
0
0
0
0
0
0.229
0
0.714
0
0.001
0.004
0
0
0
0.001
0
0
0
0.026
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.005
0
0
0.003
0
0
0.474
0
0
0
0
0
0.226
0
0

Model Summary
R Sq
Adj R Square
Std. Error of the Estimate
0.263 0.263
2.04
Dependent variable: Life satisfaction, on a scale of 1 to 10.

41

Equation 3: Individual and National Effects of Education on Well-Being
Coefficients
t
Sig.
B
Std. Error
(Constant)
6.51
0.044 146.635 0
ED1619
0.119 0.019 6.403 0
ED2022
0.242 0.02
11.951 0
ED2329
0.425 0.034 12.335 0
EDATTNAT
0.06778 0.004 16.57 0
WAVE2
0.202 0.022 8.959 0
WAVE3
-0.163 0.026 -6.402 0
FSU
-2.389 0.024 -98.745 0
EASTEUR
-1.154 0.028 -41.216 0
LATAM
0.117 0.032 3.702 0
ASIA
-0.275 0.031 -8.946 0
OTHDEV
-0.319 0.04
-7.975 0
SCAN
0.592 0.027 22.027 0
Model Summary
R Sq
Adj R Square
0.161 0.161

Std. Error of the Estimate
2.17

Dependent variable: Life satisfaction, on a scale of 1 to 10.

42

Equation 4: Effects of Education Including All Individual Variables

(Constant)
state of health
UNEMP
MARRIED
ASMARR
DIVORCED
SEPAR
WIDOWED
ED1619
ED2022
ED2329
AGE2534
AGE3544
AGE4554
AGE5564
AGE65UP
CHURCH
GOD
MEM12
MEM3
NOCHEAT
TRUST
INCREL
INCRELSQ
EDATTNAT
WAVE2
WAVE3
FSU
EASTEUR
LATAM
ASIA
OTHDEV
SCAN

Coefficients
t
B
Std. Error

Sig.

6.981
-.612
-.606
.415
.234
-.0518
-.333
-.00342
-.0881
-.0903
.0517
-.186
-.343
-.321
-.101
.197
.130
.339
.0481
.123
.251
.247
1.967
-.998
.0434
.263
-.182
-1.634
-.723
.170
-.198
-.496
.551

.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.207
.000
.927
.000
.000
.122
.000
.000
.000
.001
.000
.000
.000
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000

Model Summary
R Sq
Adj R Square
0.256 0.256

.058
.008
.031
.022
.036
.041
.057
.037
.018
.021
.033
.025
.027
.029
.031
.034
.019
.018
.014
.012
.014
.015
.120
.108
.004
.022
.026
.025
.027
.031
.030
.039
.026

119.509
-74.205
-19.417
18.864
6.576
-1.262
-5.848
-.092
-4.790
-4.400
1.545
-7.568
-12.727
-10.974
-3.259
5.801
6.877
19.223
3.321
10.545
17.359
16.205
16.449
-9.237
10.866
12.149
-7.116
-65.596
-26.682
5.503
-6.656
-12.840
20.956

Std. Error of the Estimate
2.04

Dependent variable: Life satisfaction, on a scale of 1 to 10.

43

Equation 5: Estimated by survey ordered probit with robust standard errors
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Well-being |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
[95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+---------------------------------------------------------------ill-health | -.3098529
.011971
-25.88
0.000
-.3339221
-.2857836
unemoecd | -.3264395
.0357645
-9.13
0.000
-.3983488
-.2545302
unemrest |
-.255049
.0630927
-4.04
0.000
-.3819054
-.1281927
married |
.2193904
.017063
12.86
0.000
.1850829
.253698
asmarr |
.1500514
.0316425
4.74
0.000
.0864299
.2136728
divorced | -.0280857
.0227729
-1.23
0.223
-.0738737
.0177023
separ | -.1313658
.0418161
-3.14
0.003
-.2154426
-.047289
age2534 | -.0878339
.013226
-6.64
0.000
-.1144266
-.0612412
age3544 |
-.160897
.0152974
-10.52
0.000
-.1916544
-.1301396
age4554 | -.1365462
.014558
-9.38
0.000
-.1658171
-.1072754
age65up |
.1437093
.0265991
5.40
0.000
.0902282
.1971905
church |
.0633395
.022735
2.79
0.008
.0176278
.1090512
god |
.2448375
.0260924
9.38
0.000
.1923753
.2972998
memtot |
.0320677
.0097842
3.28
0.002
.0123954
.0517401
nocheat |
.1345062
.0180847
7.44
0.000
.0981445
.1708679
trust |
.1206647
.0128723
9.37
0.000
.0947832
.1465463
dec4oecd |
.0752419
.0282683
2.66
0.011
.0184046
.1320792
dec5oecd |
.1134835
.0248328
4.57
0.000
.0635537
.1634132
dec6oecd |
.1197484
.035544
3.37
0.001
.0482823
.1912144
dec7oecd |
.1098875
.031298
3.51
0.001
.0469586
.1728165
dec8oecd |
.1143382
.0334174
3.42
0.001
.0471481
.1815283
dec9oecd |
.0995473
.036428
2.73
0.009
.0263039
.1727907
d10oecd |
.1727459
.0692726
2.49
0.016
.033464
.3120278
dec3rest |
.1474467
.03297
4.47
0.000
.0811561
.2137374
dec4rest |
.210999
.0405087
5.21
0.000
.1295509
.2924471
dec5rest |
.2757988
.0472885
5.83
0.000
.1807189
.3708787
dec6rest |
.2956818
.0509826
5.80
0.000
.1931745
.3981891
dec7rest |
.403393
.056085
7.19
0.000
.2906266
.5161595
dec8rest |
.4346364
.0600677
7.24
0.000
.3138623
.5554105
dec9rest |
.4726356
.0578563
8.17
0.000
.3563077
.5889635
d10rest |
.573604
.0730342
7.85
0.000
.426759
.720449
y2050 |
.0911829
.0832137
1.10
0.279
-.0761295
.2584953
y5075 |
.0480333
.1065739
0.45
0.654
-.1662478
.2623144
yover75 |
.0105645
.1051811
0.10
0.920
-.2009163
.2220453
govtot |
.2350489
.0575888
4.08
0.000
.1192589
.3508388
memntot |
.232473
.0952784
2.44
0.018
.0409029
.424043
wave3 | -.2074443
.0539673
-3.84
0.000
-.3159529
-.0989358
fsu2 | -.3307758
.0714761
-4.63
0.000
-.4744882
-.1870634
fsu3 | -.5388172
.0805434
-6.69
0.000
-.7007606
-.3768737
easteur2 | -.4238132
.0783556
-5.41
0.000
-.5813577
-.2662686
scan |
.2144182
.0554557
3.87
0.000
.1029169
.3259194
-------------+---------------------------------------------------------------/cut1 | -2.258001
.1180448
-19.13
0.000
-2.495346
-2.020656
/cut2 | -2.005684
.1087071
-18.45
0.000
-2.224254
-1.787114
/cut3 | -1.619015
.0969314
-16.70
0.000
-1.813909
-1.424121
/cut4 |
-1.31311
.0918048
-14.30
0.000
-1.497696
-1.128524
/cut5 |
-.779954
.0870779
-8.96
0.000
-.9550359
-.6048721
/cut6 | -.4315701
.0882769
-4.89
0.000
-.6090627
-.2540774
/cut7 |
.0083922
.0883394
0.09
0.925
-.169226
.1860105
/cut8 |
.6670761
.0864617
7.72
0.000
.4932332
.840919
/cut9 |
1.159699
.0917754
12.64
0.000
.9751721
1.344226

44

