                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DISTANCE TO FRONTIER, SELECTION, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH


                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                          Philippe Aghion
                                          Fabrizio Zilibotti


                                         Working Paper 9066
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9066


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2002




We thank seminar participants at Birkbeck College, Canadian Institute of Advanced Research, DELTA, MIT,
SITE Stockholm, Universite de Toulouse, Universita Bocconi, and Mathias Dewatripont, Byeongju Jeong
and Abhijit Banerjee for helpful comments, and Mauricio Prado for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Distance to Frontier, Selection, and Economic Growth
Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 9066
July 2002
JEL No. O31, O33, O38, O40, L16



                                               ABSTRACT

        We analyze an economy where managers engage both in the adaptation of technologies from the
world frontier and in innovation activities. The selection of high-skill managers is more important for
innovation activities. As the economy approaches the technology frontier, selection becomes more
important. As a result, countires at early stages of development pursue an investment-based strategy, with
long term relationships, high average size and age of firms, large average investments, but little selection.
Closer to the world technology frontier, there is a switch to innovation-based strategy with short-term
relationships, younger firms, less investment and better selection of managers. We show that relatively
backward economies may switch out of the investment-based strategy too soon, so certain economic
institutions and policies, such as limits on product market competition or investment subsidies, that
encourage the investment-based strategy may be beneficial. However, societies that cannot switch out
of the investment-based strategy fail to converge to the world technology frontier. Non-convergence traps
are more likely when policies and institutions are endogenized, enabling beneficiaries of existing policies
to bribe politicians to maintain these policies.




Daron Acemoglu                       Philippe Aghion                       Fabrizio Zilibotti
Department of Economics              Department of Economics               University College London
MIT, E52-380B                        Harvard University                    Gower Street
50 Memorial Drive                    Littauer Center 309                   London WC1E 6BT
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347             Cambridge, MA 02138                   Tel: 00 44 20 7679 5852
and NBER                             and NBER                              f.zilibotti@ucl.ac.uk
daron@mit.edu                        p_aghion@harvard.edu
     “... in a number of important historical instances industrialization processes,
     when launched at length in a backward country, showed considerable diﬀer-
     ences with more advanced countries, not only with regard to the speed of
     development (the rate of industrial growth) but also with regards to the pro-
     ductive and organizational structures of industry... these diﬀerences in the
     speed and character of industrial development were to a considerable extent
     the result of application of institutional instruments for which there was little
     or no counterpart in an established industrial country.”
     Gerschenkron (1962, p. 7)

                                   1   Introduction

In his famous essay, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Gerschenkron
argued that relatively backward economies, such as Germany, France, Belgium and Rus-
sia during the nineteenth century, could rapidly catch up to more advanced economies
by introducing “appropriate” economic institutions to encourage investment and tech-
nology adoption. He emphasized the role of long-term relationships between firms and
banks, of large firms and of state intervention. Underlying this view is the notion that
relatively backward economies can grow rapidly by investing in, and adopting, already
existing technologies, or by pursuing what we call an investment-based growth strategy.
If this assessment is correct, the institutions that are appropriate to such nations should
encourage investment and technology adoption, even if this comes at the expense of
various market rigidities and a relatively less competitive environment.
   Although there are numerous cases in Africa, the Caribbean, Central America and
South Asia where state involvement in the economy has been disastrous (e.g., Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson, 2001), various pieces of evidence are consistent with the notion
that rapid investment-based growth is possible with, or even sometimes encouraged by,
relatively rigid institutions and considerable government involvement. These include
the experiences of a number of European countries during the nineteenth century dis-
cussed by Gerschenkron (1962), the correlation between tariﬀ rates and economic growth
in the nineteenth century among countries following the technological leader, Britain
(O’Rourke, 2000, but see also Irwin, 2002, for a diﬀerent interpretation); the corre-
lation between protection of high-skill and high-tech industries and economic growth
in the postwar period (Nunn and Trefler, 2002); and the relatively rapid growth of
economies pursuing import-substitution and infant-industry protection policies, such as
Brazil, Mexico, Peru and Turkey, until the mid-1970s.
   Perhaps the two most well-known cases of rapid investment-based growth are the

                                            1
post-war experiences of Japan and South Korea. In Japan, the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry (MITI) played a crucial role by regulating foreign currency alloca-
tions, import licenses, and the extent of competition, by directing industrial activity and
by encouraging investment by the keiretsu, the large groupings of industrial firms and
banks (e.g., Johnson, 1982, Evans, 1995, Hoshi and Kashyap, 2002). In the Korean case,
the large family-run conglomerates, the chaebol appear to have played an important
role, especially in generating large investments and rapid technological development.
The chaebol, similar to the keiretsu in Japan, received strong government support in the
form of subsidized loans, anti-union legislation and preferential treatment that sheltered
them from both internal and external competition. An additional important feature of
both the chaebol and the keiretsu was their low managerial turnover, emphasis on long-
term relationships and generally rigid structures (e.g., Wade, 1990, Vogel, 1991, Evans,
1995).
   At the other extreme, we can think of the process of innovation-based growth, where
the selection of successful managers and firms, as well as a variety of other innovation-
type activities, are more important. Many view the current U.S. economy, with its
market-based financing, important role for venture capital and high rate of business
failures, and also the relatively competitive British economy of the nineteenth century
as approximating this type of innovation-based growth. Interestingly, both the perfor-
mance of economies pursuing the two diﬀerent types of strategies and the views of the
economics profession on the merits of the two strategies have varied significantly over
time. While, until the mid-1970s or even the 1980s, a number of economies pursuing the
investment-based strategy were successful and many economists were enthusiastic about
this strategy, today the pendulum appears to have swung the other way.
   This paper analyzes the equilibrium (and socially beneficial) choice between these
two strategies. We discuss when each arises in equilibrium, their relative eﬃciencies for
diﬀerent stages of development, the possibility of traps and non-convergence resulting
from the choice of an incorrect strategy, and the political economy of the two strategies.
   The choice between the investment-based and innovation-based strategies involves
a trade-oﬀ between investment and experience, on the one hand, and selection, on the
other. Economies can often maximize investment by channeling money to existing firms,
and making use of the experiences of established firms and managers. This is particularly
the case in the presence of incentive problems, which are partly relaxed for existing
firms and managers because of their retained earnings, thus increasing their investment
capacity relative to newcomers. But the investment-based strategy also shelters less

                                            2
successful firms and managers from competition, and as a result, it involves less selection
of successful firms and managers, worse matches between agents and economic activities,
and less innovative activity by new entrants.
   Our analysis builds on the notion that this trade-oﬀ between investment-based and
innovation-based strategies changes over the course of development, especially as an
economy approaches the world technology frontier. Relatively backward economies can
grow with an investment-based strategy. In contrast, nearer the frontier, growth has to
rely relatively more on innovation activities, thus selecting the right entrepreneurs, and
the right matches between managers and economic activities, becomes more important.
   Incorporating this trade-oﬀ into a standard endogenous technical change model,
we show that economies will first tend to pursue an investment-based strategy with
longer-term relationships, greater investment and less selection, and at some point may
switch to an innovation-based strategy with greater selection, shorter-term relation-
ships and younger firms. Moreover, we show that the equilibrium switch out of an
investment-based strategy may occur sooner or later than the growth-maximizing or
welfare-maximizing policies. Because monopolists do not appropriate the full returns
from greater investments, the switch tends to occur too soon; and because retained
earnings create an advantage for existing firms (insiders), the switch tends to occur too
late.
   As a result, similar to Gerschenkron’s argument, in relatively backward countries,
there may be room for government intervention, by direct subsidies, cheap loans and
anti-competitive policies, to encourage the investment-based strategy. However, dif-
ferent from Gerschenkron’s emphasis, an economy may fail to converge to the world
technology frontier, precisely because it does not switch (or it switches too late) out of
an investment-based to an innovation-based strategy. The reason is that after a certain
stage of development, innovation activities are necessary to ensure further growth and
convergence, and these activities are limited in the investment-based regime. Thus state
intervention may have short-term benefits but also considerable long-term costs. Our
model therefore implies that appropriate institutions and policies depend on the stage
of development, thus justifying, and qualifying, both the views that emphasize certain
beneficial eﬀects from state intervention as well as those pointing out the ineﬃciencies
resulting from these interventions.
   The potential costs of policies encouraging investment-based growth become more
substantial once we endogenize the political economy of government intervention. These
policies enrich existing capitalists, who prefer the investment-based equilibrium to the

                                            3
innovation-based equilibrium. When economic power buys political power, it becomes
diﬃcult to reverse these policies that have an economic and politically powerful con-
stituency.1 An interesting implication of this political-economy analysis is that under
certain circumstances societies may get trapped with “inappropriate institutions” and
relatively backward technology, precisely because earlier they adopted appropriate insti-
tutions for their circumstances at the time, but in the process also creating a powerful
constituency against change.2
       An immediate implication of our analysis is a new theory of “leapfrogging”. Economies
that adopt policies encouraging the investment-based strategy may initially grow faster
than others, but then get stuck in a non-convergence trap and taken over by the ini-
tial laggards. This is a very diﬀerent view of leapfrogging from the standard one (e.g.,
Brezis, Krugman and Tsiddon, 1994), where leapfrogging emerges because of compar-
ative advantage and learning-by-doing, and where the focus is on whether the world
technological leadership is taken over by a newcomer. The type of leapfrogging implied
by our model may help explain why some of the Latin American countries, most notably,
Brazil, Mexico and Peru, which grew relatively rapidly with anti-competitive and im-
port substitution policies until the mid-1970s or early 1980s, stagnated and were taken
over by other economies with relatively more competitive policies, such as Hong Kong
or Singapore.3
   1
      The Korean case illustrates the influence of economically powerful groups on politicians. Kong
(2002, p. 3) writes “...political–not economic–considerations dominated policymaking... [in Korea]....
and ...corruption was far greater than the conventional wisdom allows”. In fact, the patriarchs of
Samsung, Daewoo and Jinro, the three major chaebol, were convicted in the late 1990s of major bribing
of two former presidents. Significantly, their jail sentences were pardoned in 1997 (see Asiaweek, October
10, 1997).
    2
      Both the Korean and the Japanese cases illustrate the dangers of the investment-based strategy,
and the political economy problems created by such a strategy. The close links between government
oﬃcials and the chaebol in the Korean case and bureaucrats and the keiretsu in the Japanese case,
which appear to have been important for the early success of these economies, later became obstacles
to progress, especially after the Asian crisis for Korea and after the mid-1980s for Japan. Following the
crisis in Korea, a number of the chaebol went bankrupt, while others were split, or like Daewoo, were
forced into restructuring. Interestingly, there seems to have been much less reform in this dimension in
Japan.
    3
      Brazil and Peru started with GDP per worker levels equal to, respectively, 18% and 22% of the
U.S. in 1950. By the mid-70s, after growing at an average 3.5-4% per year, they had reached a GDP
level equal to 35% of the U.S., and from there on stayed at this level, or declined relative to the U.S..
Mexico converged steadily from 33% of the U.S. level in 1950 to 63% in 1981, with a 3.5% average
annual growth rate, but declined thereafter. In contrast, Hong Kong and Singapore, which started at
17% and 20% of the U.S. GDP per worker in 1960 (earlier data are not available), surpassed Brazil and
Peru during the 1970s and Mexico during the 1980s. In 2000, their GDP per capita was, respectively,
70% and 73% relative to the U.S. (all numbers are PPP-adjusted, and from the Penn World Tables, or
from World Factbook, 2001). It is also noteworthy that in the 63-country sample of Trefler and Nunn
(2002), Hong Kong has the lowest tariﬀ rates in their sample of 63 countries, Singapore has a relatively


                                                    4
    At the heart of our analysis is the trade-oﬀ between investment-based and innovation-
based strategies, which is founded on three ingredients: (1) Experienced managers and
incumbent firms can undertake larger investments, and everything else equal, achieve
greater technological improvements and productivity growth. (2) Managers copy and
adopt well-established technologies from the world technology frontier, and managerial
skill is not crucial for this type of copying and adoption activities. (3) Managers also
undertake innovations or adapt technologies to local conditions, and managerial skill
is essential in these tasks. This last point makes the selection of high-skill managers
important for productivity growth.
    All three ingredients are reasonable. That experienced managers and firms are more
productive and can undertake larger investments is plausible, and consistent with evi-
dence on firm-level learning-by-doing and investment patterns.4 Moreover, this feature
is introduced as an assumption only to simplify the basic model. We later show that in
the presence of moral hazard, experienced managers will naturally invest more, because
their earnings from previous periods relax the credit constraints implied by moral haz-
ard. Similarly, that managers engage both in copying and imitation-type activities as
well as innovation-type activities is natural and well accepted. The crucial ingredient
here is that selection of high-skill managers is more important for innovation-type ac-
tivities than for imitation. Although we do not have direct evidence on this point, given
the nature of innovation activities, we regard this as a plausible assumption, and we
also note that it is consistent with historical accounts. For example, Rosenberg (1982)
emphasizes the speed of technology transfer and imitation in the presence of the right
conditions, and concludes: “... the transfer of industrial technology to less developed
countries is inevitable.” (p. 270), while innovation and technological breakthroughs in
advanced economies often require continuous eﬀorts by various successful firms and the
talents of many exceptional individuals (e.g., pp. 141-192).
    Ingredients 1 and 2 above imply that managerial selection becomes more important
when an economy is close to the world technology frontier. Ingredients 2 and 3, on
low rate, while Brazil and Mexico are two of the 5 countries with the highest tariﬀs (they do not have
data on Peru).
   4
     The innovation literature places considerable emphasis on the ability of incumbent and experienced
firms to take advantage of incremental improvements (e.g., Arrow, 1974, Abernathy, 1980, Freeman,
1982, Nelson and Winter, 1982). Empirical work by, among others, Hirsch (1952), Lieberman (1984) and
Bahk and Gort (1993), and more recently, by Irwin and Klenow (1994) and Benkard (2000) for the U.S.
and Ohashi (2002) for Japan, document this type of learning-by-doing eﬀects. Also, the relationship
between firm age and firm size (or investment) is empirically well documented, e.g., Dunne, Roberts
and Samuelson (1989).



                                                  5
the other hand, generate the key trade-oﬀ: an economy can either rely on selection
(e.g., by terminating less successful managers) to generate more innovation, or sacrifice
selection for experience, and take advantage of larger investments. All three ingredients
together imply that in relatively backward economies, selection is less important, so an
investment-based strategy exploiting experience is preferable. Closer to the frontier, the
society needs selection, and therefore, it is more likely to adopt an innovation-based
strategy. All the results in this paper build on the trade-oﬀ introduced by these three
ingredients, and on the feature that closer to the world technology frontier, the selection
of high-skill managers and successful firms becomes more important.
   Our paper relates to a number of diﬀerent literatures. First, the notion that manage-
rial skill is more important for innovation than copying is reminiscent to the emphasis
in Galor and Tsiddon (1997) and Hassler and Rodriguez (2001) on skill in times of eco-
nomic change and turbulence. In a related contribution, Tong and Xu (2000) extend the
model by Dewatripont and Maskin (1995) and compare “multi-financier” and “single-
financier” contractual relationships as a function of the stage of development; the main
idea of their paper is that while single-financier relationships tend to dominate at early
stages of development when countries incur high sunk costs of R&D, multi-financier re-
lationships tend to dominate at later stages of development when selecting good R&D
projects becomes more important. But this model of financial contracting and growth
does not deal with dynamic convergence aspects, and does not develop the contrast
between innovation-based and investment-based growth strategies.
   Second, our paper is related to the literature on the relationship between growth and
contracting, including Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1999), Martimort and Verdier (2001)
and Francois and Roberts (2001), as well as more generally, to the literature on growth
and finance, including the papers by Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990), King and Levine
(1993), La Porta et al (1997), Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997), Rajan and Zingales (1998),
Carlin and Mayer (2002) and Tadesse (2002). For example, Acemoglu and Zilibotti
(1999) develop a model where informational problems become less severe as an economy
develops, and derive implications from this for the organization of firms and markets.
Martimort and Verdier (2001) and Francois and Roberts (2001) show how a high rate
of creative destruction may discourage long-term relationships within firms.
   Third, our model also relates to work on technological convergence and growth, in
particular, to the papers by Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1997), Howitt (2000) and Howitt
and Mayer (2002), which extend the growth framework of Aghion and Howitt (1992) to a
multi-countries setup. Howitt and Mayer (2002), for example, analyze convergence clubs,

                                            6
prolonged stagnations, and twin-peak convergence patterns. But they do not provide an
explicit treatment of institutions and contractual relations and they do not emphasize
the trade-oﬀ between innovation-based and investment-based growth strategies.
   Finally, our political economy section builds on the lobbying models by Grossman and
Helpman (1997, 2001). While we simplify these models considerably in many dimensions,
by introducing credit constraints on lobbies we also add a link between current economic
power and political power. In this respect, our analysis is also related to Do (2002) who
analyzes a lobbying model with credit-constrained agents, where income distribution
aﬀects policy.
    Perhaps the most interesting link is between our approach and the existing debate on
the optimal degree of government intervention in less developed countries. A number of
authors, including Stiglitz (1995), call for government intervention in situations where ex-
ternalities and market failures are rampant. Since less developed countries approximate
these situations of widespread market failure, this reasoning, just like Gerschenkron’s
(1962) message, recommends greater government intervention in these countries. A re-
cent paper by Hausmann and Rodrik (2001) pushes this line further and argues that most
of the growth related activities in less developed countries create externalities because of
potential imitation by others and learning-by-doing, and suggest that successful less de-
veloped countries have to rely on government intervention and subsidies, as was this case
in South Korea and Taiwan. They write: “the world’s most successful economies during
the last few decades prospered doing things that are more commonly associated with fail-
ure,” and propose similar “infant-industry-type” intervention for other countries. The
same point of view is developed by many political scientists, including those working in
the literature on “State Autonomy”, for example, Johnson (1982), and more nuanced
versions of these, such as the thesis of “Embedded Autonomy” by Evans (1995). These
arguments are criticized by several economists and political scientists, however, because
they ignore the potential for government failure.      For example, Shleifer and Vishny
(2000), argue that governments are often captured by interest groups or by politicians
themselves. This suggests that in less developed countries, where checks on governments
are weaker, the case for government intervention should be weaker as well. Our model
combines these two insights. We derive a reason for possible government intervention
at the early stages of development, while also highlighting why such intervention can be
counterproductive because of political economy considerations.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the basic model.
Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium. Section 4 analyzes the implications of the equi-

                                             7
librium allocations for growth and convergence (or non-convergence) patterns, and com-
pares the equilibrium allocation to growth-maximizing and welfare-maximizing policies.
Section 5 shows how the results of the simpler model of Section 2 can be obtained in
a more micro-founded model with a choice over project size. Section 6 discusses how
government policy may be useful in creating “appropriate institutions” for convergence,
but also how such policies may be captured by groups that are their main beneficiaries,
creating political economy traps. Section 7 concludes.

                                           2    The model
2.1      Agents and production

The model economy is populated by a continuum of overlapping generations of two-
period lived agents. The population is constant. Each generation consists of a mass 1/2
of “capitalists” with property rights on “production sites”, but no managerial skill, and
a mass (L + 1) /2 of workers who are born without any financial asset but are endowed
with managerial skills. Property rights are transmitted within dynasties.5 Each worker
is endowed with one unit of labor per unit of time, which she supplies inelastically
without disutility. All agents are risk neutral and discount the future at the rate r.
       There is a unique final good in the economy, also used as an input to produce in-
termediate inputs. We take this good as the numeraire. The final good is produced
competitively from labor and a continuum 1 of intermediate goods as inputs with pro-
duction function:                      Z
                                  1 1−α 1
                              yt = L [ (At (ν))1−α xt (ν)α dν],                                        (1)
                                  α     0

where At (ν) is the productivity in sector ν at time t, xt (ν) is the flow of intermediate
good ν used in final good production again at time t, and α ∈ [0, 1].
       In each intermediate sector ν, one production site at each date has access to the most
productive technology, At (ν), and so, this “leading firm” enjoys monopoly power. Each
leading firm employs a manager, for production as well as for innovation, and incurs a
setup cost, which is described in detail below. It then has access to a technology to trans-
form one unit of the final good into one unit of intermediate good of productivity At (ν).
A fringe of additional firms can also imitate this monopolist, and produce the same
intermediate good, with the same productivity At (ν), but without using the production
site or a manager. They correspondingly face greater costs of production, and need χ
   5
     Alternatively, we could introduce a market for production sites, where capitalists at the end of their
lives would sell their sites to younger agents. This would not change any of the results in the paper.


                                                    8
units of the final good to produce one unit of the intermediate, where 1/α ≥ χ > 1
(naturally, these firms will not be active in equilibrium). We will think of the parameter
χ as capturing both technological factors and government regulation regarding competi-
tive policy. A higher χ corresponds to a less competitive market, with the upper bound,
χ = 1/α, corresponding to the situation of unconstrained monopoly. The fact that
χ > 1 implies that imitators are less productive than the incumbent producer in any
intermediate good sector, while χ ≤ 1/α implies that this productivity gap is suﬃciently
small for the incumbent to be forced to charge a limit price to prevent competition from
imitators (e.g., Grossman and Helpman, 1991). This limit price is equal to the marginal
cost of imitators:
                                           pt (ν) = χ,                                (2)

so as to deter entry from the competitive fringe.
   The final good sector is competitive so that any input is paid its marginal product.
Thus, each intermediate good producer ν at date t faces the inverse demand schedule:
pt (ν) = (At (ν) L/xt (ν))1−α . This equation together with (2) gives equilibrium demands:
             1
xt (ν) = χ− 1−α At (ν) L, with monopoly profits correspondingly equal to:

                              π t (ν) = (pt (ν) − 1) xt = δAt (ν) L                   (3)
                      1
where δ ≡ (χ − 1) χ− 1−α is monotonically increasing in χ (since χ ≤ 1/α). Thus, a higher
δ corresponds to a less competitive market, and implies higher profit for monopolists.
   Using (1), we also have that output is:
                                                              α
                                       yt = α−1 χ− 1−α At L.                          (4)

where                                          Z       1
                                        At ≡               At (ν) dν.                 (5)
                                                   0
is the average level of technology in this society. The market clearing wage level is, in
turn, given by:
                                                                   α
                                  wt = (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α At .                        (6)

   Finally, let net output, ytnet , denote final output minus the cost of intermediate
production. Then,                              Z   1
                              ytnet   = yt −           xt (ν) dν = ζAt L,             (7)
                                               0
                          1
where ζ ≡ (χ − α) χ− 1−α /α is monotonically decreasing in χ. Thus for given average
technology At , both total output and net output are decreasing in the extent of monopoly

                                                       9
power, i.e., in χ, because of standard monopoly distortions. Note also that net output,
(7), and profits, (3), are identical except that the output has the term ζ instead of
δ < ζ. This reflects an appropriability eﬀect: the monopolists only capture a fraction of
the greater productivity in the final goods sector (or of the consumer surplus) created
by their production and productivity.

2.2     Technological progress and productivity growth

In every period and in each intermediate good sector, the leading firm can improve
over the existing technology. Recall that leading firms are owned by capitalists, and as
a result, a fraction 1/2 of these firms are young and a fraction 1/2 are mature (old).
Managers, and managerial skills, are crucial for improvements in technology. Each
manager selected to run a production site must make an investment of a fixed amount.
These costs can be financed either through retained earnings, or by borrowing from a
set of competitive intermediaries (“funds”), who collect earnings from other agents and
lend them to managers. We assume that these intermediaries function without any costs.
Then, returns are realized and shared between managers, intermediaries and capitalists
according to the contractual arrangements between the three parties that are described
below.
       Managerial skills are firm-specific, and are revealed after the manager undertakes
production and innovation activities in the first period of his relationship with the firm.
We assume that a manager is high skill with probability λ and low skill with probability
1 − λ. The assumption that managerial skills are firm-specific is made for simplicity,
and does not aﬀect any of the major results, but is also in line with the interpretation
that what matters for successful innovation is the match between a particular manager
and the activity he is engaged in.
       We now make three important assumptions on the process of technological progress:

   1. Experienced managers run larger projects and are, all else equal, more productive.
         Correspondingly, they create larger technological improvements.6 This assumption
         captures the notion that, everything else equal, it is beneficial to have agents who
         have already acted as managers to continue in these tasks.

   2. Managers adopt technologies from the frontier. Skills play a minor role in man-
   6
    For now, this is an assumption. In Section 5, we show that the presence of moral hazard creates
a natural tendency for experienced managers to run larger projects, since their retained earnings from
the first period of activity help relax the credit constraints introduced by the moral hazard problems.


                                                  10
     agers’ success in technology adoption. This assumption captures the notion that
     relatively backward economies can grow by adopting already well-established tech-
     nologies, and the adoption of these technologies is often relatively straightforward.

  3. Managers also engage in innovation or adaptation of existing technologies to their
     local conditions. Managerial skills, and the match between the manager and the
     activity he is undertaking, matter for success in this activity. This assumption
     builds in the notion that managerial ability and skills, and therefore the selection
     of high-skill managers, are important for technological improvements.

   First, let us denote the growth rate of the world technology frontier, At , by g, i.e.,

                                    At = (1 + g)t A0 .                                  (8)

We return to the determination of this growth rate below. All countries have a state
of technology, At , defined by (5), less than the frontier technology, i.e., At ≤ At . We
formulate the three above assumptions as follows: the productivity of intermediate good
ν at time t is given by
                                         ¡                      ¢
                          At (ν) = st (ν) η Āt−1 + γ t (ν) At−1 ,                      (9)

where st (ν) is a term that depends on the experience of the manager; γ t (ν) denotes the
skill of the manager running this firm, and η is a positive constant. This equation states
that, irrespective of the skill of the manager, all intermediate goods benefit from the
state of world technology in the previous period, Āt−1 , by copying or adopting existing
technologies. They also “innovate” over the existing body of local knowledge, At−1 , and
success in innovation depends on skill. Experience, st (ν), aﬀects the productivity of
both adoption and innovation activities.
   Rearranging equation (9), we obtain a simpler equation
                                        µ                 ¶
                         At (ν)            Āt−1
                                = st (ν) η       + γ t (ν) .                           (10)
                          At−1             At−1

Equation (10) shows the importance of distance to technology frontier, as captured by the
term Āt−1 /At−1 . When this term is large, the country is far from the world technology
frontier, and the major improvements in technology come from adoption of already
well-established technologies. When Āt−1 /At−1 is small and the country is close to
the frontier, innovations matter more. Thus as the country develops and approaches
the technology frontier, innovation and adaptation of less well-established technologies,

                                            11
managerial skills and the quality of matches between managers and activities, and hence
overall managerial selection, become more important.
       For simplicity, we assume that the innovation component is equal to 0, i.e., γ t (ν) = 0,
when the manager is low skill, and denote the productivity of a high-skill manager by
γ > 0, i.e., γ t (ν) = γ when manager in sector ν is high skill. Recall that a proportion
λ of managers within each cohort are high skill. To guarantee a decreasing speed of
convergence to the world technology frontier, we assume throughout that λγ < 1.
       The term st (ν) in (10) specifies the importance of experience in technological im-
provements. We assume that st (ν) = σ < 1 in all cases, except when the firm rehires
the same manager from the previous period, in which case the manager can make use of
his firm-specific experience and st (ν) = 1. This assumption implies that managers with
firm-specific experience are more productive.
       Finally, kt (ν) denotes the investment that the manager in sector ν must make at
time t in order to undertake the project, and we assume that kt (ν) = φκĀt−1 where
φ < 1, in all cases, except when the firm is employing the same manager as it did in the
previous period, in which case kt (ν) = κĀt−1 . There are two assumptions embedded in
these expressions:

   1. Costs grow with the level of world technology, Āt−1 . Intuitively, an important
         component of managerial activity is to undertake imitation and adaptation of
         technologies from the world frontier. As this frontier advances, managers need to
         incur greater costs to keep up with, and make use of, these technologies, hence
         investment costs increase with Āt−1 . This assumption ensures balanced growth.7

   2. Experience enables managers to run larger projects. We can think of the greater
         productivity of experienced managers, st (ν) = 1 instead of st (ν) = σ above,
         resulting, in part, from the ability of these managers to run larger projects. In
         Section 5, we show that the feature that experienced managers run larger projects
         does not need to be imposed as an assumption; once we endogenize the size of
         projects, experienced managers run larger projects than young managers because
   7
    Alternatively, investment costs of the form kt (ν) = κĀρt−1 A1−ρ
                                                                  t−1 for any ρ ∈ [0, 1] would ensure
balanced growth. We choose the formulation in the text with ρ = 1, since it simplifies some of the
expressions, without aﬀecting any of our major results. We give the relevant key expressions for the
case of ρ < 1 in the Appendix.
  Note that for all cases where ρ > 0, an improvement in the world technology frontier, Āt−1 , increases
both the returns and the costs of innovation. The parameter restriction σδηL > φκ, which we impose
below, is suﬃcient to ensure that the benefits always outweigh the costs.



                                                   12
      their retained earnings relax the credit constraints imposed by moral hazard. Nev-
      ertheless, to simplify the exposition, we simply assume this feature here, and give
      the details of the model with project size choice in Section 5.

   The setup described above introduces the key trade-oﬀ in this paper; that between
experience and selection. Everything else equal, more experienced managers invest more,
and generate more innovation and higher profits. However, some of the more experienced
managers will have been revealed to be low skill, and low-skill managers are naturally
less productive. So a society might either choose to have greater selection (a better
allocation of managers to activities), and younger managers, but less managerial ex-
perience and investment; or less selection and older firms, but greater experience and
investment. The trade-oﬀ between experience and selection will vary over the process
of development because the importance of innovation vs. adoption of well-established
technologies changes with distance the frontier, as captured by equation (10).
   The state of local knowledge in the economy is summarized by the average of the
productivity in various intermediate product sectors. To specify the law of motion of
At note three things: (1) half of the firms will be young and the other half old; (2)
                                                            ¡                ¢
average productivity among young firms is simply AY t = σ η Āt−1 + λγAt−1 , since
they will hire young managers, a fraction λ of these will be high skill, with productivity
             ¡            ¢
At (ν) = σ η Āt−1 + γAt−1 , and the remainder will be low skill, with productivity
At (ν) = ση Āt−1 (recall equation (9)); (3) clearly, all managers revealed to be high skill
will be retained, and average productivity among mature firms will depend on their
decision whether to refinance low-skill managers.
   Next, denote the decision to refinance a low-skill experienced manager by Rt ∈
{0, 1}, with Rt = 1 corresponding to refinancing. More generally, Rt = 1 stands for
all organizational decisions that make use of the skills of experienced managers or the
expertise of established firms, especially to achieve greater investments, even if this comes
at the expense of sacrificing managerial selection. Below we think of economies where
Rt = 1 as pursuing an investment-based strategy, since these economies manage to invest
more by making use of experienced managers. In contrast, economies with Rt = 0 are
pursuing an innovation-based strategy where the emphasis is on maximizing innovation
at the expense of investment. Using this notation, average productivity among mature
firms is:
                
                                    η Āt−1 + λγAt−1                     if Rt = 1
        AMt =
                
                    (λ + (1 − λ) σ) η Āt−1 + (1 + (1 − λ) σ) (λγAt−1 )   if Rt = 0.

                                              13
The first line has exactly the same reasoning as for the average productivity of young
firms. The second line follows from the fact that a fraction λ of the managers were
revealed to be high skill, are retained, and have productivity At (ν) = η Āt−1 + γAt−1 ,
and the remaining 1 − λ of managerial posts are filled with young managers, who have
                      ¡                ¢
average productivity σ η Āt−1 + λγAt−1 . Combining the productivity of young and
mature managers, we have that
                          1+σ
                               ¡                 ¢
                           2
                                η Āt−1 + λγAt−1                                 if Rt = 1
  At =                                                                                       .
        1¡                                                         ¢
         2
           (λ + σ + (1 − λ) σ) η Āt−1 + (1 + σ + (1 − λ) σ) λγAt−1             if Rt = 0.
                                                                                             (11)
      At this point, it is also is useful to introduce the notation of at to denote (the inverse
of) the distance to frontier, i.e.,
                                             At
                                            at ≡ .                                   (12)
                                             Āt
This variable is the key state variable in our analysis below. Using this definition and
equations (8), (10), and (12), we can rewrite (11) as:
                               1+σ
                              2(1+g)
                                      (η + λγat−1 )                           if Rt = 1
 at =                                                                                     , (13)
       1
          2(1+g)
                 ((λ + σ + (1 − λ) σ) η + (1 + σ + (1 − λ) σ) λγat−1 )        if Rt = 0

which is the key dynamic equation in this economy.

2.3     Incentive problems

The final element of the environment in this economy is the incentive problems faced
by firms. Managers engaged in innovative activities, or even simply entrusted with
managing firms, are diﬃcult to monitor. This creates a standard moral hazard problem,
often resulting in rents for managers, or at the very least, in lower profits for firms.
We formulate this problem in the simplest possible way, and assume that after output,
innovations and profits are realized, the manager can appropriate a fraction µ of the
returns for his own use, and will never be prosecuted. We think of the parameter µ as
a measure of the importance of incentive problems, or equivalently, a measure of credit
market imperfections resulting from these incentive problems. The key role of moral
hazard in our model is to create current and future rents for managers, so that they
can use their current rents to shield themselves from competition, and obtain the future
rents.



                                               14
       Below we analyze both the case of no moral hazard, i.e., µ = 0 (or µ small so that
the incentive compatibility constraints are slack) and the economy with moral hazard
where µ > 0.

                                   3   Equilibrium analysis

In this section, we characterize the equilibrium behavior of the economy described in
Section 2. We start by specifying the contractual relations between capitalists (firms),
intermediaries and managers, next define an equilibrium, and then characterize the equi-
librium allocations with and without moral hazard. In the next section, we compare these
equilibrium thresholds to the growth-maximizing and welfare-maximizing allocations.

3.1     Financial intermediation, contracts and equilibrium

Production requires a production site (owned by a capitalist), a manager, and financing
to pay for the set-up cost of the project. Production sites are a scarce factor in this
economy, since they allow the use of a superior technology. So the capitalists who
own them will appropriate rents subject to satisfying the individual rationality and/or
incentive constraints of intermediaries and managers.
       We assume that capitalists make contractual oﬀers to a subset of workers to become
managers and to intermediaries. Investments are financed either through the retained
earnings of managers, or through borrowing from intermediaries (recall that young cap-
italists and managers have no wealth to finance projects).8 There is free entry into
financial intermediation, and no cost of financial intermediation.
       Omitting time subscripts when this causes no confusion, we use Ies , Pes , Wes and
Ves to denote, respectively, the investment by intermediaries, the contractual payments
to intermediaries, to managers and to firms, conditional on the skill level, s, and the
experience, e, of the manager. In particular, e = M denotes the case in which a mature
firm employs the same manager as in the previous period (the case in which the firm-
specific skills of the manager can be used), e = Y denotes all other cases, and we use
Ie to denote the investment in the case of an inexperienced manager of unknown skill.
The sum of the payments to the three agents involved in each relation cannot exceed
the total profits of the firm:
                                       Pes + Wes + Ves ≤ π se ,                                    (14)
   8
    Whether mature capitalists inject their own funds or still borrow from intermediaries is immaterial,
since there is no cost of intermediation, and the incentive problems are on the side of managers.



                                                  15
where π se is a profit level of the leading firm of age e with a manager of age-experience
e ∈ {Y, M}, with skill s. The oﬀer of the capitalist is a vector (Ies , Pes , Wes , Ves ).
   Free entry into intermediation implies that intermediaries make zero (expected) prof-
its. In addition, we assume that financial intermediation takes place within a period,
so that there are no interest costs to be covered. Thus, intermediaries must receive
expected payments equal to the investments they make:
                          ¡ s ¢    s
                        E PY,t  = IY,t = kY,t = φκĀt−1 ,                                    (15)
                         ¡ s ¢     s
                        E PM,t = IM,t                     d st−1 ,
                                       = kO,t = κĀt−1 − RE

where E is the expectations operator, ke,t is required investment in a firm of age e,
                                 d st−1 denotes the fraction of costs financed by an old
manager of age e, at time t, and RE
manager through retained earnings. By assumption, young firms have to run smaller
projects, and will be managed by young agents who have no wealth, hence they have to
borrow the full cost of the project. Mature firms may be run by old managers, who may
have some retained earnings. The amount of retained earnings (invested in the firm) is
decided by the manager.
   In the presence of moral hazard, the payment to a manager must satisfy the following
incentive constraint:
                                     ICes = Wes − µπ se ≥ 0.                                 (16)

   In writing the incentive compatibility constant in this way, we are ruling out long-
term contracts where the payment to an experienced manager is conditioned on whether
he has stolen or not in the first period of his management. We assume that there is
no commitment technology for such long-term contracts, and even when a manager has
stolen in the first period, if it is still profitable for the capitalist to employ him, he will
do so–he cannot commit not to doing so ex post. This justifies the use of (16) as the
incentive compatibility constraint.
   In their contract oﬀers, capitalists have to satisfy not only the incentive compatibility
but also the individual rationality constraints of managers. These constraints ensure that
managers prefer the contract that they are oﬀered to working for the market wage, wt .
For example, for experienced managers, we need:

                                s
                              IRM,t    s
                                    = WM,t        d st−1 ≥ 0.
                                           − wt − RE

Both types of managers have to be paid at least the market wage. In addition, if they
decide to inject any of their own retained earnings from the previous period, they have

                                                16
to be compensated for these retained earnings as well. Throughout, whenever there
is moral hazard, i.e., unless we set µ = 0, we assume that the individual rationality
constraints of all managers are slack as long as their incentive compatibility constraints
are satisfied.9 This amounts to assuming that µ is large enough, so that to satisfy the
incentive compatibility constraint, capitalists are already paying a suﬃcient amount to
managers. Therefore, typically incentive compatibility constraints will bind and indi-
vidual rationality constraints will be slack.
       As noted above, high-skill experienced managers are always retained. Low-skill expe-
rienced managers may be retained (refinanced) or terminated. Recall that the variable
Rt ∈ {0, 1} denotes the retention decision of mature firms for low-skill managers. We
will have Rt = 1 when VML > E (VYs ), and capitalists will retain low-skill experienced
managers, and make them an oﬀer that satisfies their incentive compatibility constraint.
       Alternatively, mature firms may prefer Rt = 0, i.e., to hire young managers, instead
of low-skill experienced managers, and run smaller projects, which will be the case when
VML < E (VYs ). In this case, the old low-skill managers are fired and become workers
in the second period of their lives, and capitalists make incentive-compatible oﬀers to
some randomly-selected young workers to become managers. In addition, we also have
to make sure that E (VYs ) ≥ 0 so that capitalists prefer to hire managers.10
       We can now formally define an equilibrium in this economy.

Definition 1: (Static Equilibrium) Given at , an equilibrium is a set of intermedi-
         ate good prices, pt (ν), that satisfy (2), a wage rate, wt , given by (6), profit levels
         given by (3), and a vector of investments by intermediaries, and payments to inter-
         mediaries, managers and capitalists, {Ies , Pes , Wes , Ves } and a continuation decision
         with low-skill managers, Rt , such that the feasibility equation, (14), and the free
         entry equation for intermediaries, (15), are satisfied, the incentive compatibility
         and individual rationality constraints for young and low-skill old for managers
   9
    The individual rationality constraint for a young manager working in a young firm is more compli-
cated, since such an manager might receive rents in the second period of his life. To capture this, we
can write the individual rationality constraint as
                                    ¡ s ¢                1   ¡ s      ¢
                           IRY,t = E WY,t − wt +            E IRM,t+1   ≥ 0,
                                                        1+r
where the final term is the expectation of rents in the second period, if any.
  10
     Otherwise, there would be no equilibrium innovation activity, and production is undertaken by the
non-innovating fringe. Note that even if E (VYs ) < 0, innovation might be profitable when expected
revenues over both periods of the firm’s life are taken into account. However, we assume that capitalists
cannot enter into long-term relationships with financial intermediaries, thus E (VYs ) ≥ 0 is necessary.



                                                   17
        hold, and we have E (VYs ) ≥ 0, and Rt = 1 when VML > E (VYs ), and Rt = 0 when
        VML < E (VYs ).

Definition 2: (Dynamic Equilibrium) A dynamic equilibrium is a sequence of sta-
        tic equilibria such that the law of motion of the state of the economy is given by
        (13) above.

      Next, we characterize the decentralized (“laissez-faire”) equilibrium of the economy
as defined in the previous section. Throughout, the emphasis will be on whether the econ-
omy pursues an investment-based strategy or an innovation-based strategy, i.e., whether
Rt = 1 or Rt = 0, and how this decision varies with the state of the economy/distance
to frontier, at .

3.2     The case of no moral hazard

We start with the case of no moral hazard (µ = 0). The individual rationality constraints
of both young managers and experienced managers have to hold, and they will all have
lifetime income wt + wt+1 / (1 + r), where w is the market wage given by (6).
      As a result, mature firms will refinance low-skill managers, i.e., Rt = 1, if and only if
                L
                        ¡ s¢                              ¡   ¢
              VM,t  ≥ E VY,t  ⇔ π LM,t − wt − κĀt−1 ≥ E πsY,t − wt − φκĀt−1 ,

where κĀt−1 is the level of investment with an old manager, while φκĀt−1 is the smaller
level of investment when the mature firm hires an inexperienced young manager. Using
(3)-(10) as well as the definition of at from (12), and simplifying terms, we can rewrite
this inequality as:
                                δLη − κ > δσL (η + λγat−1 ) − φκ.
      Therefore, the equilibrium without moral hazard will have a threshold property. It
will feature an investment-based strategy (refinancing of unsuccessful managers) if and
only if
                                           (1 − σ) η − (1 − φ) κ/δL
                          at−1 < ar (µ = 0, δ) ≡                     ,              (17)
                                                      σλγ
where ar (µ = 0, δ) is the threshold of the distance the frontier such that mature firms
are indiﬀerent between Rt = 1 and Rt = 0.
      In addition, we have to check that innovation is profitable, E (VYs ) ≥ 0. In the
economy with no moral hazard, this requires δLσ (η + λγat−1 ) − φκ − wt ≥ 0, where the
equilibrium wage is given by (6). The following is a suﬃcient condition for E (VYs ) ≥ 0:
                                                               α
                                  σδLη ≥ φκ + (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α ,                        (18)

                                                   18
which we impose as an assumption. Summarizing this discussion:

Proposition 1 In the economy without moral hazard, the equilibrium has Rt = 1 and
an investment-based strategy for all at−1 < ar (µ = 0, δ), and Rt = 0 and an innovation-
based strategy for all at−1 > ar (µ = 0, δ) where ar (µ = 0, δ) is given by (17).

      Countries farther away from the world technology frontier follow an investment-based
strategy, and are characterized by long-term relationships between firms and entrepre-
neurs, larger and older firms, more investment and less selection. As an economy ap-
proaches the world technology frontier and passes the threshold ar (µ = 0, δ), it switches
to an innovation-based strategy with shorter relationships, younger firms, and more se-
lection. The intuition for this result is that the selection of managers becomes more
important when the economy is closer to the world technology frontier, because there
remains less room for technological improvements simply based on copying and adoption.
      The threshold ar (µ = 0, δ) is increasing in δ, so that the switch to the innovation-
based phase is delayed in less competitive economies. The reason is that refinancing
existing manager corresponds to “greater investment”, since the amount of investment
is κ as opposed to φκ < κ with a new manager. While the capitalist pays the full cost of
the investment, because of the standard appropriability eﬀect, part of the returns go to
consumers in the form of higher real wages and consumer surplus. This discourages the
strategy with a greater investment. A higher δ enables the capitalist to capture more
of the surplus, encouraging refinancing. The same reasoning will apply in the economy
with moral hazard in the next subsection.
      Notice that this equilibrium already has a flavor of some of the issues raised by Ger-
schenkron. When the economy is relatively backward, there will be a very diﬀerent set
of (equilibrium) arrangements compared to an economy close to the technology frontier.
However, Gerschenkron’s emphasis was on policies that relatively backward economies
ought to pursue, which is a topic we will revisit in Section 6.
      Finally, we note that the equilibrium allocation characterized in Proposition 1 also
applies to a range of positive µ’s, for µ ≤µ, such that the incentive compatibility con-
straints of both young and old low-skill managers are not binding for all a ∈ [0, 1]. See
the Appendix for the characterization of µ.

3.3     The case with moral hazard

In this section, we characterize the equilibrium allocation for levels of µ suﬃciently high
so that the individual rationality constraints of both young and old low-skill managers

                                              19
are slack, and their incentive compatibility constraints are binding. Typically, this case
requires µ to be greater than some threshold µ̄.11
       As before, the interesting question is whether low-skill managers are refinanced.
If refinanced, managers can extract rents, so they are willing to use their first-period
retained earnings to cover part of the investment cost. The retained earnings of a
manager who was revealed to be of low skill at the end of period t − 1 are given by:
                                                                         1+r
              REt−1 = (1 + r) µπ LM,t−1 = (1 + r) µδLση Āt−2 =              µδLσ Āt−1 ,            (19)
                                                                         1+g

where recall that r denotes the interest rate. The amount on the right-hand side of (19)
is the total retained earnings of the manager, which may not be equal to the amount
that the manager wants to, or can, inject to finance the project. Throughout the paper,
we assume that
                                     1+r
                                          µδLση < κ,                                (20)
                                     1+g
so that retained earnings are less than the cost of the project for experienced managers,
and hence they can inject all of their retained earnings to finance part of the costs of
                  d t−1 = REt−1 ).
the project (thus RE
       Since the incentive compatibility constraint of a low-skill manager is binding, the
manager receives a fraction µ of the profits. Thus, the value of a mature firm retaining
a low-skill manager at date t can then be expressed as:

                        L
                       VM,t = (1 − µ) π LM,t − E (PM,t )                                             (21)
                              µ                               ¶
                                                    1+r
                            =   (1 − µ) δLη − κ +        µδLση Āt−1 ,
                                                    1+g

                                                                    d t−1 as specified in
where the last line makes use of the fact that E (PM,t ) = κĀt−1 − RE
                                    d t−1 = REt−1 from (19).
equation (15), and substituting for RE
       In contrast, the expected value of a mature firm employing a young manager is equal
to:
                       ¡ s¢             ¡      ¢
                      E VY,t = (1 − µ) E π sY,t − φκĀt−1                                            (22)
                                  = ((1 − µ) δLσ (η + λγat−1 ) − φκ) Āt−1 .
  11
     It is straightforward to check that as we consider large economies where population, L, and invest-
ment costs, κ, are large, all individual rationality constraints will be slack, while incentive constraints
will bind (this is because the wage rate, wt , does not depend on the population, L, while profits do).
In other words, in this case both µ and µ̄ will become arbitrarily small. Here we focus on such large
economies where incentive constraints are binding and individual rationality constraints are slack.



                                                    20
This expression incorporates the fact that the manager will be paid a fraction µ of the
profits she generates irrespective of her revealed skill.
     Mature firms will continue their relationship with experienced low-skill managers,
                              L
                                       ¡ s¢
i.e., Rt = 1, if and only if VM,t ≥ E VY,t    or, equivalently, whenever at−1 ≤ ar (µ, δ)
where:                        ³                             ´
                                                   1+r
                               (1 − µ) (1 − σ) +   1+g
                                                       µσ       η − κ (1 − φ) /δL
                ar (µ, δ) ≡                                                         ,   (23)
                                              (1 − µ) σλγ
is the threshold for the distance to frontier such that mature firms are indiﬀerent between
Rt = 1 and Rt = 0. The sequence of the economy moving from an investment-based
strategy to an innovation-based strategy is the same as in the case of no moral hazard.
It is also noteworthy that the threshold ar (µ, δ) in (23) limits to the no-moral hazard
threshold ar (µ = 0, δ) in (17) as incentive problems disappear, i.e., as µ → 0.
   Next observe that ar (µ, δ) is increasing with δ as was the case with ar (µ = 0, δ), and
when product markets are less competitive (higher δ), the switch to an innovation-based
strategy occurs later. This comparative static now reflects two eﬀects. First, for the
same reasons as discussed in the previous subsection, the standard appropriability eﬀect
discourages the investment-based strategy, and an increase in δ reduces the extent of the
appropriability eﬀect. Thus, a higher δ enables the capitalists to capture more of the
surplus, encouraging the investment-based strategy. Second, a higher δ implies greater
profits and greater retained earnings for old unsuccessful managers, which they can use
to “shield” themselves against competition from young managers, making refinancing
and the investment-based strategy more likely.
   The impact of the extent of incentive problems/credit market imperfections, µ, on ar
is ambiguous, however. On the one hand, a higher µ increases the earnings retained by
young managers, thereby shielding these insiders from outside competition, and encour-
aging refinancing. On the other hand, a higher µ reduces the profit diﬀerential between
hiring a young and an old low-skill manager. If

                                         (1 − φ) κ 1 + g
                                    δ>                   ,                              (24)
                                            σηL 1 + r
then, the former eﬀect dominates and ar is increasing in µ, and more severe moral
hazard/credit market problems encourage the investment-based strategy. In contrast,
when (24) does not hold, these problems encourage the termination of low-skill managers.
   To complete the characterization of equilibrium, we finally have to check that in-
novation is profitable, i.e., E (VYs ) ≥ 0, or ((1 − µ) δLσ (η + λγat−1 ) − φκ) ≥ 0. This


                                             21
requires that                                      µ                  ¶
                                               1           φ      κ
                        at−1   ≥ ang (µ, δ) ≡                       −η .                 (25)
                                              λγ       σ (1 − µ) δL
Assumption (18), which ensured E (VYs ) ≥ 0 with no moral hazard, is not suﬃcient to
guarantee that ang (µ, δ) < 0 for µ > 0. In particular, ang (µ, δ) > 0 and stagnation
traps are possible when µ is large, i.e., moral hazard is important, and δ is small, i.e.,
the market is highly competitive. The former eﬀect reflects the fact that with greater
moral hazard, capitalists make lower profits. The latter is due to the appropriability
eﬀect: some degree of monopoly power is necessary for capitalists to make suﬃcient
profits from innovation.
      We summarize our discussion in this subsection with the following:

Proposition 2 In the economy with moral hazard, there is a no-innovation equilibrium
for all at−1 < ang (µ, δ) where ang (µ, δ) is given by (25). For all at−1 ≥ ang (µ, δ), the
equilibrium has Rt = 1 and an investment-based strategy for all at−1 < ar (µ, δ), and
Rt = 0 and an innovation-based strategy for all at−1 > ar (µ, δ) where ar (µ, δ) is given by
(23). Also the threshold of distance to frontier, ar (µ, δ), is increasing in δ, so the switch
to an innovation-based strategy occurs later when the economy is less competitive.

                  4   Growth, convergence patterns and traps

In this section, we first contrast the growth path of a laissez-faire economy with that of
an economy in which refinancing decisions maximize growth. Then, we analyze the possi-
bility of non-convergence traps where productivity and output per capita never converge
to the world technology frontier. In the last subsection, we compare the equilibrium al-
location to the welfare-maximizing allocation, which diﬀers from the growth-maximizing
one, since greater growth may come at the cost of greater investments and lower current
consumption.

4.1    Growth-maximizing strategies

Consider an allocation where prices pt (ν) satisfy (2), the wage rate, wt , is given by
(6), high-skill mature managers are refinanced, exactly as in an equilibrium allocation.
However, suppose that the decision to refinance low-skill old managers, Rt , is made to
maximize the growth rate of the economy. What is this growth-maximizing refinancing
decision, Rtmax ? The answer is straightforward: simply compare the two branches of
equation (13) corresponding to Rt = 1 and Rt = 0, and pick whichever is greater. This

                                              22
immediately implies that the growth-maximizing decision will be Rtmax = 1 if:

                                                     η (1 − σ)
                                       at−1 < b
                                              a≡               .                                    (26)
                                                        λγσ
Just like the equilibrium, the growth-maximizing strategy also has a threshold property:
the investment-based strategy is pursued until the economy reaches a certain distance
to frontier, b
             a, and from then on, the innovation-based strategy maximizes growth.
       Since near the world technology frontier, growth, by definition, must come from
innovation, not imitation, in the neighborhood of the frontier, innovation-based strategy
must yield faster growth than the investment-based strategy. Thus b
                                                                  a < 1. This reasoning
implies the following parameter restriction:

Condition 1: λγσ > η (1 − σ),

which we impose throughout.12
       If â < ar the laissez-faire economy generates excess refinancing, or spends too much
time with an investment-based strategy: there is a range of states, at−1 ∈ [â, ar ], where all
managers are refinanced in equilibrium whereas, from a growth maximization standpoint,
it would be better not to refinance managers who were revealed to be of low skill. In
contrast, when â > ar , the laissez-faire economy generates insuﬃcient refinancing: there
is a range of states, at−1 ∈ [ar , â], where only high-skill managers are refinanced in
equilibrium whereas, from a growth maximization standpoint, it would be better to
refinance all managers, even the low-skill ones.


                                           Figure 1 HERE


       Whether the growth-maximizing cut-oﬀ â is larger or smaller than the laissez-faire
no-refinancing threshold, ar , depends on the level of competition (δ) and on the degree
of capital market imperfection (µ). First, we have that ar (µ = 0, δ) < â: the economy
with no moral hazard switches to an innovation-based strategy too quickly. To see this,
simply observe that

                         η (1 − σ)   η (1 − σ) − (1 − φ) κ/δL
                  â =             >                          = ar (µ = 0, δ) .
                            λγσ                λγσ
  12
    We refer to this parameter restriction and the one in the next subsection as “conditions”, since they
are parameter configurations implied by the logic of the model.



                                                   23
The same result carries over to economies with suﬃciently small µ’s. Intuitively, the
investment-based strategy involves greater investments, and as discussed above, because
of the appropriability eﬀect, capitalists are biased against greater investments. This
makes the equilibrium switch to the innovation-based strategy with smaller investments
come too soon relative the growth-maximizing allocation.
       While the economy without any moral hazard always switches to an innovation-based
strategy too soon, i.e., ar (µ = 0, δ) < â, the economy with moral hazard might have
ar (µ > 0, δ) > â. This is because moral hazard generates a high salary for managers,
and they can use these as retained earnings to “shield” themselves from competition and
continue in their role as managers. In other words, a key role of moral hazard in our
model is to generate rents and thus protect low-skill insiders. As a result, the economy
with moral hazard may remain in an investment-based strategy with little managerial
selection for an excessively long duration. The possibility of staying too long in this
regime will play an important role in our discussion below.
       In addition, we can see that the degree of competition also aﬀects the compari-
son between the equilibrium and the growth-maximizing allocations. Recall that a less
competitive environment, i.e., a lower δ, encourages the investment-based strategy (cfr.,
equation (23)), while the growth-maximizing allocation does not depend on δ (cfr., equa-
tion (26)). Greater competition may increase or reduce the gap between the equilibrium
and the growth-maximizing allocations, however, depending on whether we start from
a situation where â > ar (µ, δ) or â < ar (µ, δ). More specifically, given µ, there exists
a unique level of competition δ, denoted by b  δ (µ), such that â = ar (µ, δ), where simply
comparing equations (23) and (26), we have:

                                    b       (1 − φ) κ 1 + g
                                    δ (µ) =                 .
                                              µσηL 1 + r

If product market competition is lower than this threshold, namely, if δ > b
                                                                           δ (µ) (see up-
per panel in Figure 1), then â < ar , and the laissez-faire economy generates excess refi-
nancing relative to the growth-maximizing allocation.13 In this case, greater competition
increases the gap, and worsens ineﬃciency. Conversely, if product market competition
is high, namely if δ < b
                       δ (µ) (see lower panel in Figure 1), then â > ar and the economy
switches to an innovation-based strategy too quickly, and now lower competition reduces
the gap between the equilibrium and the growth-maximizing allocations.
       We summarize this discussion with the following:
  13
    That there is a non-empty set of parameter values where â < ar can be seen by considering large
values of for µ and δL, and comparing (23) and (26)

                                                24
Proposition 3 The growth-maximizing policy is to choose Rt = 1 and an investment-
based strategy for all at−1 < â, and Rt = 0 and an innovation-based strategy for all
at−1 > â where â is given by (26).
      The laissez-faire economy with suﬃciently small µ switches to an innovation-based
strategy (Rt = 0) too soon relative to the growth-maximizing allocation, i.e., ar (µ = 0, δ) <
â. An economy with suﬃciently high µ and δL, on the other hand, switches to an
innovation-based strategy too late.

4.2    Growth, convergence patterns, traps and leapfrogging

We now discuss how an economy that fails to switch to an innovation-based strategy
might not converge to the world technology frontier. We already saw that, for com-
binations of large µ and small δ’s, there exists a non-empty range of economies with
a < ang (µ, δ), which will stagnate because moral hazard makes innovation unprofitable
for capitalists. These economies will diverge from the frontier (i.e., stagnate while the
frontier is advancing). In this subsection, we will see that there is also a more interesting
non-convergence trap, where certain economies grow, but fail to converge to the frontier
because they persistently pursue an investment-based strategy.
      As was the case for Condition 1, the logic of the model, in particular the fact that
world growth must come from innovation, dictates that in the neighborhood of the
world technology frontie, an economy pursuing the innovation-based strategy must grow
approximately at the same rate as the frontier. This implies another condition:

Condition 2: 1 + g = [(λ + σ + (1 − λ) σ) η + (1 + σ + (1 − λ) σ) λγ] /2.

This condition can be thought of as endogenizing the growth rate of the world technology
frontier, g, as resulting from the most advanced economy pursuing an innovation-based
strategy.
      Figure 2 depicts the relationships between at and at−1 under refinancing (R = 1
curve) and no-refinancing (R = 0 curve) of old low-skill managers. The fact that both
curves are linear simply follows from the expressions in equation (13). The two lines
intersect at at−1 = b
                    a, defined by equation (26), since by construction at this point they
generate the same amount of growth (that b
                                         a < 1 is guaranteed by Condition 1). When a
is greater than â, refinancing reduces growth, and for a less than â, it increases growth,
as discussed in the previous section. Furthermore, Condition 2 implies that the R = 0
curve hits the 45 degree line at a = 1. This immediately implies that the R = 1 curve is


                                             25
below the 45 degree at a = 1. Therefore, an economy that always pursues an investment-
based strategy (i.e., refinances low-skill managers) will not converge to the frontier. This
result is implied by the structure of our model.
   Since the R = 1 curve starts above the 45 degree line, and ends below it at a = 1, it
must intersect it at some
                                              (1 + σ) η
                             atrap =                          < 1.                     (27)
                                       2 (1 + g) − λγ (1 + σ)
This is the value of the distance to frontier at which an economy pursuing an investment-
based strategy will get trapped: it is a fixed point of equation (13) for Rt = 1.
   The existence of this point, atrap , does not imply that there will be traps in equi-
librium, since the economy may switch to an innovation-based strategy before atrap .
Therefore, the necessary and suﬃcient condition for an equilibrium trap is atrap < ar .
When is this condition likely to be satisfied?
   >From (27), atrap is an increasing function of λγ, and is independent of κ/δL and
µ. Also, recall that ar is a decreasing function of κ/δL and of λγ, and, if condition
(24) holds, it is an increasing function of µ, see equation (23). These observations imply
that smaller values of κ/δL and λγ make it more likely that atrap < ar . Furthermore,
if condition (24) holds, then traps are more likely in economies with severe incentive
problems/credit market imperfections.
   These comparative statics are intuitive. First, smaller values of κ and greater values
of δL make it easier for low-skill managers to get refinanced. Since a trap can only arise
due to excess refinancing, a greater κ/δL reduces the possibility for traps. Second, large
values of λγ increase the opportunity cost of refinancing low-skill managers, and make
it less likely that a trap can emerge due to lack of selection. Finally, when condition
(24) holds, more severe credit market imperfections (incentive problems) favor insiders
by raising retained earnings, and via this channel, they increase the probability of a trap
due to excess refinancing.
   An implication of this discussion is that less competitive environments may foster
growth at early stages of development (farther away from the technology frontier), but
will later become harmful to growth, and prevent convergence to the frontier. In partic-
ular, there exists a cut-oﬀ competition level, δ ∗ (µ), such that

                                       ar (µ, δ ∗ (µ)) = atrap.                        (28)

An economy with a suﬃciently high level of competition, δ < δ ∗ (µ), will never fall into
a non-convergence trap. Too high competition may cause a slowdown in the process

                                                 26
of technological convergence at the earlier stages of development, but does not aﬀect
the long-run equilibrium.14 Low competition, instead, has detrimental eﬀects in the
long-run.
       Another related implication is that when ar < â, an economy with more competitive
product markets will initially grow slower than a less competitive economy, but later
“leapfrog” it, when the less competitive economy becomes stuck in a non-convergence
trap. This result may shed some light on why some economies, such as Brazil, Mexico
or Peru, that grew relatively rapidly with highly protectionist policies were then taken
over by economies with more competitive policies such as Hong Kong or Singapore.15
       Finally, it is useful to determine the basin of attraction of atrap when the economy
is pursuing an investment-based strategy. Clearly, this includes all a ∈ [ang , atrap ].
Moreover, for a ∈ (atrap , 1], the growth rate of an economy pursuing investment-based
strategy is less than g, so the basin of attraction of atrap when the economy is pursuing
an investment-based strategy is the entire set a ∈ [ang , 1] (see Figure 1). Thus we have:

Proposition 4 Economies with a < ang (µ, δ) stagnate. Economies with a ≥ ang (µ, δ)
that always pursue the innovation-based strategy converge to the frontier, a = 1.
Economies with a ≥ ang (µ, δ) that always pursue the investment-based strategy con-
verge to atrap > 1.
       Suppose a ∈ [ang , atrap ]. Then if δ < δ ∗ (µ), the equilibrium involves investment-based
strategy for a < ar (µ, δ) < atrap , and the innovation-based strategy for a > ar (µ, δ),
and convergence to the frontier where δ ∗ (µ) is given by (28). If δ > δ ∗ (µ), the economy
always pursues the investment-based strategy and converges to atrap .

4.3      Welfare analysis

In this subsection, we compare the laissez-faire equilibrium with the refinancing policy
that maximizes social welfare. We will see that the economy with no moral hazard
pursues an investment-based strategy (refinancing of low-skill managers) for too long,
while an economy with moral hazard may have too much or too little refinancing relative
to the social optimum.
       More formally consider a planner who maximizes the present discounted value of
the consumption stream, with a discount factor β ≡ 1/ (1 + r), i.e., she maximizes
  14
     The exception is that because high competition increases ang , it makes stagnation traps more likely.
Thus the statement in the text applies to economies with a >> ang .
  15
     Interestingly, before 1967 the growth of GDP per worker was indeed slower in Singapore (2.6% per
year) than in both Mexico (3.9%) and Peru (5.3%). This ranking was reverted in the 1970s and 1980s.


                                                   27
       P∞                                        R1
Ct +    j=1   β t Ct+j , where Ct = ζLAt −          0
                                                        kt (ν) dν is equal to net output minus investment
at date t with                                   ¡ 1+φ ¢
                         Z    1                  2 κĀt−1               if Rt = 1
                                  kt (ν) dν =
                          0                        λ+φ(2−λ)
                                                       2
                                                             κĀt−1      if Rt = 0.
As before, we start with an allocation where prices pt (ν) satisfy (2), the wage rate, wt ,
is given by (6), high-skill experienced managers are refinanced, exactly as in an equilib-
rium allocation, but we now suppose that the decision to refinance low-skill experienced
managers, Rt , is made to maximize welfare. In other words, the planner only controls
the refinancing decision, Rt .
    To gain some intuition, it is useful to start by characterizing the choice of a “myopic
planner” who disregards future generations, i.e., β = 0. The myopic planner chooses the
refinancing policy at t so as to maximize total consumption at t. The myopic planner
refinances low-skill managers if and only if at−1 < amf b , where the threshold amf b is such
that Rt = 0 and Rt = 1 yield the same consumption, i.e.,

                                                η (1 − σ) − (1 − φ) κ/ζL
                                     amf b ≡                             .                          (29)
                                                          σλγ

    Note here that the expression of amf b is identical to the expression of ar (µ = 0, δ)
(see equation (17)), except that here ζ replaces δ in (17). Recall that because of the
appropriability eﬀect, ζ > δ. This implies that amf b > ar (µ = 0, δ) , i.e., the planner puts
more weight on the benefits of innovation than the equilibrium allocation. Therefore,
the planner will choose refinancing (an investment-based strategy) over a larger range
of a’s. The planner’s choice can also be compared with the growth-maximizing policy.
Since the planner takes into account the cost of innovation, which is ignored by the
growth-maximizing strategy, we have amf b < â. Thus the myopic planner sets amf b ∈
(ar (µ = 0, δ) , â) .
    Now, consider a non-myopic planner who also cares about future consumption, i.e.,
she has β > 0. The non-myopic planner realizes that, by increasing the no-refinancing
threshold on amf b , she can increase future consumption at the expense of current con-
sumption. For any positive β, and in particular for β = 1/ (1 + r), a small increase of
the threshold starting at amf b involves no first-order loss in current consumption, while
generating first-order gains in productivity, At , and in the present discounted value of
future consumption. Thus, the non-myopic planner will choose a threshold, af b > amf b ,
which, a fortiori, satisfies af b > ar (µ = 0, δ), proving that the equilibrium switch to an
investment-based strategy occurs too soon. Moreover, we can see that af b cannot exceed

                                                          28
the growth-maximizing threshold, â. Any candidate threshold larger than â, say ã > â,
can be improved upon, since any threshold in the range (ã, â] increases both current and
future consumption relative to ã. Thus, the optimal threshold cannot be to the right of
â. In summary, we have

                                  ar (µ = 0, δ) < amf b < af b < â.

       By continuity, the same inequality holds in economies with suﬃciently low µ’s. The
analysis therefore establishes:16

Proposition 5 The welfare-maximizing policy is Rt = 1 and an investment-based strat-
egy for all at−1 < af b , and Rt = 0 and an innovation-based strategy for all at−1 > af b
where af b ∈ (amf b , â) with â and amf b given by (26) and (29).
       The laissez-faire economy with suﬃciently small µ switches to an innovation-based
strategy (Rt = 0) too soon relative to the welfare-maximizing allocation, i.e., ar (µ = 0, δ) <
af b . An economy with suﬃciently high µ and δL, on the other hand, switches to an
innovation-based strategy too late.

       The last part of the proposition simply follows from the second part of Proposition
3, where we show that with suﬃciently high µ and δL, we have ar > â, combined with
the observation that af b < â.

                                     5   Microfoundations

The previous sections outlined a simple model to analyze the costs and benefits of
investment-based and innovation-based strategies as a function of an economy’s distance
to the world technology frontier. The important trade-oﬀ was between exploiting the
experience of existing managers vs. selecting younger more skilled managers or managers
who might be better matched to new tasks. An important element was the feature that
experienced managers can carry out greater investments (hence the term “investment-
based strategy” for the case where experienced managers are refinanced). To simplify
the analysis, this aspect was introduced as an assumption. However, there is a natural
reason for why experienced managers will invest more in the presence of moral hazard:
incentive compatibility problems restrict the size of investments, and retained earnings
  16
     Note also that the same argument as in Proposition 5 applies if we were to compare the laissez-
faire economy to the unconstrained first best, where the planner also controls pricing decisions. The
unconstrained planner would set monopoly distortions to zero, so ζ would reach its highest possible
value, (1 − α) /α, and the planner would have a greater incentive to choose an investment-based strategy.


                                                   29
of experienced managers relax the credit constraints imposed by incentive problems and
enable them to undertake greater investments.
   In this section, we briefly outline why, once we introduce a choice of project size, we
should expect experienced managers to run large projects, while young managers run
small projects. This analysis is somewhat more involved than the one in the preced-
ing sections, which motivates our choice of imposing this diﬀerential project size as an
assumption for the basic model.
   Consider the same economy as above with the key diﬀerence that all managers now
have a choice between two project sizes: small and large. We assume that small projects
cost kt (ν) = φκĀt−1 , while large projects cost kt (ν) = κĀt−1 . Next, we also allow
experienced managers to be potentially more productive, though the results also go
through even when they are equally productive as inexperienced managers (but in that
case the investment-based strategy would not be an equilibrium in the absence of moral
hazard, nor would it ever be chosen by the growth-maximizing or welfare-maximizing
planners). More specifically, in equation (9), let st (ν), the productivity a manager-firm
match, be given as:
                       
                       
                        σ̂ if manager=experienced and project=small
                       
                          1    if manager=experienced and project=large
              st (ν) =
                       
                        εσ̂ if manager=inexperienced and project=small
                       
                          ε if manager=inexperienced and project=large
where σ̂ < 1 and ε ≤ 1, i.e., ε = 1, the case in which experienced and inexperienced
managers have the same productivity is allowed. This setup therefore implies that
both project size and managerial experience (firm-specific experience) contribute to the
productivity of the project (in other words, to advances in productivity). Moreover, we
assume that
                                  δLη − κ > σ̂δLη − φκ,
so, absent moral hazard problems, even with low-skill experienced managers it would
be profitable to run larger projects. Without this assumption, low-skill experienced
managers would never run large projects. The rest of the setup is unchanged, and for
brevity, here we focus on the case with moral hazard.
   To determine whether young managers run small or large projects, we need to com-
pare capitalists’ returns from these two options (individual rationality constraints of
young managers are slack with both small and large projects). Comparing these re-
turns, we find that capitalists will choose the small project if:

            (1 − µ) εδL (η + λγat−1 ) − κ < (1 − µ) εσ̂δL (η + λγat−1 ) − φκ.        (30)

                                            30
The left-hand side is profits from the large project, multiplied by 1 − µ (since a fraction
µ of the profits have to be paid to the manager for incentive compatibility), minus the
cost of the project. Notice that profits are multiplied by ε, which captures the fact
that young managers are potentially less productive. The right-hand side is for a small
project, and profits are multiplied by εσ̂, since now the manager is inexperienced and
is running a small project. Moreover, the project cost is multiplied by φ, because the
project is small. Notice that (30) can only be true if φ < σ̂, that is if there are decreasing
returns to scale so that the costs of the project increase faster than the returns from the
larger scale. Thus, we are implicitly assuming that there are decreasing returns to scale
in project size.
   Since the left-hand side of (30) increases in at−1 less than the right-hand side, then
if (30) holds for at−1 = 1, it will hold for all at−1 . To simplify the discussion, we now
impose the following condition

                   (1 − µ) εδL (η + λγ) − κ < (1 − µ) εσ̂δL (η + λγ) − φκ,               (31)

which ensures that (30) holds for at−1 = 1, and , hence, for all at−1 . As a result, when
(31) holds, capitalists will always choose the small project with young managers. This
condition is satisfied if µ is suﬃciently large (as long as φ < σ̂).
   Now, let us look at the choice of project size with experienced managers. To simplify
the discussion, we will introduce an additional assumption, similar to (20) above, but
somewhat stronger:
                                          1+r
                                  φκ <        σ̂µδLεη < κ.                               (32)
                                          1+g
Similar to our previous assumption (20), this condition states that retained earnings are
less than the cost of the large project. But it also requires that they are greater than
the cost of the small project.
   Next, we must compare the return to capitalists from large and small projects with
an experienced low-skill manager. Capitalists prefer the large project with experienced
managers when

                                         1+r
                      (1 − µ) δLη − κ +        σ̂µδLεη > (1 − µ) σ̂δLη.                 (33)
                                         1+g
The left-hand side is capitalists’ profits from a large project with a low-skill experienced
manager, δLη, times 1−µ (since this fraction has to be paid to the manager for incentive
compatibility), minus the diﬀerence between the cost of the project and the retained
                                                      1+r
earnings that the manager contributes, i.e., κ −      1+g
                                                          σ̂µδLεη.     The right-hand side is

                                              31
simply profits from the small project times 1 − µ. The cost of the small project is
financed entirely by the manager from retained earnings.
       When assumptions (31), (32) and (33) are satisfied, young managers run small
projects while experienced managers run large projects.17 Intuitively, capitalists are
discouraged from financing large projects because the form of the incentive compati-
bility problem (that the manager can appropriate a fraction µ of the returns) implies
greater payments to managers from larger projects. Incentive problems are therefore
introducing “credit constraints,” and these constraints are especially severe on young
managers, reducing their level of investment. However, for experienced managers there
is a countervailing eﬀect: these managers have retained earnings, and they can use these
retained earnings to bear part of the cost of the project, making larger projects more
attractive for capitalists. In other words, retained earnings relax the “credit constraints”
introduced by the incentive problems.
       Notice that moral hazard together with choice of project size (and the assumptions
(31), (32), and (33)) implies exactly the configuration we imposed in the previous sec-
tions: young managers run smaller projects, while experienced managers run larger
projects and, everything else equal, they generate more revenues. This indicates that
the results here will be very similar to those in the previous sections. In fact, they are
identical.
       To see this, define σ ≡ εσ̂, and the comparison between financing a young manager
and a low-skill experience manager boils down to the comparison of (21) and (22), and
yields the critical threshold of (23) as in Section 2.

Proposition 6 In the economy with project size choice and moral hazard, as long
as conditions (31), (32) and (33) are satisfied, the equilibrium is identical to that in
Proposition 2 with σ ≡ εσ̂.

       Therefore, this extended model gives exactly the same results as our basic model in
  17
    It is straightforward to verify that these three conditions can be easily satisfied. For example, take
1+r
1+g σ̂µδLεη   → κ, which ensures both (32) and (33), and then reduce φ to satisfy (31).
  In addition, we have to make sure that it is in the interest of the entrepreneur to inject his re-
tained earnings. Since the capitalist is making the oﬀer, this simply requires that individual rationality
constraint of the entrepreneur is satisfied, or in other words:
                                    1+r                                α
                           µδLη −       σ̂µδLεη > wt = (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α at .
                                    1+g
where the left-hand side is the net return from running the large project, taking into account the costs,
and the right-hand side is the return from quitting and working for the market wage. As usual, we
assume that this individual rationality constraint is satisfied, which again requires µ to be large enough.


                                                    32
Section 2. In the rest of the paper, we work with the simpler model of Section 2.

      6     Policy, appropriate institutions and political economy traps

The analysis so far established that:

  1. The equilibrium allocation, the growth-maximizing allocation and the social op-
          timum all involve an investment-based regime with high investment and long-
          term relationships, followed by an innovation-based regime with lower investment,
          shorter relationships, younger firms and more selection.

  2. Unless incentive/credit market problems are suﬃciently severe and the economy
          is highly non-competitive, the equilibrium switch to an innovation-based strategy
          will happen too soon. In other words, economies farther away from the frontier
          might have a tendency to “invest too little” and grow “too slowly”.

      These observations raise the possibility of useful policy interventions along the lines
suggested by Gerschenkron: relatively backward economies intervening to increase in-
vestment in order to ensure faster adoption of technologies and development. In this
section, we discuss possible policies to foster growth, how they can be interpreted as
corresponding to “appropriate institutions” for countries at diﬀerent stages of develop-
ment, and how political economy considerations might turn appropriate institutions into
“inappropriate institutions” that generate traps.

6.1     Policy and appropriate institutions

Consider an equilibrium allocation with ar (µ, δ) < af b . A policy intervention that en-
courages greater investment will increase welfare and growth over a certain range. There
are a number of diﬀerent policies that can be used for this purpose. Probably the most
straightforward is an investment subsidy, which might take the form of direct subsidies
or preferential loans at low interest rates etc.. Imagine the government subsidizing a
fraction s of the cost of investment. If s is chosen appropriately, the economy can be
induced to switch from an investment-based strategy to an innovation-based strategy
exactly at af b or (at â, depending on the purpose of policy). Alternatively, the gov-
ernment could use investment subsidies only for existing firms, with similar results. An
additional role of investment subsidies is that they would reduce ang , the stagnation
threshold, thus making stagnation less likely.


                                               33
   Investment subsidies are diﬃcult to implement, however, especially in relatively back-
ward economies where tax revenues are scarce. Furthermore, it may be diﬃcult for the
government to observe exactly the level of investment made by firms. For this reason,
in much of the discussion we focus on another potential policy instrument which aﬀects
the equilibrium threshold ar (µ, δ), the extent of anti-competitive policies, such as entry
barriers, merger policies etc.. Nevertheless, all of the discussion applies to investment
subsidies for all or only existing firms.
   Anti-competitive policies are captured by the parameter χ in our model, and recall
that δ is monotonically increasing in χ. Thus high values of χ or δ correspond to a
less competitive environment. Starting from a situation where ar (µ, δ) < af b , policies
that restrict competition will close the gap between the equilibrium threshold and the
social optimum (or the growth-maximizing point). Although restricting competition
creates static losses, in the absence of feasible tax/subsidy policies this may be the best
option available for encouraging faster growth and technological convergence. Similar
to investment subsidies, a higher δ (or a higher χ) also reduces ang (µ, δ) and the range
of stagnation.
   The situation where the government chooses a less competitive institutional environ-
ment in a relatively backward economy in order to encourage more investment, long-
term relationships and faster technological convergence is reminiscent to Gerschenkron’s
analysis. Appropriate institutions for relatively backward economies may then be thought
to correspond to those that create a less competitive and perhaps “more rigid” environ-
ment, and encourage longer-term relationships and greater investment. This is also, in
some sense, similar to the famous “infant-industry” arguments that call for protection
and government support for industries at early stages of development.
   But our analysis also reveals that such institutions/policies limiting competition, and
similarly investment subsidies, are harmful for economies closer to the world technology
frontier. Appropriate institutions for early stages of development are inappropriate for
an economy close to the world technology frontier. Therefore, any economy that adopts
such institutions must then abandon them at some point; otherwise, it will end up in a
non-convergence trap.
   A sequence of optimal policies whereby certain interventions are first adopted and
then abandoned raises important political economy considerations, however. Groups
that benefit from anti-competitive policies will become richer while these policies are
implemented, and will oppose the change in policy. To the extent that economic power
buys political power, they will be quite influential in opposing such changes. Therefore,

                                            34
the introduction of appropriate institutions to foster growth also raises the possibility
of “political economy traps”, where certain groups oppose the change in policy, and the
economy ends up in a non-convergence trap because, at early stages of development, it
adopted appropriate institutions.
      We now build a simple political economy model where special interest groups, de-
pending on the economic power, may capture politicians. Our basic political-economy
model is a simplified version of the special-interest-group model of Grossman and Help-
man (1997, 2001) combined with our growth setup.

6.2    Political economy traps

Suppose that competition policy (the “institutional” environment), χ , is determined in
each period by a politician (or government) who cares about the current welfare of living
agents, but is also sensitive to bribes–or campaign contributions. For tractability, we
adopt a very simple setup: politicians at time t can be bribed to aﬀect policies at time
t+1. The politician’s pay-oﬀ is equal to HAt−1 , where H > 0, if she behaves honestly and
chooses the policy that maximizes current consumption (i.e., the planner does not have
a long horizon), and to Bt otherwise, where B denotes a monetary bribe the politician
might receive in order to pursue a diﬀerent strategy. The utility of pursuing the right
policy is assumed to be linearly increasing in At−1 in order to ensure stationary policies
in equilibrium, since bribes will be increasing in A, and the timing structure simplifies
the algebra below.
      In this formulation, the parameter H may be interpreted as a measure of the aggre-
gate welfare concerns of politicians or, more interestingly, as the quality of the system
of check-and-balances that limit the ability of special interest groups to capture politi-
cians. We will refer to H as the honesty parameter of politicians. When H is greater,
the political system is less corruptible. This formulation is similar to that in Grossman
and Helpman (1997, 2001), but simpler since in their formulation, the utility that the
politician gets from adopting various policies is a continuous function of the distance
from the ideal policy. As in their setup, the politician is assumed to have perfect com-
mitment to deliver the competition policy promised to an interest group in return for
bribes.
      Young agents have no wealth, so they cannot bribe politicians. We also assume that
only capitalists can organize as interest groups, so the only group with the capability to




                                            35
bribe politicians are mature capitalists.18
       To simplify the analysis further, we assume that the institutional choice facing the
politician is between two policies, low and high competition, or between “competitive”
                                           ©     ª
and “anti-competitive” policies, i.e., χt ∈ χ, χ̄ where α−1 ≥ χ̄ > χ. We set, by analogy,
                        1                                     1
                     − 1−α                                 − 1−α
δ t = (χt − 1) χt            ∈ {δ, δ} and ζ t = (χt − α) χt        /α ∈ {ζ, ζ}. The assumption that
χ is a discrete rather than a continuous choice variable is reasonable, since the ability
of the politicians to fine-tune institutions is often limited (i.e., they can either impose
entry barriers or not, etc.).
       We start our analysis by characterizing the policy that would be chosen by an honest
politician who will never be influenced by bribes (i.e., H = ∞). First, note that the
honest politician will always choose competitive policies (χ = χ, δ = δ) for at−1 ≤
ar (µ, δ), since over this range, even with relatively high competition there is refinancing,
i.e., Rt = 1, so anti-competitive policies would simply create static distortions without
aﬀecting equilibrium refinancing decisions.
       Will an honest politician choose anti-competitive policies for any a > ar (µ, δ)? In
this range, anti-competitive policies may create a trade-oﬀ: they lead to monopoly price
distortions, but they may encourage the investment-based strategy, which for a < amf b ,
yields greater current consumption than the innovation-based strategy, where amf b is
defined by (29). It is straightforward to verify that the honest politician will choose
anti-competitive policies if and only if at−1 ≤ awm , where awm is such that:19
                           ¡                              ¢
                            ζ̄ (1 + σ) − ζ (λ + σ (2 − λ)) η − (1 − φ) (1 − λ) κ/L
                   awm   ≡                ¡                             ¢          .             (34)
                                       λγ ζ (1 + σ (2 − λ)) − ζ̄ (1 + σ)
Thus awm is the threshold of the distance to frontier such that low competition and
Rt = 1 give the same level of current consumption as greater competition and Rt = 0.
Honest politicians will prefer low competition when a ∈ [ar (µ, δ) , awm ], when this set is
nonempty. The reason why anti-competitive policies cease to be desirable when a > awm
is that the benefits from these policies decline as the economy gets closer to the frontier.
       Next consider the competition policy set by a politician who responds to bribes (i.e.,
  18
     The qualitative results would not change if we allowed mature managers to contribute to the anti-
competitive lobby.
  19
     awm is derived by equating consumption under (i) refinancing and low competition, ζ̄, and (ii) no
refinancing and high competition, ζ. Formally, we set:
      µ                   ¶
          1+σ                1+φ       1                                                      λ + φ (2 − λ)
ζ̄L           (η + λγawm ) −     κ = ζL ((λ + σ + (1 − λ) σ) η + (1 + σ + (1 − λ) σ) λγawm )−               κ,
           2                  2        2                                                            2

Simplifying this expression gives (34).


                                                    36
H finite). Clearly, capitalists always prefer low to high competition, as this increases
their profits. Let BtW ≡ B W (at−1 )Āt−1 denote the maximum bribe that capitalists
are willing to pay in order to induce anti-competitive policies, χt = χ, rather than
competitive policies, χt = χ < χ.20
       We assume that agents cannot borrow to pay bribes, so the amount of bribes that
they can pay will be also limited by their current income. This assumption introduces
the link between economic power and political power in our context: richer agents can
pay greater bribes and have a greater influence on policy. Let BtC ≡ B C (δ t−1 , at−1 ) Āt−1
denote the maximum bribe that they can pay, where δ t−1 ∈ [δ, δ̄] was the level of
competition at date t − 1. It is equal to the profits generated by young firms in period
t − 1 that accrues to capitalists:

                       B C (δ t−1 , at−1 ) = δ t−1 (1 − µ) σ (Lη + λγat−1 ) − φκ.                 (35)

       The maximum bribes capitalists will pay are therefore:
                                               ­                                 ®
                        B (δ t−1 , at−1 ) = min B W (at−1 ) , B C (δ t−1 , at−1 ) .

We focus on economies where capitalists are credit constrained in the range of inter-
est. Suﬃciently small values of σ guarantee that this is the case. Thus, from now on,
B (δ t−1 , at−1 ) = B C (δt−1 , at−1 ). This is in the spirit of capturing the notion that eco-
nomic and political power are related. If capitalists were not credit constrained, this
link would be absent.
       As long as at−1 ∈
                       / [ar (µ, δ) , awm ], i.e., as long as the politician does not want to choose
the anti-competitive policy, χ, for welfare-maximizing reasons, she will be induced to
change the policy to χ if and only if bribes are suﬃcient to cover the dishonesty cost,
HAt−1 , or if and only if:
                                       B C (δ t−1 , at−1 ) ≥ Hat−1 .

Using (35), we can rewrite this inequality as

                           δ t−1 (1 − µ) σL (η + λγat−1 ) − φκ ≥ Hat−1 .                          (36)
  20
    Let R (δ, a) ∈ {0, 1} denote the refinancing decision conditional on the policy δ and distance from
frontier a. Then, the maximum bribe that capitalists are willing to pay is given by
               ¡ ¡       ¡ ¢¢                    ¢
 B W (a) = δ 1 − R δ, a − δ (1 − R (δ, a)) (1 − µ) L ((λ + (1 − λ) σ) η + (1 + (1 − λ) σ) λγa) +
               ¡ ¡ ¢                ¢                       ¡ ¡ ¢             ¢
                δR δ, a − δR (δ, a) (1 − µ) L (η + λγa) − R δ, a − R (δ, a) (1 − (λ + (1 − λ) φ)) κ.

It can be shown that B W (a) /a is a continuously decreasing function of a.



                                                    37
We define aL and aH as the unique values of at−1 such that (36) holds with equality for,
respectively, δ t−1 = δ̄ and δ t−1 = δ. We thus have:

                          δ̄ (1 − µ) σLη − φκ           δ (1 − µ) σLη − φκ
                   aL ≡                        and aH ≡                    .
                          H − λγ δ̄ (1 − µ) σL          H − λγδ (1 − µ) σL
The politicians will be bribed to maintain the anti-competitive policy, χ, as long as
at−1 ≤ aL . Similarly, they will be bribed to switch from competitive to the anti-
competitive policies when at−1 ≤ aH .
       It is immediate to see that aL > aH , since capitalists make greater profits with low
competition and have greater funds to bribe politicians. This formalizes the idea that
once capitalists become economically more powerful, they are more likely to secure the
policy that they prefer. Note that both cut-oﬀs, aL and aH , are decreasing functions of
H, which captures the fact that more honest politicians will be harder to convince to
pursue the policy preferred by capitalists.


                                          Figure 3 HERE


       Now consider Figure 3.21 For a ≤ aH , the politician is successfully bribed and anti-
competitive policies prevail. If a ≥ aL , there is no bribe, and the politician chooses the
welfare-maximizing policy. Finally, if a ∈ (aH , aL ) , the outcome is history-dependent. If
competition is initially low, capitalists enjoy greater monopoly profits and are suﬃciently
wealthy to successfully lobby to maintain the anti-competitive policies. If competition
is initially high, capitalists do not make as much profits and do have not enough funds
to buy politicians, so there is no eﬀective lobbying activity, and equilibrium policies are
competitive.
       Next consider the evolution of an economy with initial level of technology a0 satisfying
a0 < aH . Irrespective of past competition policies, the capitalist lobby is wealthy enough
to buy the anti-competitive policy χ̄ (δ̄). In earlier stages of development (a < â), the
only eﬀect of the lobbying activity is a static distortion that reduces consumption, but
it has no eﬀect on innovation and growth. In some intermediate stage of development
where a ∈ (ar (µ, δ) , â), the anti-competitive policy actually becomes growth-enhancing.
          ¡     ¡ ¢¢
When a ∈ â, ar µ, δ̄ , however, the industrial policy resulting from lobbying activities
  21
    Figure 3 uses a parameter configuration such that aH < ar (µ, δ) < awm < aL , while Figure 4
assumes aH < ar (µ, δ) < atrap < aL . It is straightforward construct numerical examples with plausible
parameters where aH < ar (µ, δ) < awm < atrap < aL , thus satisfying both parameter configurations.
Details are available upon request.

                                                  38
is harmful for growth, as well as reducing the level of consumption through the static dis-
tortion. Growth slowdowns and the economy may even get stuck into a non-convergence
trap.
   We refer to this case as a “political economy trap”, since the reason why the non-
convergence trap emerges is the ability of the capitalist lobby to bribe politicians. Con-
sider an economy starting at some level a0 < aH , such that the capitalistic lobby can
initially bribe politicians. Two conditions are suﬃcient for a political economy trap to
arise:

   1.
                                             δ < δ ∗ (µ) < δ,                                (37)

         where, recall, δ ∗ (µ) was defined as the cut-oﬀ competition level such that ar (µ, δ ∗ (µ)) =
         atrap defined in (28). Under this assumption, the anti-competitive policy, χ, leads
         to a non-convergence trap, where low-skill managers are always refinanced and the
         economy pursues an investment-based strategy. The competitive policy, χ, would
         have instead ensured convergence to the world technology frontier.

   2.
                                               atrap < aL ,                                  (38)

         This condition implies that when the economy reaches atrap , and convergence comes
         to a halt, the anti-competitive lobby continues to prevent the change of policy that
         would be necessary to induce further convergence.

   These two conditions, (37) and (38), are more likely to be satisfied when H is low,
i.e., when the political system is more corruptible. Therefore, political economy traps
are more likely in societies with weak political institutions, and such institutions might
have to be more careful in pursuing government interventions.


                                         Figure 4 HERE


   Figure 4 describes how the trap arises diagrammatically. The policy choice is endoge-
nous, and the lobbying activity implies low competition for all a ≤ aL . If the economy
ever reached a state a = aL , it would switch to high competition and an innovation-based
strategy, and would eventually attain full convergence to the world technology frontier.
But this stage is never reached since convergence stops at a = atrap < aL .

                                                 39
       Another, possibly more interesting, case is when the economy starts with a0 ∈
(aH , ar (µ, δ)) and χ = χ, i.e., competition is high. In this case, capitalists do not
initially have enough funds to bribe politicians to reduce competition. Thus, without
a change in competition policy, the capitalist lobby will never be eﬀective. However,
as long as awm > ar (µ, δ), when a increases above ar (µ, δ), politicians will choose to
reduce competition in order to create welfare gains for the citizens. Once competition is
reduced, capitalists become richer, and now they have enough funds to successfully bribe
politicians to keep competition low. This case, therefore, illustrates how a well-meaning
(but shortsighted) attempt to introduce appropriate institutions may lead to a political
economy trap.
       Finally, note also that when aH < atrap , a temporary improvement in policy might
have long-run policy and economic benefits. In particular, if the adverse eﬀects of
lobbying activity could be prevented for even just one period (e.g., by the election
of an exceptionally honest politician), the economy could escape from the trap. The
honest politician would choose competitive policies, and this would destroy the ability of
capitalists to lobby against competition in the future. So, even a temporary improvement
in “political institutions” would lead to permanent changes in “economic institutions”
(here the degree of competition in the product market).22
       This discussion establishes:

Proposition 7 Suppose that competition policy is decided by a sequence of politicians
with honesty parameter H, and bribes by the lobby of capitalists. Then, there exists a
cut-oﬀ level aL , which is decreasing in H, such that the politician will always be bribed
into maintaining a low level of competition if a < aL .
       When parameters are such that (i) δ ∗ (µ) < δ where δ ∗ (µ) is defined by (28); and (ii)
atrap < aL , then an economy starting at a0 < max har (µ, δ) , aL i will be locked-in into
a non-convergence trap, characterized by the anti-competitive policy δ (χ), and bribes
to politicians from the capitalist lobby. Such political economy traps are more likely in
economies where H is small.
  22
     Note that this extreme result hinges on the two-period nature of our model. If agents live for more
periods, and the capitalists own other assets, other reforms may be necessary to curb the power of
insiders. Redistribution and reduction of income or wealth inequality may be necessary to make such
a reform sustainable. Nevertheless, clearly the feature that current policies aﬀect profits and therefore
the capitalist lobby’s ability to influence policy in the future is more general than the 2-period model
here




                                                   40
                                   7   Conclusion

There are certain marked diﬀerences in the economic organization of technological lead-
ers and technological followers. While technological leaders often feature younger firms
and greater churning, technological followers emphasize investment and long-term rela-
tionships. In other words, while technological leaders follow an innovation-based strat-
egy, technological followers adopt an investment-based strategy of growth.
   In this paper, we have proposed a model which accounts for this pattern, and also
evaluates the pros and cons of investment-based and innovation-based strategies. In our
economy, managers engage both in copying and adopting technologies from the world
frontier and in innovation activities. The selection of high-skill managers is more im-
portant for innovation activities. As the economy approaches the technology frontier,
selection becomes more important. As a result, countries that are far away from the tech-
nology frontier pursue an investment-based strategy, with long-term relationships, high
average size and age of firms, large average investments, but little selection. Closer to
the technology frontier, there is less room for copying and adoption of well-established
technologies, and consequently, there is an equilibrium switch to an innovation-based
strategy with short-term relationships, younger firms, less investment and better selec-
tion of managers.
   The sequence of investment-based strategy followed by an innovation-based strategy
is not only a feature of the equilibrium, but also of the socially-planned economy. How-
ever, societies may switch out of the investment-based strategy too soon or too late.
A standard appropriability eﬀect, resulting from the fact that firms do not internalize
the greater consumer surplus they create by investing more, makes the switch too soon.
Whereas the presence of retained earnings that incumbent managers can use to shield
themselves from competition makes the investment-based strategy persist for too long.
When the switch is too soon, government intervention in the form of policies limit-
ing product market competition or providing subsidies to existing firms may be useful
because they encourage the investment-based strategy.
   Equally interesting, we find that retained earnings may shield insiders so much that
some societies may never switch out of the investment-based strategy, and these societies
never converge to the world technology frontier. The reason is that they fail to take
advantage of the innovation opportunities that require managerial selection. This means
that policies encouraging investment-based strategies might also lead to non-convergence
traps.


                                           41
   The optimal policy sequence for economic growth is therefore a set of policies en-
couraging investment and protecting insiders, such as anti-competitive policies at the
early stages of development, followed by more competitive policies. Such a sequence of
policies creates obvious political economy problems. Beneficiaries of existing policies can
bribe politicians to maintain these policies. Moreover, these groups, in our model the
capitalists, will be politically powerful precisely because they have economically bene-
fited from the less-competitive policies in place. Therefore, the model illustrates how a
well-meaning attempt to speed up convergence may lead to a political economy trap.
Interestingly, such traps are more likely when the underlying political institutions are
weak, making politicians easier to capture. In this context, the model also sheds some
light on the debate about whether government intervention should be more prevalent in
less developed countries. The answer suggested by the model is that, abstracting from
political economy considerations, there is a greater need for government intervention
when the economy is relatively backward. But unless political institutions are suﬃ-
ciently developed, or become developed in the process of economic growth, to impose
eﬀective constraints on politicians and elites, such government intervention may lead to
the capture of politicians by groups that benefit from government intervention, paving
the way for political economy traps.
   Even though much of the emphasis in this paper is on cross-country comparisons, the
same reasoning also extends to cross-industry comparisons. In particular, our analysis
suggests that the organization of firms and of production should be diﬀerent in industries
that are closer to the world technology frontier. More generally, cross-industry diﬀer-
ences in the internal organization of the firm and the type of equilibrium financial and
employment relationships, and the political economy implications of these diﬀerences,
constitute a very interesting, and relatively underexplored, area for future research.




                                            42
                                    References

 [1] Abernathy, William (1980) The Productivity Dilemma, Baltimore John Hopkins

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial
    Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Eco-
    nomic Review, vol. 91, 1369-1401.

 [3] Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (1997) “Was Prometheus Unbound by
    Chance? Risk Diversification and Growth.” Journal of Political Economy, vol.105,
    pp.709-51.

 [4] Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (1999) “Information Accumulation in De-
    velopment” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 4, pp. 5-38.

 [5] Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. (1992) “A Model of Growth Through Creative
    Destruction.” Econometrica, vol. 60, pp. 323-51.

 [6] Arrow, Kenneth (1974) The Limits of Organization, New York, Norton.

 [7] Bahk B. H. and Michael Gort (1993) “Decomposing learning by doing in new plants”
    Journal of Political Economy Vol 101, pp 561-583.

 [8] Barro, Robert and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1997) “”Technological Diﬀusion, Conver-
    gence and Growth” Journal of Economic Growth, 2, 1-26.

 [9] Benkard, Lenier (2000) “Learning and Forgetting: the Dynamics of Aircraft Pro-
    duction” American Economic Review, volume 90,1034-1054.

[10] Bond, Stephen and Meghir, Costas (1994) “Dynamic investment models and the
    firm’s financial policy”, Review of Economic Studies, 61, 197-222.

[11] Brezis Elise, Paul Krugman and Dani Tsiddon, (1994) “Leapfrogging International
    Competition: A Theory of Cycles and National Technological Leadership” Ameri-
    can Economic Review, volume 83,1211-1219.

[12] Carlin, Wendy and Colin Mayer, (2002), “Finance, Investment and Growth”, Mimeo
    University College London.

[13] Dewatripont, Mathias and Eric Maskin (1995) “Credit and Eﬃciency in Centralized
    and Decentralized Economies”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 62, No. 4., pp.
    541-555.

                                          43
[14] Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts and Larry Samuelson (1989) “The Growth and
    Failure of U.S. Manufacturing Plants” Quarterly Journal of Economics, volume
    104,671-698.

[15] Evans, Peter, (1998), Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation,
    Princeton University Press.

[16] Francois, Patrick and Joanne Roberts (2001), “Contracting Productivity Growth”
    CentER Working Paper No.35, Tilburg University.

[17] Freeman, Christopher (1982) The economics of industrial innovation, Cambridge,
    MA, MIT Press.

[18] Galor, Oded and Daniel Tsiddon (1997), “Technology, Mobility, and Growth”,
    American Economic Review, vol. 87, pp.363-382.

[19] Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962) Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective,
    Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.

[20] Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic,(1990), “Financial Development,
    Growth, and the Distribution of Income”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 98,
    No. 5, Part 1. pp. 1076-1107

[21] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, (1999), “Competing for Endorsements”,
    American Economic Review, vol.89, No. 3, pp.501-524

[22] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, (2001), Special Interest Politics, MIT
    Press, Cambridge MA and London UK

[23] Hassler, John and Jose V. Rodriguez Mora, (2000) “Intelligence, Social Mobility,
    and Growth”, American Economic Review vol. 90: pp. 888-908

[24] Hausmann, Ricardo and Dani Rodrik, (2002), “Economic Development As Self-
    Discovery”, Mimeo Harvard University.

[25] Hirsch, W. Z. (1952) “Manufacturing progress functions” Review of Economics and
    Statistics Vol 34, pp 143-155.

[26] Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap (2001) Corporate financing and governance in Japan
    : the road to the future, Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.


                                         44
[27] Howitt, Peter, (2000), “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Diﬀer-
    ences”, American Economic Review, vol. 90, pp. 829-46.

[28] Howitt, Peter and David Mayer (2002), “Technological Inovation, Implementation
    and Stagnation: A Schumpeterian Theory of Convergence Clubs”, Mimeo Brown
    University

[29] Johnson, Chalmers, (1982), MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Indus-
    trial Policy, 1925-75, Stanford University Press.

[30] Irwin, Douglas A. (2002) “Did Import Substitution Promote Growth in the Late
    Nineteenth Century?” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
    8751.

[31] Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter Klenow (1994) “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the
    Semiconductor Industry” Journal of Political Economy, volume 102, 1200-1227.

[32] King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, (1993), Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
    108, No. 3. pp. 717-737.

[33] Kong, David (2002) Crony Capitalism: Corruption and Development and South
    Korea and the Philippines, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

[34] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny
    (1998) “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political Economy, vol.106, No. 6, pp. 1113-
    55.

[35] Lieberman, M. B. (1984) “The learning curve and pricing curve in chemical process-
    ing industries” Rand Journal of Economics Vol 15, pp 213-28

[36] Martimort, David and Thierry Verdier (2001) “Monopolies life cycle, bureaucratiza-
    tion and Schumpeterian growth ”, London : Centre for Economic Policy Research.

[37] Nelson, Richard R. and Sidney G. Winter (1982) An Evolutionary Theory of Eco-
    nomic Change, Cambridge, MIT Press.

[38] Nunn, Nathan and Daniel Trefler, (2002) “The Political Economy of Tariﬀs and
    Growth”University of Toronto, mimeo.

[39] Ohashi, Hiroshi (2002) “Learning-by-Doing, Export Subsidies and Japanese Steel
    Miracle” University of British Columbia mimeo.

                                          45
[40] O’Rourke, Kevin (2000) “Tariﬀs and Growth in Late 19th-century” Economic Jour-
    nal, volume 110, 456-483.

[41] Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (1998) “Financial Dependence and
    Growth’, American Economic Review, vol. 88, pp. 559-586.

[42] Rosenberg, Nathan (1982) Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics, Cam-
    bridge, Cambridge University Press.

[43] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1999),The Grabbing Hand : Government
    Pathologies and Their Cures , Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA

[44] Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1995),Whither Socialism?, MIT Press. Cambridge, MA

[45] Tong, Jian and Chenggang Xu (2001) “Endogenous Financial Institutions, R&D
    Selection and Growth”, Mimeo London School of Economics.

[46] Vogel, Ezra F. (1991) The Four Little Dragons: the Spread of Industrialization in
    East Asia, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University press.

[47] Wade, Robert (1990) Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of
    Government in East Asian Industrialization, Princeton, Princeton University Press.




                                          46
7.1     Appendix A: determination of µ

Since ar (µ = 0, δ) < â, the incentive compatibility of the old unsuccessful starts binding
before the incentive compatibility of the young employed in old firms. The condition for
the incentive compatibility of the old unsuccessful to bind is:
                                                                    α
                            µδLη Āt−1 > (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α At = wt                         (39)

where the wage, wt , depends, through At , on Rt ∈ {0, 1}.
      If Rt = 1, then (39) reads (after dividing both terms of the inequality by Āt−1 ):
                                                       α   1+σ
                        µδLη > (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α              (η + λγat−1 )
                                                            2
      If Rt = 0, then (39) reads
                         α 1
  µδLη > (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α ((λ + σ + (1 − λ) σ) η + (1 + σ + (1 − λ) σ) λγat−1 ) (40)
                           2
      These two equations define, respectively, the following thresholds
                                                                    α
                                   µδL − (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α 1+σ
                                                             2
                      aR=1 =                                 α           η
                                    λγ (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α 1+σ
                                                           2
                                                                    α
                                   µδL − (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α (λ+σ+(1−λ)σ)
                                                                 2
                      aR=0 =                                    α                 η
                                     λγ (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α (1+σ+(1−λ)σ)
                                                                2

      The incentive compatibility constraints do not bind as long as ar (µ = 0, δ) > max{aR=1 , aR=0 },
in which case the allocation is as in the case where µ = 0. Since ar (µ = 0, δ) < â, then
aR=1 > aR=0 . The threshold µ is therefore given by equating ar (µ = 0, δ) = aR=1 . This
yields
                                             α
                   µδL − (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α 1+σ
                                             2
                                                                            κ
                                                       (1 − σ) η − (1 − φ) δL
                                         α          η=
                     λγ (1 − α) α−1 χ− 1−α 1+σ
                                            2
                                                                σλγ
and, solving                                                Ã                     !
                                           −α                   δL − κη (1 − φ)
                       µ = (1 − α) α−1 χ   1+α   (1 + σ)
                                                                        2σ
Note that, when µ < µ, the incentive compatibility condition of the experienced man-
agers may bind at some low levels of at−1 such that at−1 < ar (µ = 0, δ) . But this has no
eﬀect on the refinancing decision nor on the determination of the threshold ar (µ = 0, δ),
since when the economy approaches the relevant threshold all incentive compatibility
conditions are slack.


                                                  47
7.2    Appendix B: Details with more general costs

In this appendix, we briefly generalize the results to the case when investment costs
take the form kt (ν) = κĀρt−1 A1−ρ                                            ρ    1−ρ
                                t−1 for experienced managers, and kt (ν) = κφĀt−1 At−1
for all others. It is clear that this modification does not aﬀect the growth maximizing
threshold, â. The comparison in the case of no moral hazard changes simply to:

                       δLη − κa1−ρ                            1−ρ
                               t−1 vs. δσL (η + λγat−1 ) − φκat−1 .


Equating these two terms, we obtain a new equation defining ar (µ = 0, δ):

         δLη − κar (µ = 0, δ)1−ρ = δσL (η + λγar (µ = 0, δ)) − φκar (µ = 0, δ)1−ρ .

Although this equation has no closed-form solution, ar (µ = 0, δ) has exactly the same
comparative statics as (17) in the text. It is also straightforward to verify that ar (µ = 0, δ) <
â.
      The analysis of the case with moral hazard is similar, and defines an equilibrium
cutoﬀ parallel to ar (µ, δ) given by (23). Condition (20), which ensures that retained
earnings are not suﬃcient to pay to full cost of the project, now is somewhat more
complicated, and requires
                              1+r
                                  µδLση < κ (ar (µ, δ))1−ρ .
                              1+g

Given this assumption, ar (µ, δ) is a solution to the equation:
                                 1+r
(1 − µ) δLη−κ (ar (µ, δ))1−ρ −       µδLση = (1 − µ) δLσ (η + λγar (µ, δ))−φκ (ar (µ, δ))1−ρ ,
                                 1+g

and has the same comparative statics as ar (µ, δ) in (23). In particular, it is monotoni-
cally increasing in δ, and may be increasing or decreasing in µ. As in the text, because
of the rents created by moral hazard, ar (µ, δ) can be larger than â. The results about
non-convergence traps immediately generalize to this case




                                             48
                        FIGURE 1

                   LOW COMPETITION

0                            ^a        ar   1



    RANGE OF GROWTH-REDUCING
    REFINANCING




                    HIGH COMPETITION

    0              ar             ^a            1



        RANGE OF GROWTH-REDUCING
        TERMINATION
                  FIGURE 2
                                          O
                                     45
at
                           R=0




     R=1




       ang                       1
                                              at-1
             ^a    atrap
                                 if R=0
                                 if R=1
                               FIGURE 3




  BRIBES            YES            NO        YES         NO



COMPETITION         LOW           LOW        LOW         HIGH




           0   a0         aH    ar(µ,δ)
                                     _ awm         aL           1



                                RANGE WHERE THE HONEST
                                POLITICIAN CHOOSES LOW
                                COMPETITION
                FIGURE 4
                                       O
                                  45
at

                       R=0




     R=1




           ^                               at-1
           a   atrap         aL   1
