                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MANAGERIAL POWER AND RENT EXTRACTION
                         IN THE DESIGN OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION


                                               Lucian Arye Bebchuk
                                                  Jesse M. Fried
                                                 David I. Walker


                                               Working Paper 9068
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w9068


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          July 2002

A substantially different version of this paper was circulated earlier under the title “Executive Compensation in America:
Optimal Contracting or Extraction of Rents?” We have benefited from the valuable suggestions of various individuals,
including Franklin Ballotti, Lisa Bernstein, Victor Brudney, Brian Cheffins, Steve Choi, Mel Eisenberg, Charles Elson,
Allen Ferrell, Jeff Gordon, Assaf Hamdani, Sharon Hannes, Henry Hansmann, Marcel Kahan, Louis Kaplow, Reinier
Kraakman, Michael Levine, Saul Levmore, Kevin Murphy, Richard Painter, Mark Roe, David Schizer, Steve Shavell,
Eric Talley, Randall Thomas, Detlev Vagts, Michael Wachter, Ivo Welch, David Yermack and participants in two
Harvard seminars, the American Association of Law Schools Business Law Panel on Executive Compensation, and the
University of Chicago Law Review Symposium on Management and Control of the Modern Business Corporation.
Nicholas Hecker, Matthew Heyn, Ryan Kantor, Jason Knott, Matthew McDermott, and Selena Medlen provided
excellent research assistance. For financial support, we wish to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business at Harvard Law School, the Berkeley Committee on Research, and the Boalt Hall Fund. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Jesse M. Fried and David I. Walker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Managerial Power and Rent Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation
Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Jesse M. Fried and David I. Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 9068
July 2002
JEL No. D23, G32, G34, G38, J33, J44, K22, M14



                                            ABSTRACT

        This paper develops an account of the role and significance of managerial power and rent
extraction in executive compensation. Under the optimal contracting approach to executive
compensation, which has dominated academic re-search on the subject, pay arrangements are set by a
board of directors that aims to maximize shareholder value. In contrast, the managerial power approach
suggests that boards do not operate at arm's length in devising executive compensation arrangements;
rather, executives have power to influence their own pay, and they use that power to extract rents.
Furthermore, the desire to camouflage rent extraction might lead to the use of inefficient pay
arrangements that provide suboptimal incentives and thereby hurt shareholder value. The authors show
that the processes that produce compensation arrangements, and the various market forces and constraints
that act on these processes, leave managers with considerable power to shape their own pay arrangements.
Examining the large body of empirical work on executive compensation, the authors show that
managerial power and the desire to camouflage rents can explain significant features of the executive
compensation landscape, including ones that have long been viewed as puzzling or problematic from the
optimal contracting perspective. The authors conclude that the role managerial power plays in the design
of executive compensation is significant and should be taken into account in any examination of
executive pay arrangements or of corporate governance generally.




Lucian Arye Bebchuk             Jesse M. Fried                          David I. Walker
Harvard Law School              Boalt Hall School of Law                School of Law
1557 Massachusetts Avenue       University of California, Berkeley      Boston University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
                                               TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................1

I. THE OPTIMAL CONTRACTING APPROACH AND ITS LIMITATIONS ..............................9

        A. The Optimal Contracting Approach.........................................................10
              1.     Inducing the Executive to Take and Retain the Position ................................. 10
              2.     Incentives to Manage Well ............................................................................... 11
              3.     Costs ................................................................................................................. 12
        B. The Limitations of the Optimal Contracting Approach ........................12
              1.     Limitations of the Arm’s Length Model of Boards ........................................... 13
              2.     Limitations on the power of market forces........................................................ 23
              3.     Limitations on the Power of Shareholders ........................................................ 28

II. THE MANAGERIAL POWER APPROACH ....................................................................33

        A.    Managerial Power and the Extraction of Rents ......................................33
        B.    “Outrage” Costs and Constraints .............................................................36
        C.    The Critical Role of “Camouflage” ...........................................................38
        D.    Compensation Consultants and Camouflage .........................................39
        E.    The Design of Stock Option Plans: The Devil Is in the Details.............41
        F.    A Note on Conforming to Norms .............................................................43

III. EVIDENCE BETTER EXPLAINED BY THE MANAGERIAL POWER APPROACH ...........45

        A. Rewarding Executives for General Market Rises ...................................46
              1.     The Suboptimality of Rewarding Managers for Market Rises ......................... 47
              2.     Alternative ways of designing reduced-windfall options ................................. 48
              3.     The Rare Use of Reduced-Windfall Options .................................................... 51
              4.     Is there an Adequate Optimal Contracting Explanation? ............................... 53
              5.     Accounting Considerations .............................................................................. 60
              6.     The Managerial Power Explanation................................................................. 62
              7.     Is Non-Option Compensation Adjusted to Reduce Windfalls? ....................... 65
        B. Near-Uniform Use of At-the-Money Options .........................................67
              1.     The Puzzle of One-Size-Fits-All....................................................................... 67
              2.     The Managerial Power Explanation................................................................. 70
        C. Resetting of Option Exercise Prices ..........................................................72
              1.     The Resetting Puzzle ........................................................................................ 72
              2.     The Managerial Power Explanation................................................................. 74
        D. Executives’ Broad Freedom to Unwind Incentives ................................75
              1.     Freedom to Determine the Amount of Unwinding. ......................................... 76
              2.     Freedom to Determine the Time of Unwinding ............................................... 79
        E. Reload Options ............................................................................................82
        F. Gratuitous Acquisition-Related Payments ..............................................85
        G. Differences between Executives with More and Less Power ...............88
              1.     Relationship between Power and Pay............................................................... 88
              2.     Inferences and Objections................................................................................. 92
        H. Differences between U.S. and Non-U.S. Companies..............................94

CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................97
                                     INTRODUCTION

    Executive compensation has long attracted a great deal of attention from
academics, the media, Congress, and the public at large. During the ex-
tended bull market of the 1990s, stock option programs adopted by public
companies yielded unprecedented gains for senior executives.1 These gains
were accompanied by a parallel rise in academic work on the subject.2 In-
deed, it appears that the rate of growth in such academic work has outpaced
even the growth rate of executive compensation. 3
    This paper questions the dominant approach in the academic work on
executive compensation. It also seeks to put forward a systematic and com-
prehensive account of an alternative approach to the study of executive
compensation—the “managerial power approach”—that focuses on the role
of managerial power in shaping executive compensation practices. The sub-
stantial influence of managerial power on executive compensation, we ar-
gue, is suggested both by a realistic analysis of the processes that produce
executive pay and by an examination of the substantial body of empirical
evidence on the subject.
    The dominant approach to the study of executive compensation among
academics has for some time been what we call “the optimal contracting ap-
proach.”4 Under this approach, executive compensation practices in large,

   1 The median compensation of S&P 500 CEOs increased by approximately 150 percent
from 1992 to 1998, and option-based compensation provided the largest share of the gains.
See Tod Perry and Marc Zenner, CEO Compensation in the 1990s: Shareholder Alignment or
Shareholder Expropriation? 35 Wake Forest L Rev 123, 145 (2000).
   2 Recent surveys of this voluminous literature include Perry and Zenner, supra note 1;
John M. Abowd and David S. Kaplan, Executive Compensation: Six Questions that Need An-
swering, 13 J Econ Perspectives 145 (1999); and Kevin J. Murphy, Executive Compensation, in
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics 2485 (Elsevier 1999). A
noteworthy survey from an earlier era is Michael C. Jensen and Jerold L. Zimmerman,
Management Compensation and the Managerial Labor Market, 7 J Acct & Econ 3 (1985).
   3 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 2487. He demonstrates graphically that the increase in
academic papers on the subject of CEO pay outpaced the increase in total CEO pay during
the late 1980s and early 1990s.
   4 This is the leading view among financial economists, who have done most of the
scholarship in this area. Indeed, as we discuss later in the paper, there is a large body of
work in financial economics that seeks to come up with an explanation, within an optimal
contracting framework, for almost every feature of the executive compensation landscape.
The optimal contracting view is also taken by an important line of legal scholarship. See,
for example, Frank H. Easterbrook, Managers’ Discretion and Investors’ Welfare: Theories and
Evidence, 9 Del J Corp L 540 (1984); Daniel R. Fischel, The Corporate Governance Movement, 35
Vand L Rev 1259 (1982); Nicholas Wolfson, A Critique of Corporate Law, 34 U Miami L Rev
959 (1980); Robert Thomas, Is Corporate Executive Compensation Excessive?, in M. Bruce John-



                                             1
publicly traded companies are viewed as designed to minimize the agency
costs that exist between senior executives (the agents) and shareholders (the
principals). The board is viewed as seeking to maximize shareholder value,
with the compensation scheme being designed to serve this objective. Finan-
cial economists, both theorists and empiricists, have largely worked within
this model in attempting to explain the various features of executive com-
pensation arrangements as well as the cross-sectional variation in compensa-
tion practices among firms.
     We seek to contrast this optimal contracting approach to the study of ex-
ecutive compensation with an approach that we label “the managerial
power approach.” Analysis from this perspective focuses on the ability of
executives to influence their own compensation schemes. According to the
considered approach, compensation arrangements approved by boards of-
ten deviate from optimal contracting because directors are captured or sub-
ject to influence by management, sympathetic to management, or simply in-
effectual in overseeing compensation. As a result of such deviations from
optimal contracting, executives can receive pay in excess of the level that
would be optimal for shareholders; this excess pay constitutes rents.5 More
importantly, to camouflage or facilitate the extraction of rents, managerial
power can lead to the use of inefficient pay structures that weaken or distort
incentives and that thus, in turn, further reduce shareholder value. Although
recognition of the role of managerial power lies at the heart of much of the
public criticism of compensation levels and practices, this role has attracted
relatively little attention and analysis in the academic literature.6

son, ed, The Attack on Corporate America 276 (McGraw Hill 1978).
   5 Executives can extract rents in ways other than through their executive compensa-
tion arrangements. See, for example, Lucian A. Bebchuk and Christine Jolls, Managerial
Value Diversion and Shareholder Wealth, 15 J L, Econ, & Org 487, 487–90 (1999) (analyzing the
costs of permitting managers to extract value other than through their formal compensa-
tion arrangements); Jesse M. Fried, Reducing the Profitability of Corporate Insider Trading
through Pretrading Disclosure, 71 S Cal L Rev 303, 348–64 (1998) (explaining how corporate
insiders continue to be able under existing rules to make profits from trading on inside in-
formation); Jesse M. Fried, Insider Signaling and Insider Trading with Repurchase Tender Offers,
67 U Chi L Rev 421, 453–70 (2000) (showing that managers are likely to use repurchase ten-
der offers to engage in insider trading). It would be possible, of course, to define compensa-
tion schemes as including benefits that managers obtain in any way as a result of their posi-
tion, including benefits from insider trading, the taking of corporate opportunities, and so
forth. In this paper, however, our focus is solely on the benefits that executives get and the
rents they extract from arrangements that are formally defined and ordinarily viewed as
compensation.
   6 Many practitioners, investors, shareholder activists, and media commentators have
expressed views that are close to the view we put forward more systematically in this
work. See, for example, Graef S. Crystal, In Search of Excess (Norton 1991); Shawn Tully,



                                               2
    Although the managerial power approach is conceptually quite different
from the optimal contracting approach, the former is not proposed as a
complete replacement for the latter. One can take the view that compensa-
tion arrangements are shaped both by managerial power and by what
would be optimal. The managerial power approach merely implies that
compensation practices cannot be adequately explained by optimal contract-
ing alone. Rather, practices might be adopted that deviate significantly from
those suggested by optimal contracting. Under the managerial power ap-
proach, compensation practices can be fully understood only with careful at-
tention to the role of managerial power.
    Our analysis indicates that managerial power and rent extraction are in-
deed likely to play a significant role in executive compensation in the United
States. At the level of theory, we argue that a realistic analysis of the com-
pensation-setting process indicates that its outcomes are likely to be much
influenced by managerial power and by managers’ interest in extracting
rents. As an empirical matter, we argue that the extensive empirical evi-
dence on executive compensation is consistent with the predictions of the
managerial power approach. Indeed, this approach can better explain cer-
tain significant features of the executive compensation landscape, including
ones that have been long regarded as puzzling.
    Part I begins by providing an account of the standard optimal contract-
ing approach, and it then provides a detailed analysis of the limitations and


Raising the Bar, Fortune 272 (June 8, 1998) (reporting some of Warren Buffett’s views on ex-
ecutive compensation); Robert A.G. Monks and Nell Minow, Corporate Governance, 221–25
(2d ed Blackwell Business 2001).
   Although academics commonly hold what we have called the “optimal contracting”
view, see note 4, there is some academic work that is close in spirit to ours. A number of le-
gal scholars have been skeptical about claims that executive compensation arrangements
are designed to maximize shareholder value. See, for example, Linda J. Barris, The Over-
compensation Problem: A Collective Approach to Controlling Executive Pay, 68 Ind L J 59 (1992);
Mark J. Loewenstein, Reflections on Executive Compensation and a Modest Proposal for (Further)
Reform, 50 SMU L Rev 201 (1996); Detlev Vagts, Challenges to Executive Compensation: For the
Markets or the Courts?, 8 J Corp L 231 (1983); Carl T. Bogus, Excessive Executive Compensation
and the Failure of Corporate Democracy, 41 Buff L Rev 1 (1993); Charles M. Yablon, Bonus
Questions—Executive Compensation in the Era of Pay for Performance, 75 Notre Dame L Rev
271 (1999). And several empirical papers by financial economists have recently suggested
that some of their findings are consistent with, or indicative of, “appropriation” or “skim-
ming” by executives. Part III discusses such studies by Bertrand and Mullainathan; Benz,
Kucher, and Stutzer; Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer; and Yermack. No work,
however, has thus far attempted to put forward a full account of a managerial power ap-
proach—including both a theoretical framework for such an approach and an examination
using this approach of the large body of empirical evidence on executive compensation—as
we aim to do in this paper.



                                              3
shortcomings of this approach. Optimal compensation contracts could result
from effective arm’s length bargaining between the board and the execu-
tives, from market constraints that induce players to adopt such contracts
even in the absence of arm’s length bargaining, or from shareholders’ ability
to directly shape executive compensation arrangements. Our analysis indi-
cates that none of these forces can be expected to constrain executive com-
pensation effectively. Bargaining with the board is in fact far from arm’s
length. Market forces are not sufficiently strong and fine-tuned to eliminate
substantial deviations from optimal contracting. And shareholders have lit-
tle practical ability to prevent such deviations.
     After analyzing the shortcomings of the optimal contracting approach,
we turn in Part II to providing an account of the managerial power ap-
proach. The very reasons for questioning optimal contracting’s ability to ex-
plain adequately compensation practices also suggest that executives will
have substantial influence over their own pay. These reasons also suggest
that the greater managers’ power, the greater their ability to influence pay
and to extract rents.
     One important building block of the managerial power approach is that
of “outrage” costs and constraints. That executives can exert influence on
their pay does not imply that there are no constraints on their ability to do
so. Although the need for board approval and the presence of market forces
cannot be expected to produce compensation arrangements consistent with
optimal contracting, they can and commonly do provide some constraints.
The tightness of these constraints depends, in part, on the outrage that a par-
ticular compensation arrangement is expected to generate. Outrage can be
costly to directors and managers by causing embarrassment or reputational
harm, as well as by reducing the willingness of shareholders to support in-
cumbents in control contests. The more outrage a compensation arrange-
ment is expected to generate, the more reluctant directors will be to approve
the arrangement, and the more hesitant managers will be to propose it in the
first instance. Thus, whether a compensation arrangement that is favorable
to executives but suboptimal for shareholders is adopted will depend on
how the arrangement is perceived by outsiders and, in particular, on how
much outrage (if any) it is expected to produce.
     The potential significance of outrage costs explains the importance of
“camouflage,” yet another building block of the managerial power ap-
proach. Because outrage resulting from outsiders’ recognition of the pres-
ence of rent extraction provides a possible check on managers’ power to ex-
tract rent, managers have an incentive to obscure and legitimize—or, more
generally, to camouflage—their extraction of rents. Indeed, the extensive use
of compensation consultants, which might be viewed as an attempt to opti-



                                       4
mize incentives under the optimal contracting approach, can itself be seen as
a means of justifying and legitimizing pay under the managerial power ap-
proach. This concept of camouflage will turn out to be quite useful in ex-
plaining many of the patterns and puzzles provided by the executive com-
pensation landscape.
     The desire to camouflage might lead to the adoption of inefficient com-
pensation structures that, compared with optimal contracting arrangements,
fail to provide desirable incentives, or even supply perverse incentives. In
our view, the reduction in shareholder value caused by these inefficiencies,
rather than the excess rent captured by managers, might well be the biggest
cost arising from the influence of managerial power on compensation prac-
tices. Thus, improvement in this area may provide considerable benefits to
shareholders from better managerial incentives and performance.
     Part III identifies and discusses a significant number of compensation
practices and patterns that can be explained by the managerial power ap-
proach and that suggest that managerial power influences pay. Some of the
practices and features that we analyze in this Part are ones that have long
been regarded as puzzles by researchers working within the optimal con-
tracting approach.
     We first turn to firms’ failure to use option schemes that filter out stock
price rises that are due largely to industry and general market trends and
thus are unrelated to the managers’ performance. Such filtering could be
done by using what we call “reduced-windfall” options—options designed
to reduce executives’ ability to make gains unrelated to their managerial per-
formance. Such options could be designed using indexing, benchmarking, or
some other feature that has a similar effect.
     When option compensation is based on changes in the absolute share
price, even poorly performing managers might make significant profits. The
substantial compensation dollars that are currently spent on rewarding
managers for general market rises could be either used to enhance incentives
(by, for example, giving managers a larger number of reduced-windfall op-
tions) or saved. As we show, the almost complete absence of any form of re-
duced-windfall options is rather difficult to explain from an optimal con-
tracting approach. We explore a number of alternative ways to filter out
general market and sector rises, and we show how unlikely it is that not us-
ing any form of filtering is generally optimal.
     The absence of any filtering of general market or industry effects is not
puzzling, however, under the managerial power approach. Under this ap-
proach, compensation schemes are designed with an eye to benefiting execu-
tives while reducing outrage costs by staying within the range of legitimacy
and acceptability. Given that the use of conventional options is well estab-



                                       5
lished and generally considered a legitimate form of compensation, and that
indexing or benchmarking is likely to be costly or inconvenient for manag-
ers, the lack of any real movement toward reduced-windfall options is con-
sistent with the managerial power approach.
     Part III next considers the nearly uniform use of at-the-money options.
An optimally designed option scheme would seek to provide risk-averse
managers with the strongest cost-effective incentives to exert effort and
make value-maximizing decisions. The optimal exercise price under such a
scheme should depend on a multitude of factors that are likely to vary from
executive to executive, from company to company, and from time to time.
Such factors might include the degree of managerial risk aversion (which in
turn might be affected by the manager’s age and wealth), the project choices
available to the company, the volatility of the company’s stock, the expected
rate of inflation, and the length of the executive’s contract, among other
things. There is no reason to expect that the same exercise price formula
would be optimal for all executives at all firms in all industries at all times.
The fact that options are almost uniformly issued at-the-money is thus
rather difficult to explain from an optimal contracting perspective.
     The uniform use of at-the-money options is not puzzling, however,
when examined under the managerial power approach. Given that execu-
tives benefit from lower exercise prices, there will be a desire to push exer-
cise prices as far down as is possible without generating too much outrage.
There is thus little reason for designers of plans to award out-of-the-money
options—that is, to raise the exercise prices above the market price at the
time the options are issued—given that some justification is available for at-
the-money options. On the other hand, in-the-money options might be re-
garded as a windfall and thereby generate outrage costs. Furthermore, the
grant of in-the-money options would trigger a charge to accounting earn-
ings, and this might undermine one of the excuses for not using reduced-
windfall options—that the use of such options would give rise to an ac-
counting charge. Because in-the-money options might thus be difficult or
costly for managers to obtain, and at-the-money options are the ones most
favorable to managers within the remaining range of possibilities, a uniform
use of at-the-money options is quite consistent with the managerial power
approach.
     Another problem for the optimal contracting approach—and one that
has been little noticed by researchers despite its importance— concerns man-
agers’ widespread freedom to undo the financial incentives provided to
them by their compensation arrangements. Under optimal contracting,
when value is spent on providing managers with incentives, it might well be




                                       6
desirable to place substantial limits on managers’ freedom to unwind them.
But existing practice fails to do so.
     Stock options generally vest only after a specified period, which ensures
that the executive cannot walk out with the underlying shares without first
serving the company for the specified period. Although an executive be-
comes entitled to the awarded options once their vesting period is over, the
compensation contract could preclude the executive from “cashing out” the
vested options—that is, from exercising the options and then selling the ac-
quired shares. Such a limitation would maintain incentives for an additional
period and thus avoid the need to grant new options to replace the ones that
have been cashed out. There is no reason to expect that optimal contracts
would generally make the vesting date and the cash-out date the same. Yet,
the two dates are almost always the same.
     An optimal contract also might prohibit managers receiving an option
grant from weakening (if not eliminating) the incentive effects of the option
grant by selling an equivalent number of shares they already own. Standard
practice fails to do so, however, and executives receiving new options often
respond by heavily selling already-owned shares. Contracts generally also
do not prohibit executives from hedging vested or even unvested options,
and executives often hedge their exposure to the firm when disposal is either
not possible or too costly from a tax perspective.
     Furthermore, even if it were optimal in some cases to grant an executive
broad freedom to cash out and unwind incentives in order to serve the ex-
ecutive’s liquidity or diversification needs, there would be little reason to
give the executive unrestricted control over the timing of stock sales. Liquid-
ity and diversification needs hardly call for permitting the executive to cash
out positions on any given day that the executive chooses. Although some
firms use “trading windows,” many firms place no limits on the freedom of
executives to time the cashing out or hedging of their equity positions. The
evidence indicates that executives’ freedom to engage in such timing, cou-
pled with inside information, enables executives to make substantial trading
profits (at the expense of public shareholders).
     The lack of restrictions on the amount and timing of stock selling, while
difficult to explain from an optimal contracting perspective, is easily ex-
plained under the managerial power approach. Under this approach, the de-
sign of compensation plans is partly influenced by managerial power.
Avoiding such restrictions on unwinding benefits managers and does so in a
way that thus far has been largely under the radar screen.
     Part III also examines the phenomena of option repricing and reloadable
options. Repricing refers to the lowering of the options’ strike price when
the stock price falls below the original exercise price. The possibility that the



                                        7
exercise price will be lowered ex post if the stock price declines dilutes ex
ante incentives. To be sure, such downward repricing can, in theory, be use-
ful for retaining and providing incentives to good managers when the stock
price falls for reasons beyond managers’ control. However, indexing would
also solve the incentive problem that arises when the market price falls
much below the exercise price of the options due to a general market or sec-
tor decline. The lack of indexing on the upside and the use of repricing on
the downside ensures that managers receive both the full value of stock
price increases that are due to market or sector rises and protection against
market and sector declines on the downside.
     Reloadable option plans are plans under which an executive who exer-
cises options pays the exercise price by handing over firm shares that he al-
ready owns, and receives a new option for each share tendered with the
same expiration date as the old options being exercised. These plans allow
executives to profit from share price volatility even if the long-term share
performance is flat. The only possible justification that can be given for re-
loadable options is that—given executives’ freedom to unwind incentives—
it might be desirable to have a mechanism that will replenish those incen-
tives. But this problem could have been, of course, more easily and effec-
tively addressed by placing limits on executives’ freedom to unwind incen-
tives. The puzzling combination of freedom to unwind incentives and re-
loading options aimed to correct it, we argue, can best be explained under
the managerial power approach.
     Another significant practice examined by Part III is that of “gratuitous”
acquisition-related payments. CEOs of acquired firms in many cases receive
payments from their firm or the acquiring firm that are “gratuitous” in that
they are not required under the terms of the CEO’s compensation contract
(including the golden parachute, if any). These payments take a number of
different forms, including increases in the contractual golden parachute pay-
out and separate cash payments. Such gratuitous payments, we show, are
much more difficult to explain under the optimal contracting approach than
under the managerial power approach.
     Finally, and importantly, we show in Part III that the managerial power
approach can help explain cross-company as well as cross-country differ-
ences in executive pay. The managerial power approach predicts that man-
agers will be paid more in firms in which they have relatively more power.
This prediction, we show, is confirmed by empirical studies. Surveying the
empirical literature on CEO compensation in the U.S., we find that pay is
higher in firms where the CEO is more powerful vis-à-vis the board, in firms
with antitakeover provisions that protect incumbents from hostile takeovers,
in firms with a smaller institutional investor presence, and in firms where



                                      8
there is no large outside shareholder. We also explain how the managerial
power approach can shed light on differences in pay between U.S. and non-
U.S. companies.
    The conclusion that managerial power and rent extraction play a signifi-
cant role in executive compensation has important implications for the
study, regulation, and practice of corporate governance. We plan to explore
fully these implications in subsequent work. Here, however, we focus on a
prior and important step: to put forward a systematic framework for the
study of this subject and, furthermore, to show that the evidence supports
the view that managerial power and rent extraction play an important role
in executive compensation.

        I. THE OPTIMAL CONTRACTING APPROACH AND ITS LIMITATIONS

     Our analysis focuses on public companies that lack a controlling share-
holder. Managers of these companies have substantial power and discretion
but generally own only a small fraction of the firm’s equity.7 The interests of
the shareholder-principals and manager-agents are not perfectly convergent,
and thus there exists an agency problem. The two approaches to the study of
executive compensation that we discuss both start with the recognition that
there is an agency problem, but they take that recognition in different direc-
tions. This Part discusses the approach that is more conventional among aca-
demics: that executive compensation arrangements can generally best be
understood as instruments that the board uses in the shareholders’ interest
to address the agency problem.
     Part I.A describes the optimal contracting approach to executive com-
pensation. In Part I.B, we discuss the limitations and shortcomings of this
approach. An optimal principal-agent contract would generally be chosen if
(i) the board were bargaining with the executives at arm’s length; (ii) the di-
rectors or executives were constrained by market forces from deviating from
optimal compensation contracts; or (iii) shareholders could use the courts or
another mechanism to force managers to adopt compensation contracts that
maximize shareholder value. We argue in Part I.B that none of these propo-
sitions commonly holds, and thus there are reasons to doubt whether the
optimal contracting approach can fully or even largely explain the executive
compensation landscape.



    7 In 1996, for example, CEOs of S&P 500 manufacturing companies owned an average
of fewer than 1 percent of their firms’ shares, while median ownership was only 0.11 per-
cent. See Murphy, supra note 2, at 2490–93.



                                           9
                        A. The Optimal Contracting Approach

    There is no contract that would perfectly align the interests of managers
and shareholders. The optimal contract is therefore the one that minimizes
agency costs (that is, the sum of contracting costs, monitoring costs, other
costs incurred in achieving a certain level of compliance with the principal’s
interest) and the costs of the residual divergence.8 Under the optimal con-
tracting approach, this is exactly what executive compensation packages are
designed to do. The board, attempting to maximize shareholder wealth,
seeks to establish optimal incentives for the executives. This approach is cap-
tured in various formal models that view the board of directors as selecting
an optimal compensation program for shareholders. As we will discuss, a
great deal of empirical work has been done from this perspective.
    The designer attempting to optimize an executive compensation pro-
gram would be concerned with: (1) attracting and retaining high quality ex-
ecutives, (2) providing executives with incentives to exert sufficient effort
and to make decisions that serve shareholders’ interests, and (3) minimizing
overall costs. We will consider briefly these elements of an optimal contract.

1. Inducing the Executive to Take and Retain the Position

    A successful CEO of a large public company undoubtedly possesses a
rare combination of skills and instincts. The CEO must manage an organiza-
tion with a large number of employees, provide the strategic direction for
the firm, and decide when or whether the company should acquire other
firms or be acquired. Individuals who possess the necessary attributes might
be scarce9 and competition among firms, particularly for rising stars, might
be intense. Of course, compensation is not the only factor in attracting and



   8 A thorough review of the optimal contracting literature is beyond the scope of this
paper. Important works on the subject include Stephen A. Ross, The Economic Theory of
Agency: The Principal’s Problem, 63 Am Econ Rev 134 (1973); J.A. Mirrlees, The Optimal Struc-
ture of Incentives and Authority within an Organization, 7 Bell J Econ 105 (1976); Bengt Holm-
strom, Moral Hazard and Observability, 10 Bell J Econ 74 (1979); Steven Shavell, Risk Sharing
and Incentives in the Principal and Agent Relationship, 10 Bell J Econ 55 (1979); Bengt Holm-
strom, Moral Hazard in Teams, 13 Bell J Econ 324 (1982); Sanford J. Grossman and Oliver D.
Hart, An Analysis of the Principal-Agent Problem, 51 Econometrica 7 (1983); and Dilip Mook-
herjee, Optimal Incentive Schemes with Many Agents, 51 Rev Econ Stud 433 (1984).
   9 See Charles P. Himmelberg and R.G. Hubbard, Incentive Pay and the Market for CEO’s:
An Analysis of Pay-for-Performance Sensitivity at 20, working paper (1999), available online at
<http//:www.columbia.edu/~cph15/> (arguing that there is not an unlimited supply of
CEOs who are able to run large companies).



                                              10
retaining talent at the very top of the corporate pyramid, but it is an impor-
tant one.
    To induce an executive to take and retain a position, then, a firm must
offer an overall package of benefits that meets or exceeds the executive’s op-
portunity cost. Call this opportunity cost the executive’s “reservation value.”
An executive’s reservation value is in part a function of her appetite for risk.
A firm that requires a risk-averse executive to accept risky elements of com-
pensation will have to provide more total compensation on an expected
value basis to offset risk-bearing costs. For example, if a CEO candidate cur-
rently works for a firm that pays her a cash salary of $500,000, another firm
wishing to hire her and pay her in part with options will have to provide
her—if she is risk-averse—compensation with an expected value greater
than $500,000.
    Under the optimal contracting approach, inducing the executive to take
and retain a position only provides a lower bound on compensation. A firm
cannot pay less than the executive’s reservation value, but it might wish to
pay more in order to provide better incentives.

2. Incentives to Manage Well

     There are two dimensions to the executive incentive problem. A firm
must provide incentives that induce the executive to expend effort as well as
incentives that motivate the executive to make decisions that advance share-
holders’ interests.
     As in any agency relationship, there is the risk that the agent will ex-
pend too little effort on the principal’s behalf. That is, executives might have
an incentive to work less than is optimal for shareholders as a group. This
distortion arises because executives enjoy all of the benefits of their leisure
time (or other non-work activities) but capture only a fraction of the value
their work generates for the firm.
     The second agency problem in most public companies is that executives
might make decisions that maximize their own utility but that fail to maxi-
mize shareholder value. Such decisions might include the erection of lavish
office buildings to house corporate staff or other excessive perquisite con-
sumption; the selection of low-risk business strategies; attempts to block
value-adding takeover attempts; the failure to reorganize and reduce the
scope of operations when downsizing is called for; and the refusal to fire an
incompetent subordinate because he is a close friend. The variety of critical
decisions that may be faced by a CEO is extremely large, and the compensa-
tion device that properly aligns incentives in one case may be less effective
in another. Moreover, the nature of the key decisions in the coming years of-



                                       11
ten will be unforeseeable, thus complicating further the design of the opti-
mal compensation plan.

3. Costs

    The executive’s reservation value places a lower bound on the value of a
compensation package and thus its cost to the company. But a firm may
wish to pay executives much more than their reservation value to create in-
centives for behavior that increases shareholder value. Under the optimal
contracting approach, shareholders should continue to give value to execu-
tives until the incremental cost of doing so outweighs the incremental bene-
fit of the incentives produced. A compensation plan designer attempting to
maximize shareholder value would consider alternative structures both in
terms of their incentive benefits and their costs to the company. No scheme
would be chosen, of course, if an alternative scheme could produce the same
or better incentives at a lower cost to the company.

           B. The Limitations of the Optimal Contracting Approach

    There are three mechanisms that might produce executive compensation
programs that are optimal for shareholders: (1) the board, acting at arm’s
length, selects the compensation arrangement that maximizes shareholder
value; (2) although the board acts under the influence of management, ex-
ecutives are constrained by market forces to select the compensation ar-
rangement that best serves shareholder interests; or (3) shareholders can use
their rights under corporate law to block pay arrangements that are not op-
timal for shareholders, which forces executives to adopt arrangements that
maximize shareholder value. Below we analyze in turn each of these mecha-
nisms and show that they are unlikely to be sufficiently powerful to ensure
that compensation arrangements closely follow the model suggested by op-
timal contracting. Before proceeding, it is worth stressing that our view is
not that these mechanisms are useless in constraining executive compensa-
tion. As will be explained, these mechanisms, particularly the board of direc-
tors and market forces, do impose some constraints on executive compensa-
tion. However, these mechanisms are generally not strong enough to pre-
vent large deviations from optimal contracting in directions that favor man-
agers’ interests.




                                      12
1. Limitations of the Arm’s Length Model of Boards

     The optimal contracting literature assumes explicitly or implicitly that,
in setting executives’ compensation, directors take an adversarial (or at least
independent) position vis-à-vis the executives. It is acknowledged that man-
agement plays a role in supplying data and proposals. However, the board
is viewed as serving shareholder interests exclusively in this process and
bargaining with management in an arm’s length fashion. Although some
students of corporate governance have recognized the limitations of this
view,10 their full force has not been generally appreciated in the literature on
executive compensation.
     In exploring these limitations it will be helpful to begin with a brief de-
scription of the process of setting executive pay. In a large public corpora-
tion, the board of directors is responsible for determining the compensation
of the CEO and other top executives. Typically, the board will adopt a multi-
year compensation program for executives, including an option plan that
provides bounds on the total amount of stock-based awards that can be
made to senior executives and lower-level employees. The option plan
might be put to a shareholder vote and ratified by shareholders.11 Operating
within the plan, however, the board has full authority to fix the compensa-
tion of any given senior executives on a periodic basis.12
     The directors of essentially all large U.S. public companies have estab-
lished compensation committees to which they delegate this responsibility.13
A compensation committee typically is composed of three or four direc-
tors.14 In most firms, all or almost all of the directors serving on the commit-
tee are “independent.”15


   10 See, for example, Victor Brudney, The Independent Director—Heavenly City or Potemkin
Village?, 95 Harv L Rev 597 (1982).
   11 Ratification of these option plans is virtually certain. Incumbent managers face a
meaningful chance of losing a vote only if there is an active proxy contest for control of the
board. See Lucian A. Bebchuk and Marcel Kahan, A Framework for Analyzing Legal Policy
towards Proxy Contests, 78 Cal L Rev 1071, 1074 (1990). The question of ratifying stock-based
awards is not sufficiently weighty to induce a challenger to wage a campaign to replace the
board. For a discussion of shareholder voting on option plans, see Part I.B.3.b.
   12 See Stacey R. Kole, The Complexity of Compensation Contracts, 43 J Fin Econ 79, 101
(1997) (finding that shareholder-approved option plans in companies that are larger, more
diversified, and more research-intensive tend to provide directors greater flexibility).
   13 See Kenneth A. Bertsch, Rachel Leahey, and Hawie Haun, Board Practices (1998): The
Structure and Compensation of Boards of Directors at S&P Super 1500 Companies 19 (Investor
Responsibility Research Center 1998).
   14 See id at 6 (reporting that the average committee size ranged from 3.3 directors



                                             13
    Three primary factors have led to the increasing use of compensation
committees composed entirely of (at least nominally) independent directors.
First, investor advocacy organizations have long pushed for this improve-
ment in corporate governance.16 Second, the tax code now provides corpora-
tions with a strong incentive to establish such committees. Since 1994, CEO
and top officer pay in excess of $1 million annually per executive has not
been deductible by a publicly held corporation unless the excess compensa-
tion consists of options or is based upon the achievement of performance
goals that have been established by a compensation committee composed
solely of independent outside directors.17 Third, the use of an independent
compensation committee would, in the event of a legal challenge, result in
more deferential review of the compensation program.18
    Despite the nominal independence of most compensation committees,
there are several reasons to be skeptical that the process of setting executive
compensation approximates the arm’s length ideal. The key problem is the
pervasive influence of management, particularly the CEO, on all facets of the



among S&P Small Cap 600 firms to 4.2 directors among S&P 500 firms).
    15 Bertsch, Leahey, and Haun report that in 1998 the average percentage of independ-
ent directors on compensation committees ranged from 83.5 percent among S&P Small Cap
600 firms to 91.9 percent among S&P 500 firms. See id. Directors are defined in their study
as independent if they are not employed by the firm or “affiliated.” A director is consid-
ered “affiliated” if she is a former employee, a relative, a representative of a charity that re-
ceives contributions from the firm, a service provider, a supplier, a customer, or an inter-
locking director.
    16 The current Teachers Insurance and Annuities Association/College Retirement Equi-
ties Fund (“TIAA/CREF”) policy, for example, states that compensation committees
should be independent, knowledgeable, and willing to use an outside compensation con-
sultant in negotiating CEO compensation. See Fund Toughens on Executive Pay, Investor Rel
Bus (Apr 3, 2000).
    17 See Internal Revenue Code (“IRC”) § 162(m), codified at 26 USC § 162 (Supp 2001).
The employees whose compensation is covered by this rule include the CEO, or individual
acting in that capacity, and the four most highly compensated officers other than the CEO,
whose compensation must be reported under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. See 26
CFR § 1.162-27(c)(2) (2002) (defining the employees covered under IRC § 162(m)). Non-
employee directors who serve as consultants or who otherwise receive direct or indirect
remuneration from the firm in a capacity other than as a director do not qualify as outside
directors for the purposes of Section 162(m). See 26 CFR § 1.162-27(e)(3).
    The enactment of Section 162(m) has appeared to reduce some salaries and salary
growth rates and increase the sensitivity of pay to performance. See Tod Perry and Marc
Zenner, Pay for Performance?: Government Regulation and the Structure of Compensation Con-
tracts, 62 J Fin Econ 453–88 (2001).
    18 See Robert Charles Clark, Corporate Law § 6.1 at 194 (Little, Brown 1986).



                                               14
pay-setting process.19 Below we will discuss several reasons to expect large
deviations from arm’s length outcomes. First, managers influence the ap-
pointment of independent directors, which in many cases enables them to
block the appointment of directors who are likely to try to bargain with the
managers at arms’ length. Secondly, once appointed, independent directors
are influenced by board dynamics that make it difficult for them to deal with
managers in a truly arm’s length way, especially if other directors have no in-
terest in confronting the managers over their pay. Finally, even if directors
were otherwise inclined to challenge managers on the issue of executive
compensation, they would likely have neither the financial incentive nor suf-
ficient information to do so. We will discuss each of these problems in turn.
        a) Management influence over director appointment. Management’s domi-
nation of the compensation process begins with the selection of the corpora-
tion’s directors, who form the pool of candidates for the compensation com-
mittee. Traditionally, the CEO has dominated the director nomination proc-
ess.20 While most boards employ a nominating committee, the CEO often
formally serves on the committee. 21 A 1998 survey found that only 27 percent
of S&P 1500 firms had fully independent nominating committees.22 And even


    19 Even the timing of stock option awards may be influenced to favor senior manage-
ment. Yermack finds that that the timing of CEO option awards tends to precede immedi-
ately favorable movements in company stock prices. See David Yermack, Good Timing:
CEO Stock Option Awards and Company News Announcements, 52 J Fin 449, 450 (1997). Man-
agers can also release bad news prior to the grant date of options in order to reduce the
strike price of the options (which is almost always set to the grant-date market price). See
Keith W. Chauvin and Cathy Shenoy, Stock Price Decreases Prior to Executive Stock Option
Grants, 7 J Corp Fin: Cont, Gov & Org 53 (2001) (reporting abnormal stock price declines
during the 10-day period preceding the grant date).
    20 See Brian G.M. Main, et al, The CEO, the Board of Directors, and Executive Compensation:
Economic and Psychological Perspectives, 11 Indus & Corp Change 293, 302–03 (1995); Brud-
ney, supra note 12, at 610 n 39; Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach, Endoge-
nously Chosen Boards of Directors and Their Monitoring of the CEO, 88 Am Econ Rev 96, 97
(1998). For a review of the economic literature on boards of directors, see Benjamin E.
Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach, Boards of Directors as an Endogenously Determined Insti-
tution: A Survey of the Economic Literature at 10–12, NBER Working Paper No 8161 (2001),
available online at <http://papers.nber.org/papers/w8161.pdf>.
    21 See Anil Shivdasani and David Yermack, CEO Involvement in the Selection of New
Board Members: An Empirical Analysis, 54 J Fin 1829, 1834 (1999) (reporting that 78 percent of
341 publicly traded Fortune 500 firms in 1994 had a nominating committee, and that in 33
percent of those firms the CEO was a member of the nominating committee).
    22 See Bertsch, Leahey, and Haun, supra note 13, at 18. In the study, directors are classi-
fied as employees, affiliated, or independent. A director is deemed affiliated if, as disclosed
in the proxy statement, he or she is a former employee, a relative of an executive, a repre-
sentative of a charity that receives contributions from the firm, or a designated interlocking



                                              15
when the CEO does not sit on the nominating committee, his influence on the
nomination process is still generally thought to be considerable.23 The CEO
can use his power and influence to encourage the appointment -and reap-
pointment of independent directors who are not likely to challenge his com-
pensation.
     b) Board dynamics. Most directors believe that their primary responsibil-
ity is to monitor the CEO’s performance and, if necessary, fire him and hire a
suitable replacement.24 Outside of this unfortunate circumstance, however,
the directors are expected to support the CEO. Those who cannot do so in
good faith are expected to step down.25 Overall, board meetings and proc-
esses are characterized by an emphasis on courtesy, politeness, and defer-
ence to the CEO.26
        (i) The “support or fire” model. The role of the board of directors, as it is
normally conceived, is to focus on the big picture and ensure that the per-
sonnel and strategies necessary for the company’s success are in place. Al-
though setting executive compensation clearly is a board responsibility,
scrutinizing the level or form of executive compensation proposed by an ef-
fective CEO (or his compensation consultant) runs counter to the predomi-
nant “support or fire” model of the board of directors.27 Independent direc-

director. Id at 9–10.
    23 See Main, supra note 20, at 293, 302–03 (suggesting that director nominations are
“dominated by the CEO”).
    24 See Crystal, supra note 6; Jay W. Lorsch and Elizabeth M. MacIver, Pawns or Poten-
tates?: The Reality of America’s Corporate Boards 64 (Harvard Business School 1989).
    25 See Main, supra note 20, at 304 (documenting the social pressure on directors not to
actively challenge the CEO).
    26 See Michael C. Jensen, The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal
Control Systems, 48 J Fin 831, 863 (1993) (noting that the board’s “politeness and courtesy”
comes at the expense of “truth and frankness”).
    27 There is evidence indicating that boards do in fact sometimes fire poorly performing
CEOs. See David J. Denis and Diane K. Denis, Performance Changes Following Top Manage-
ment Dismissals, 50 J Fin 1029, 1055 (1995) (finding that forced CEO resignations are rare
and that two-thirds of those that occur are caused by factors other than board monitoring,
such as blockholder pressure or a takeover attempt); Mark R. Huson, Robert Parrino, and
Laura T. Starks, Internal Monitoring Mechanisms and CEO Turnover: A Long-Term Perspective,
56 J Fin 2265, 2279 (2001) (finding that 23.4 percent of turnovers in large public U.S. firms
during the period 1989–1994 were involuntary). Not surprisingly, firms with outsider-
dominated boards are significantly more likely to remove the CEO on the basis of poor
stock performance than are firms with insider-dominated boards. See Michael S. Weisbach,
Outside Directors and CEO Turnover, 20 J Fin Econ 431, 453–54 (1988). See also Warren
Boeker, Power and Managerial Dismissal: Scapegoating at the Top, 37 Admin Sci Q 400 (1992)
(finding that the likelihood that a poorly performing CEO of semiconductor firm will be
replaced decreases as the percentage of inside directors increases).



                                               16
tors are thus likely to be reluctant to confront an effective CEO regarding the
amount of his pay and perquisites. This reluctance might stem from a notion
that their effort and scrutiny are better focused on policy matters, or inde-
pendent directors’ perception that they are not as knowledgeable about
compensation issues as the management or the compensation consultant.
       (ii) Social dynamics. Although the use of a compensation committee
comprised solely of independent directors mitigates somewhat the influence
of the CEO on executive compensation, it is no panacea. The social dynamics
of the board, the members of which have been selected in large part by the
CEO or with his input,28 play an important role in deterring objection to ex-
ecutive compensation programs.
       It is well known that individuals working within a group feel pres-
sure to placate group members, often at the expense of interests that are not
directly represented at the table.29 The relationship between the CEO and the
board is also likely to produce additional dynamics specific to that particular
setting. Main, O’Reilly, and Wade have found that directors are influenced
by notions of reciprocity, authority, and similarity in their deliberations con-
cerning executive compensation.30 Specifically, they find that compensation
committee chairmen who are appointed after the CEO takes office tend to
reciprocate by awarding higher CEO compensation.31 They also find a sig-
nificant association between the compensation level of outsiders who serve
on the compensation committee and CEO pay.32



    28 See Main, supra note 20, at 302–03 (reporting the CEO domination of board member
selection).
    29 See Melvin A. Eisenberg, The Compensation of Chief Executive Officers and Directors of
Publicly Held Corporations, SE39 ALI-ABA 103, 117–18 (1999).
    30 Main, supra note 20, at 304. For other research on small group dynamics, see gener-
ally J.S. Coleman, Constructed Organizations: First Principles, 7 J L, Econ, & Org 7 (1991); R.B.
Cialdini, Influence: The New Psychology of Modern Persuasion (Morrow 1993).
    31 Main, supra note 20, at 307–08. Similarly, CEO pay tends to be higher and the CEO is
more likely to have a golden parachute when more of the outside directors have been ap-
pointed by the CEO.
    32 Id at 319–20; Charles A. O’Reilly, et al, Overpaid CEO’s and Underpaid Managers: Eq-
uity and Executive Compensation at 24, working paper (1998). The relative social status of the
CEO also affects his pay. See Maura A. Belliveau, Charles O’Reilly, and James B. Wade, So-
cial Capital at the Top: Effects of Social Similarity and Status on CEO Compensation, 39 Acad
Mgmt J 1568, 1581–84 (1996) (finding no support for the proposition that social similarity
between the CEO and the chair of compensation committee increases CEO compensation,
but finding that CEOs with relatively high social status versus other CEOs and CEOs with
high social status versus chairmen of the compensation committees do receive higher com-
pensation).



                                               17
        (iii) Self-serving cognitive dissonance. It has been suggested that a CEO
benefits when a well-paid CEO of another firm sits on the compensation
committee.33 If so, this phenomenon could be viewed as pure self-interest: by
approving high compensation for the evaluated CEO, the outside CEO in-
creases the compensation baseline. Alternatively, it may be seen as a form of
cognitive dissonance wherein the outside CEO internally justifies his high
pay and that of the subject CEO by viewing the compensation data in the
most favorable light. In 1998, 25 percent of compensation committee mem-
bers were CEOs, and a number of highly compensated CEOs served on sev-
eral compensation committees.34
     c) Insufficient incentives. CEO control over the board nomination process
and board dynamics militate against effective executive compensation over-
sight by independent directors. Unfortunately, outside directors generally
lack the economic incentive to overcome these forces. The benefits of at-
tempting to curb excessive executive compensation are low, while the poten-
tial costs are high.
        (i) Economic benefits. Although stock-based compensation for outside
directors is on the rise—81 percent of S&P 500 firms awarded directors stock
or options in 199735—the direct benefit to independent directors of reducing
the CEO’s compensation remains insignificant in almost all cases.36 Even if
excessive CEO pay results in somewhat higher compensation throughout
the managerial ranks, the impact is unlikely to be felt by a director who
holds options to purchase only a very small fraction of the company’s
shares.37 Further, as we will discuss below, the incremental compensation
cost incurred by a company with less than vigilant directors is unlikely to


   33 See Crystal, supra note 6, at 227 (referring to the well-paid CEO/director as a “social
reference” for the CEO).
   34 Bertsch, supra note 13, at 20.
   35 Id at 37.
   36 See George P. Baker, et al, Compensation and Incentives: Practice vs. Theory, 43 J Fin 593,
614 (1988) (arguing that directors fail to create proper executive pay arrangements because
the directors bear a large share of the nonpecuniary costs of creating the arrangements and
receive little monetary benefit from improved compensation practices).
   37 Independent directors with more substantial equity interests would have more in-
centive to limit executive compensation. See Richard Cyert, et al, Corporate Governance,
Ownership Structure, and CEO Compensation at 17–20, working paper (1997) (finding that
CEO pay is negatively related to the level of equity holdings of compensation committee
members). A case for increasing stock grants to independent directors is forcefully pre-
sented in Charles M. Elson, Executive Over-Compensation—A Board-Based Solution, 34 BC L
Rev, 937, 981–83 (1993) (arguing that granting stock to outside directors would better align
their interests with that of shareholders).



                                               18
reduce the stock price sufficiently to spark a hostile takeover attempt and
threaten the independent directors’ positions on the board.
       (ii) Economic costs. While the benefit to independent directors of reduc-
ing the CEO’s salary is minimal, the cost of trying to do so could be consid-
erable. As explained previously, CEOs have significant influence on the ap-
pointment and reappointment of outside directors. This influence makes di-
rector compensation activism costly in two ways. First, and most impor-
tantly, the CEO has an incentive to throw an uncooperative director off the
board (or not reappoint the director when his term expires). In many cases,
the CEO will have the power, through his relationships with other board
members, to do so. If the director is expelled or his directorship is not re-
newed, the director will lose his compensation38 and other economic and
noneconomic benefits he gets from his board position, including prestige
and business and social connections.39 The risk of losing one’s directorship
as a result of challenging the CEO’s compensation must be orders of magni-
tude greater than the increase in risk of a takeover resulting from the CEO’s
higher salary.40
    Second, there is likely to be a reputational cost of trying to reduce the
CEO’s compensation. In particular, other CEOs are unlikely to appoint or
reappoint to their boards a director with a reputation for challenging execu-
tive compensation. Thus, attempting to reduce the CEO’s compensation
might jeopardize not only the director’s salary and perks associated with
that board position, but also the salary and perks associated with member-
ship on other boards. Finally, reducing the CEO’s compensation would indi-


   38 In addition to equity-based compensation, directors usually receive a cash salary. See
Eisenberg, supra note 29, at 132 (reporting that the average Fortune 500 director’s fee in-
creased from $30,000 in 1980 to $50,000 in 1994).
   39 It is reasonable to think that in many cases a CEO would be able to rally a majority of
board members to his side to replace the problem director when the director’s term expires.
Inside directors can be mobilized by the CEO because they are beholden to the CEO. Out-
side directors may well go along with the CEO to protect their own positions, to curry fa-
vor with the CEO, who has influence over board compensation, or simply to make board
meetings less fractious and unpleasant.
   40 A study of the determinants of CEO compensation in Australia finds that CEO com-
pensation is decreasing as the amount of equity held by outside directors and increasing as
the salary paid outside directors rises. See Robert Evans and John Evans, The Influence of
Non-Executive Director Control and Rewards on CEO Remuneration: Australian Evidence at 18–
19, working paper (2000), available online at <http://www.efmaefm.org/jevans2.pdf>.
The first finding suggests that outside directors are more likely to curb CEO compensation
when the benefits of reducing CEO compensation are higher. The second suggests that out-
side directors are less likely to curb CEO compensation when the potential costs (the loss of
position and salary) are higher.



                                             19
rectly hurt the independent director if the director is a CEO whose pay is
linked broadly to that of other CEOs.41
        (iii) The market for directors. Fama and Jensen have argued that inde-
pendent directors have an incentive to develop reputations as experts in de-
cision control, which they can do by safeguarding shareholder interests.42
Their idea is as follows: Independent directors normally are CEOs or other
decision managers in their primary jobs, and the value of their human capi-
tal depends on their decision management reputation. Effective independent
directors signal to the managerial labor market that they are indeed experts
in decision control. Thus, Fama and Jensen might argue that—in addition to
possibly increasing the value of the director’s options—attempting to reduce
CEO compensation yields reputational benefits.
     While this mechanism may work in certain cases, we are skeptical about
its effect on many, if not most, directors. First, the signal provided by inde-
pendent directorships is likely to be quite noisy, particularly when the board
is large and responsibilities are diffuse. Second, and relatedly, the manage-
rial labor market is more likely to focus on the manager’s performance in his
primary role rather than in his independent directorships. Third, there are
likely to be a considerable number of independent directors who are inter-
ested less in establishing reputations as “expert decisionmakers” than in
keeping their current board seats and perhaps joining other boards. As we
noted above, CEOs have considerable influence in the choice of independent
directors and will tend to prefer candidates who are unlikely to challenge
their compensation.43 Thus, for a director aspiring to additional board posi-
tions, the “market” for directors creates incentives not to challenge the CEO
on the issue of his compensation but rather to accommodate the CEO’s
wishes.
     Given the process of director selection and retention, board and commit-
tee processes and dynamics, and the lack of an effective incentive structure,
it is unlikely that Fama and Jensen’s “decision control expert” story will re-
sult in independent directors engaging in effective arm’s length bargaining
with the CEO over his compensation. Indeed, reputation is likely to limit the


   41 See Yermack, supra note 19, at 461–62.
   42 Eugene F. Fama and Michael C. Jensen, Separation of Ownership and Control, 26 J L &
Econ 301, 315 (1983).
   43 To be sure, one could argue that market forces will prevent CEOs from appointing
directors who are too pliant and instead will force them to appoint directors willing and
able to engage in arm’s length bargaining with the CEO. This is a variant of the argument
that even if the CEO has influence over the board, market forces will force the board to ne-
gotiate with the CEO at arm’s length. We will address this argument shortly.



                                            20
degree to which the independent directors are willing to challenge man-
agement in this area.
     d) Information disparities. We have just shown that directors, including
independent directors, are likely to have neither the inclination nor the in-
centive to engage in arm’s length bargaining with the CEO. We now wish to
point out that even if directors have the inclination and incentive to negoti-
ate for CEO compensation that maximizes shareholder value, they will usu-
ally lack the information to do so effectively.
     The CEO, by way of his personnel department, controls much of the in-
formation that reaches the committee. TIAA/CREF has recommended that
compensation committees be “willing” to employ an independent compen-
sation consultant,44 but normally the firm (in other words, management)
employs the consultant that provides the data to the committee.45 Even if the
consultant’s compensation data are perfectly accurate, there is a great deal of
flexibility and discretion involved in choosing the companies that are used
for comparison, determining the economic scenarios that will be presented
to the committee, and in general deciding what data will be presented and
how.46 Because managers choose which compensation consultants to hire,
the consultants have a clear incentive to make recommendations favorable
to managers.
     To be sure, the consultant is somewhat constrained by reputational con-
siderations—she cannot propose a pay package that is obviously excessive.
But within the range of flexibility and discretion, the consultant has an in-
centive to provide information in a way that is most beneficial to managers.
Thus, the information presented and the way it is framed will be chosen
with an eye toward maximizing managers’ compensation.
     Of course, independent directors are not required to follow the compen-
sation consultant’s recommendation. They could attempt to solicit other
proposals or come up with a package on their own. But as a practical matter,
independent directors have only limited time and resources available to de-
vote to increasingly complex compensation issues.47 Thus, directors will rely
heavily, if not almost exclusively, on the information and proposal provided
by the compensation consultant.
     e) Larger and smaller departures from the arm’s length model. We wish to
emphasize that the various factors undermining the board’s ability to en-
gage in arm’s length bargaining—management control over director ap-

  44   See Fund Toughens on Executive Pay, supra note 16.
  45   See Crystal, supra note 6, at 229–30.
  46   See id.
  47   See Main, supra note 20, at 305; Brudney, supra note 10, at 609; Jensen, supra note 26.



                                               21
pointment, board social dynamics, directors’ insufficient and distorted eco-
nomic incentives, and informational barriers—are stronger in some cases
and weaker in others. Thus, firms can differ in the extent to which the com-
pensation-setting process deviates from arm’s length bargaining.
     For example, CEO influence over director appointment and the strength
of the personal relationships between the CEO and board members will vary
from firm to firm. As a result, some CEOs will have more power than others.
Nevertheless, in most companies, at least some of the factors undermining
the board’s willingness and ability to engage in arm’s length bargaining over
executive compensation are present. Therefore, some departure from opti-
mal contracting is to be expected.
     It is worth noting in this connection the trend among firms in the last
decade or so to increase the number and power of “independent directors.”48
There are data suggesting that outside directors have increasing influence
over the composition of board committees49 and that they constitute a major-
ity of most board committees, including the nominating committee.50 Thus,
corporate governance experts have concluded that boards have become
more effective monitors of CEO performance.51
     This trend may have reduced the power of the CEO in certain compa-
nies. In some companies, directors are more independent from the execu-
tives and are thus more willing to fire executives when they perform par-
ticularly poorly. In fact, during the last twenty years CEO tenure has de-
clined and CEO terminations have increased52—trends that are attributed to
boards becoming more independent.53

   48 See, for example, Sanjai Bhagat and Bernard Black, The Uncertain Relationship between
Board Composition and Firm Performance, 54 Bus Law 921, 922 (1999).
   49 Korn/Ferry International, Korn/Ferry’s 28th Annual Board of Directors Study Finds
CEO, Board Evaluations on Upswing, Outsiders Deciding Committee Membership, Compensation
Static,                       available                        online                      at
<http://www.kornferry.com/pr/pr_01_0904_board_evaluations.asp> (reporting survey
results indicating that the percentage of firms in which the CEO chooses committee chairs
and members has declined from 57 percent in 1996 to 37 percent in 2001).
   50 Korn/Ferry International, 27th Annual Board of Directors Study 2000. See also Anil
Shivdasani and David Yermack, CEO Involvement in the Selection of New Board Members: An
Empirical Analysis, 54 J Fin 1829, 1851 (1999) (reporting that the influence of CEOs over the
selection of board members has declined).
   51 See, for example, Ira M. Millstein and Paul W. MacAvoy, The Active Board of Directors
and Performance of the Large Publicly-Traded Corporation, 98 Colum L Rev 1283 (1998); Melvin
A. Eisenberg, Corporate Law and Social Norms, 99 Colum L Rev 1253, 1268 (1999); Mark J.
Loewenstein, The Conundrum of Executive Compensation, 35 Wake Forest L Rev 1, 15 (2000).
   52 Tom Neff, Anatomy of a CEO, Chief Exec 3032 (Feb 1, 2001) (reporting that the median
tenure of CEOs in office declined from seven years in 1980 to five years in 2000); Denis B.K.



                                             22
     However, although boards are more likely to fire CEOs who are per-
forming particularly poorly, the formulation of executive pay packages is
not likely to be characterized by arm’s length bargaining in the great major-
ity of firms. Even in those firms where a majority of the directors are suffi-
ciently “independent” to fire the CEO in the event of dismal performance,
the directors will generally not have an economic incentive and sufficient in-
formation to attempt to negotiate down the compensation of a CEO who is
performing sufficiently well not to be fired. Such a CEO is likely to stay in
his position for some time, and thus could retaliate against a director who
sought to limit his compensation.
     To be sure, in the future there could be changes of a more fundamental
nature that bring us closer to an arm’s length model. There is good reason to
believe, however, that currently negotiations between executives and the
board over executive compensation tend to be far from that model.

2. Limitations on the power of market forces.

    Directors are unlikely to bargain with management over their compen-
sation in a manner that approaches the arm’s length ideal. However, we
must consider whether the CEO and more junior executives will be induced
by market forces not to push for anything other than optimal compensation
contracts.
    There is an important school of thought in corporate law and finance
scholarship that takes the view that markets for managerial labor, corporate
control, capital, and products effectively align managers’ and shareholders’
interests.54 As one of us has argued in earlier work, however, these market
mechanisms cannot be relied upon to align managers’ and shareholders’ in-
terests with respect to significantly redistributive actions—actions by which
the managers can transfer to themselves value that is substantial relative to
the resulting loss to shareholders.55 The payment of executive compensation,


Lyons, CEO Casualties: A Battlefront Report, Directors & Boards 43 (Summer 1999) (reporting
that the percentage of Fortune 100 companies whose CEOs have tenure of five years or less
has increased from 46 percent in 1980 to 58 percent in 1998).
   53 Lyons, supra note 52, at 43 (listing “increasingly independent boards” as an impor-
tant factor contributing to the increase in CEO turnover).
   54 See Easterbrook, supra note 4, at 543–53; Daniel R. Fischel, The “Race to the Bottom”
Revisited: Reflections on Recent Developments in Delaware’s Corporation Law, 76 Nw U L Rev
913, 916–20 (1982); Eugene F. Fama, Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm, 88 J Polit
Econ 288, 289 (1980).
   55 See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on State
Competition in Corporate Law, 105 Harv L Rev 1437, 1461–67 (1992) (arguing that market



                                            23
which approaches a direct transfer from shareholders to management,
would seem to be an especially clear case of a significantly redistributive ac-
tion for which market forces will provide insufficient discipline. We will
briefly review the market forces that bear upon managerial behavior activity
and discuss why they are unlikely to impose significant restraints on execu-
tive compensation.
     a) Managerial labor markets. Several labor market mechanisms tend to
align the interests of executives with those of shareholders. The most impor-
tant mechanisms are executives’ compensation plans and their equity hold-
ings. The typical CEO’s compensation package is composed of a base salary,
an annual bonus, stock options and/or restricted shares, and often other
long-term incentive elements.56 Each of these components is sensitive to firm
performance to a greater or lesser degree. To the extent executives retain the
stock acquired by exercising their options (or acquired through restricted
stock programs), they will have an additional incentive to generate share-
holder value.
     Over the past two decades, the increasing use of stock options has
boosted the sensitivity of the average CEO’s wealth to firm performance by
an order of magnitude. However, given the enormous size of large U.S.
companies, the absolute sensitivity of CEO wealth to performance remains
small. For a $1000 change in firm value, the wealth of the average CEO of a
large public corporation currently changes by only about $10.57 All else be-


forces cannot ensure that managers’ reincorporation decisions are those that are optimal for
shareholders); Lucian A. Bebchuk, Limiting Contractual Freedom in Corporate Law: The Desir-
able Constraints on Charter Amendments, 102 Harv L Rev 1820, 1840–46 (1989) (arguing that
market forces cannot ensure that managers’ decisions concerning charter amendments are
those that are best for shareholders); Lucian A. Bebchuk and Mark J. Roe, A Theory of Path
Dependence in Corporate Ownership and Governance, 52 Stan L Rev 127, 142–53 (1999) (argu-
ing that market forces cannot ensure that managers and controlling shareholders move to
whatever ownership structure becomes efficient as legal rules change).
    56 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 2497–2517.
    57 Perry and Zenner report that in 1997 the median S&P 1500 CEO stood to gain or lose
$11.50 per $1000 of shareholder gain or loss. See Perry and Zenner, supra note 1, at 149.
Similarly, Hall and Liebman have estimated that 1998 CEO wealth-to-shareholder-value
sensitivity was approximately $11 per $1000, based on a firm with $1 billion market capi-
talization. See Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey B. Liebman, The Taxation of Executive Compensation at
figure 1, NBER Working Paper No 7596 (Mar 2000), available online at
<http://papers.nber.org/papers/w7596.pdf>. These figures exclude an adjustment for risk
of dismissal. CEO wealth-to-shareholder-value sensitivity had been lower in the past. Us-
ing 1974–1986 data, Jensen and Murphy had calculated a median CEO wealth-to-
shareholder-value sensitivity of $3.25 per $1000, a figure that included a $0.30 per $1000 ad-
justment for risk of dismissal. See Michael Jensen and Kevin J. Murphy, Performance Pay and
Top-Management Incentives, 98 J Polit Econ 225, 261 (1990).



                                              24
ing equal, a CEO who wrote himself a check for an extra $1000 would thus
net about $990 after taking into account the impact of the change in firm
value on his shares and options.
     To be sure, all else is not equal. Although there appears to be a widening
gap between the compensation of U.S. CEOs and junior executives,58 there is
some evidence that when CEOs are overpaid (or underpaid), a diminishing
echo effect is felt throughout the organization.59 Moreover, a large gap be-
tween the compensation of the CEO and that of his subordinates has been
shown to be associated with higher rates of managerial turnover.60 Hence, a
CEO might also take these factors into account before awarding himself a
pay raise. Nevertheless, the sensitivity of their wealth to firm value, by itself,
would dissuade few CEOs from seeking to increase their compensation.
     Of course, compensation is just one element of the managerial labor
market. Executives are also concerned with the possibilities of promotion or
being tapped for higher-level positions by other firms. However, for the
CEO—the person driving the executive compensation process—internal
promotion is, of course, impossible. External promotion is always a possibil-
ity: she could become the CEO of a larger or more prestigious firm. But most
CEO positions are filled internally.61 For the CEO, there are likely to be few
other jobs that are both available and more desirable than her current one.
Not surprisingly, the overwhelming majority of CEOs do not go on to be-
come CEOs of other firms.62
     In any event, the ability to get another CEO job will depend on the
CEO’s overall performance at her current firm, not on the amount of rent ex-
tracted. Thus, the possibility of being hired for another CEO position is
unlikely to deter a CEO from extracting rents. Indeed, when CEO do get


    58 See John M. Abowd and Michael L. Bognanno, International Differences in Executive
and Managerial Compensation, in R. Freeman and L. Katz, eds, Differences and Changes in
Wage Structures 67, 83 (Chicago 1995).
    59 See O’Reilly, supra note 1, at 24 (noting that overcompensation of the CEO leads to
overcompensation in the lower ranks of employees).
    60 See id at 25. Vertical pay inequity within an organization might also be associated
with poorer product quality. See Douglas M. Cowherd and David I. Levine, Product Quality
and Pay Equity between Lower-Level Employees and Top Management: An Investigation of Dis-
tributive Justice Theory, 37 Admin Sci Q 302, 316 (1992).
    61 See C. Edward Fee and Charles J. Hadlock, Raids, Rewards, and Reputations in the Mar-
ket for CEO Talent at 13, working paper (2001), available online at
<http://www.afajof.org/Pdf/meeting/2002/fee_paper.pdf> (reporting that in a sample of
1200 CEO hires during the period 1990–98, 73.5 percent were internal hires).
    62 See Melvin A. Eisenberg, The Structure of Corporation Law, 89 Colum L Rev 1461, 1495
(1989).



                                            25
new jobs,63 the initial hiring grants for the new jobs are highly correlated
with the value of the unvested options and restricted stock the CEOs leave
behind.64 Thus, if the prospect of being hired elsewhere has any effect on the
pay level desired by CEOs, the effect will likely be in the direction of increas-
ing this level.
     Executives will also be concerned about the possibility of dismissal. But
the risk of being fired also depends more upon overall performance than on
the CEO’s level of compensation. In any event, this risk is small. In their
seminal 1990 study, Jensen and Murphy calculated that the median CEO suf-
fers an expected dismissal-related wealth reduction of $0.30 per $1000 reduc-
tion in shareholder value.65 It seems highly unlikely that the small added
threat of dismissal would dissuade a CEO from granting himself and per-
haps other executives increased compensation.
     b) Market for corporate control. The market for corporate control is also
viewed as a strong force aligning the interests of management and share-
holders.66 A company whose share price sags should become more vulner-
able to a hostile takeover, which would likely cause the executives to lose
their positions, pay, and perquisites.
     The takeover threat, however, is unlikely to discourage managers from
seeking to boost their compensation. Consider an executive of a $10 billion
company who contemplates increasing executive compensation by an
amount with a present value of $100 million. Obviously, the direct benefit to
the executive is very large. The cost to the executive is the enhanced risk of
takeover and ouster. However, the increase in takeover risk resulting from a
1 percent reduction in firm value is bound to be quite limited.67
     Even the commentators who believe most fervently in the disciplining
force of takeovers admit that control transactions are very costly and useful


   63 The probability of being hired as CEO for another firm (which is low) is positively
related to the stock price performance at one’s current firm. See Fee and Hadlock, supra
note 61, at 21–25.
   64 See id at 36 (finding a positive correlation between forfeited equity positions and a
CEO’s new compensation package).
   65 See Jensen and Murphy, supra note 57, at 242.
   66 See Easterbrook, supra note 4, at 564–70; Henry G. Manne, Mergers and the Market for
Corporate Control, 73 J Polit Econ 110 (1965). Despite widespread adoption of poison pills
and other takeover defenses, the corporate control market has remained active. See John C.
Coates IV, Takeover Defenses in the Shadow of the Pill: A Critique of the Scientific Evidence, 79
Tex L Rev 271, 276 (2000).
   67 This simplified example ignores the compensation echo effect we mentioned in the
prior subsection, but that effect does not disturb the conclusion that the direct benefit of in-
creased compensation is significantly larger than the expected cost.



                                               26
only as a response to substantial performance shortfalls.68 Excessive com-
pensation might be a symptom of more pervasive management shortcom-
ings, but the limited evidence available does not support the proposition
that overcompensation increases takeover risk substantially.69
     To be sure, the market for corporate control does impose some con-
straint on increasing compensation. At a certain point, shareholders might
become sufficiently outraged to be willing to support outside challengers or
bidders in a control contest. The main point, however, is that management
pay could substantially exceed the amount that would be consistent with
optimal contracting without creating much additional risk of a takeover.
     c) Market for additional capital. Another source of market discipline might
arise from the possibility that the firm will need to return to the market for
additional equity capital in order to support expansion. The prospect of
needing to sell shares to the public might cause a value-maximizing man-
agement team to maintain restraint and develop a reputation as conservative
self-compensators.
     The failure of managers to limit tightly their pay, however, is unlikely to
impede the firm’s access to equity capital. Instead, a pattern of excessive
self-compensation will raise only slightly a firm’s cost of capital. Taking
managers’ excessive compensation into account, future investors will pay
something less for the firm’s shares in a secondary offering than they would
otherwise. Thus, more shares would have to be issued to raise a given
amount of capital. Of course, this effect leads to a reduction in value that is
borne by all existing shareholders, including the executive team. But again,
the impact of this reduction in share value on managerial wealth and on the
likelihood of ouster via takeover will be considerably less than the direct
benefit of taking additional compensation.
     d) Product markets. A final potential external constraint on management
behavior is the one created by competition in product markets. In a competi-
tive market, it is argued, inefficient behavior produces competitive disad-
vantage, shrinking profits, and business contraction or failure.70 Although
this effect may discourage management from acting in ways that decrease
productivity, the redistribution of firm profits from shareholders to execu-

    68 Easterbrook suggests that a potential increase in value of about 20 percent is needed
to trigger a control transaction. See Easterbrook, supra note 4, at 567.
    69 A study of Forbes 800 firms in the 1980s determined that takeover bids were more
common in industries in which CEOs were overpaid, but found no significant difference
between the compensation of the CEOs of firms that were and were not targeted for take-
over within these industries. See Anup Agrawal and Ralph A. Walking, Executive Careers
and Compensation Surrounding Takeover Bids, 49 J Fin 985, 986 (1994).
    70 See Easterbrook, supra note 4, at 557.



                                            27
tives has no significant effect on the operational efficiency of the company,
and hence this factor will not inhibit excessive compensation.71
    e) Overall force. Even in the aggregate, the foregoing market forces are
unlikely to impose tight constraints on executive compensation. To be sure,
they might impose some constraints and deter managers from deviating ex-
tremely far from optimal contracting arrangements. The analysis indicates
that the incentives for restraint provided by the executives’ stock and option
holdings outweigh any other incentives to restrain pay and that even these
direct incentives are far from sufficient to induce managerial self-discipline
with regard to such a significantly redistributive matter as executive com-
pensation. The conclusion that market forces do not impose tight constraints
on executive compensation is supported by evidence indicating that non-
market factors, including the CEO’s power vis-à-vis the board, are important
determinants of CEO compensation. 72

3. Limitations on the Power of Shareholders

    Although neither market forces nor bargaining between the board and
the CEO is likely to ensure optimal contracting, in theory such contracting
could arise if shareholders had the power to block executive compensation
arrangements that they did not believe to be optimal. Shareholders have one
or two mechanisms at their disposal that, in principle, could be used to chal-
lenge executive compensation arrangements: derivative litigation and, in
some cases, the ability to vote against employee stock option plans. As we
explain below, however, neither of these mechanisms imposes much of a
constraint on executive compensation.
    a) Derivative litigation. Even though corporate boards and market forces
cannot ensure that executive compensation arrangements are close to those
suggested by optimal contracting, optimal pay arrangements might arise if
shareholders could use the courts to throw out compensation packages that
do not maximize shareholder value. In fact, corporate law permits share-
holders to challenge a particular compensation package under a variety of
doctrines. However, the obstacles to the success of such a lawsuit all but en-
sure that courts never review the substantive merits of management com-




   71 See Eisenberg, supra note 62, at 1489.
   72 See, for example, John E. Core, et al, Corporate Governance, Chief Executive Officer Com-
pensation, and Firm Performance, 51 J Fin Econ 371, 388 (1999). This evidence that executive
pay is affected by executive power is presented and discussed in detail in Part III.G.



                                              28
pensation arrangements. Thus, as a practical matter, judicial review fails to
impose any constraint on executive pay.73
     To overturn a board’s decision to grant a particular pay package, share-
holders would be required to show that the board had violated its duty of
care, committed “waste,” or breached its duty of loyalty. As we will explain,
it is all but impossible to prove any of these violations. Before describing
each of these legal standards, however, it will be useful to examine the pro-
cedural barriers that make it extremely unlikely that shareholders will even
get to the stage where such claims are heard.74
     Excessive compensation does not hurt shareholders directly, but rather
indirectly through their equity interests in the firm. Thus, shareholders can-
not sue the board directly for claims relating to executive pay. To challenge
board decisions involving executive compensation, shareholders generally
must file a derivative suit—a suit brought on behalf of the corporation—that
alleges that the corporation has been hurt by the board’s decision (in this
case, to grant excessive pay to management).
     Because shareholders generally do not make decisions on behalf of the
corporation—the board is charged with making such decisions —the courts
severely restrict shareholders’ ability to proceed with a derivative suit. The
most important procedural restriction is the “demand requirement.” Under
this requirement, shareholders first must “make demand” on the board to
investigate the problem and take whatever steps are necessary to correct it.
If there is a failure to make demand, the board can usually have the case dis-
missed.75 An exception is made, however, when shareholders can show that
such a demand would be “futile.”
     If the shareholders make demand on the board to pursue the litigation
(which, as the reader should recall, is against one or more members of the
board itself), the board will take control over the lawsuit.76 The board will
then almost always seek to dismiss the suit.77 If the board appears to have
acted independently, and to have conducted a reasonable investigation of


   73 See Barris, supra note 6, at 82 (reporting that in almost all cases since 1900 involving
publicly traded firms, courts have refused to overturn board compensation decisions).
   74 This discussion of derivative litigation focuses primarily on the corporate law of
Delaware, the state in which the most large publicly traded firms are incorporated.
   75 See Randall S. Thomas and Kenneth J. Martin, Litigating Challenges to Executive Pay:
An Exercise in Futility?, Wash U L Q 569, 579 (2001).
   76 See id at 576 & n 33.
   77 See id at 576. The failure of the board to deal with the demand in good faith or to
conduct a reasonable investigation could constitute a wrongful refusal of demand, giving
control over the litigation back to the shareholders. See id at 576–77.



                                             29
the allegations, the court will respect the board’s decision to terminate the
litigation and allow dismissal, ending the legal challenge to the board’s
compensation decision. Because demand almost always leads to the termi-
nation of the lawsuit, shareholders must claim that demand on the board is
futile.
     Establishing demand futility requires the plaintiff to offer “particular-
ized facts” that create a reasonable doubt that (1) the directors are disinter-
ested and independent and (2) the board’s decision (approval of the com-
pensation package) is not otherwise protected by the “business judgment
rule”—the doctrine that shelters almost all board decisions from review.
Creating a reasonable doubt about either can be difficult for shareholders to
accomplish early in the litigation, especially because the plaintiff has not had
the opportunity to conduct discovery.78
     Consider the first approach: creating a reasonable doubt as to the inde-
pendence of the board. To create such a doubt, one would generally need to
show that the directors on the board have a direct financial interest in the
compensation decision, or that they are beholden to the controlling person
through personal or other relationships.79 Thus, by staffing the compensa-
tion committee with nominally independent directors, firms can make it
practically impossible for shareholders to satisfy the demand-futility re-
quirement by creating a reasonable doubt as to the independence of the
board.80
     The second approach to establishing demand futility—creating a rea-
sonable doubt that the board’s decision is protected by the business judg-
ment rule—requires the plaintiff to allege facts indicating that the board
failed to fulfill either its “procedural due care” or its “substantive due care”
duties. A board fails to fulfill its “procedural due care” duties by being unin-
formed.81 A board fails to fulfill its “substantive due care” duties by making
an irrational decision and thereby committing “waste” or by making a “gift”
unsupported by any consideration.82 However, the board can easily fulfill
both types of duties. The board can satisfy its procedural duties by reading


   78 See id at 577.
   79 It is not sufficient to show, for example, that an executive whose pay is being chal-
lenged owns a large percentage of the firm’s shares and had personally selected the direc-
tors. See Aronson v Lewis, 473 A2d 805 (Del 1983).
   80 See, for example, Marx v Akers, 666 NE2d 1034, 1036 (NY 1996) (rejecting sharehold-
ers’ demand-futility claim, on the ground that the compensation committee consisted of
independent directors).
   81 See Brehm v Eisner, 746 A2d 244, 259–61 (Del 2000).
   82 Id at 262–63.



                                            30
some materials and asking some questions. Similarly, the board can easily
meet its substantive due process duties by coming up with a justification for
the executives’ salary. Support can be marshaled for even the most patently
unreasonable plans.83
     If shareholders were to satisfy the demand futility requirement—either
by showing that the board was not independent or that the board likely vio-
lated its duty of care—they might still face additional obstacles before they
could get to trial. To begin, the board can appoint a “special litigation com-
mittee” of independent directors to advise the board on whether it is in the
best interest of the firm to terminate the litigation. If the committee recom-
mends dismissal, and the firm asks the court to dismiss the litigation, the
court might well oblige.
     In addition to (or after) arguing that the suit should be dismissed for
failure to make demand or because a special committee recommends dis-
missal, the board might also move to dismiss the suit for failure to state a le-
gally recognized claim. If these fail, the board could move to dismiss
through a summary judgment motion, arguing that the suit should be dis-
missed because plaintiffs have misinterpreted the law. And even once these
procedural hurdles are overcome, the shareholders must actually win on the
merits at trial and survive appeal—both daunting tasks.
     b) Voting on option plans. Shareholders can also attempt to shape execu-
tive compensation when they vote on stock option plans. There are a num-
ber of situations in which shareholders might vote on an option plan. First,
there are situations in which state corporate law or stock exchange rules re-
quire that shareholders vote on stock option plans. Under the corporate laws
of some states—including New York—shareholders must approve all stock
option plans, and under the corporate statutes of all states shareholders
must approve stock option plans whenever the charter must be amended to
increase the number of authorized shares.84 The stock exchange on which
the firm’s shares trade might also have rules requiring shareholder approval
of certain kinds of stock option plans.85
     Second, firms that wish to deduct option compensation when an execu-
tive’s total annual compensation exceeds $1 million must put the option

   83 Consider Loewenstein, supra note 6, at 214–15 (reporting that there have been no ap-
pellate court cases involving publicly traded firms affirming an order to reduce managerial
compensation on the theory of gift or waste).
   84 Even if the corporate statute does not require a shareholder vote, the board of direc-
tors gains substantial protection from fiduciary duty suits if shareholders approve the stock
option plan. See Randall S. Thomas and Kenneth J. Martin, The Determinants of Shareholder
Voting on Stock Option Plans, 35 Wake Forest L Rev 46–51 (2000).
   85 See id at 48.



                                             31
plan to shareholder vote. Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code disal-
lows deductions of compensation paid to an executive in excess of $1 million
per year unless the compensation in excess off $1 million is “performance-
based.” For an option plan to be “performance-based,” it must receive share-
holder approval.
     However, even if shareholders were to vote on every stock option plan,
such voting could not produce outcomes equivalent to arm’s length bargain-
ing. To begin, the stock option plans on which shareholders vote do not
specify the design of a particular executive’s compensation but rather set out
general parameters for the use of stock options to compensate employees—
such as the total number of options that can be issued under the plan. Thus,
shareholders cannot use the vote to reject or approve a particular executive’s
pay package.
     To be sure, shareholders could repeatedly refuse to approve the option
plan until the CEO’s compensation is acceptable. But the failure of share-
holders to approve a plan is unlikely to make shareholders better off. The
failure would force managers to modify the CEO’s compensation and re-
submit the option plan for shareholder approval at some future time. In the
meantime, the absence of any option plan and the possibility that sharehold-
ers might again vote against the option plan could easily lead to the depar-
ture of good executives who wish to be compensated with options.
     The cost of these departures to shareholders might be quite high and
perhaps much higher than the gain from reducing the CEO’s compensation.
Thus, most of the shareholders voting on the plan are unlikely to oppose it
unless the CEO’s compensation is so high that the expected benefit of reject-
ing the plan exceeds the expected cost associated with the personnel instabil-
ity that might result. In fact, shareholders rarely fail to approve these plans.
In short, shareholder voting on option plans is unlikely to lead to optimal
contracting over executive compensation.86


    86 In some cases shareholders offer nonbinding (precatory) resolutions requesting more
specific limitations on executive compensation. See Brian R. Cheffins and Randall S. Tho-
mas, Should Shareholders Have a Greater Say over Executive Pay?: Learning from the U.S. Experi-
ence, 1 J Corp L Stud 227–315 (2001). These resolutions have no legal effect and usually at-
tract very few votes.
    One might infer from the failure of these resolutions that institutional shareholders be-
lieve there is no problem with executive compensation. But this is unlikely to be the right
inference. We agree with Kahan and Rock that institutions have decided to focus their lim-
ited power on certain problems and not others. See Marcel Kahan and Edward B. Rock,
How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Pill: Adaptive Responses to Takeover Law, 69 U Chi
L Rev 871, 898 (2002). The institutions seem to have made the judgment that it would be
more important for them to address the problems of entrenchment and takeover defenses
rather than that of executive compensation. This “bargain” might make sense given the



                                              32
                      II. THE MANAGERIAL POWER APPROACH

     This Part puts forward the managerial power approach to executive
compensation. Part II.A explains how managers with power use their power
to influence the level and structure of their pay, and that managers with
more power can be expected to do so to a greater extent. Managers with
power are able to extract “rents”—value in excess of that which they would
receive under optimal contracting—and managers with more power can ex-
tract more rents. Part II.B examines an important element of the managerial
power approach—outrage costs and constraints. Rent extraction might give
rise to outrage on the part of observers about whose views directors and
managers care. This outrage can in turn impose costs on directors and man-
agers, thereby discouraging the adoption of some arrangements favorable to
managers. Part II.C examines another important element of the managerial
power approach—“camouflage”—managers’ attempts to hide, obscure, and
justify various aspects of their compensation in order to reduce outrage.
     Part II.D discusses the role of compensation consultants and how they
can be used to camouflage rent extraction. Part II.E discusses how, even
though the use of options might itself be beneficial to shareholders, the par-
ticular design of option compensation plans might deviate from that sug-
gested by optimal contracting, due to managerial power. Finally, Part II.F
considers an alternative explanation for deviations from optimal contract-
ing—that they are caused by boards’ tendency to conform to norms; we ar-
gue that, although norms are likely to play a role in executive compensation
practices, they cannot by themselves provide a full explanation for the de-
velopment and persistence of arrangements that deviate considerably from
what would be expected under optimal contracting.

                 A. Managerial Power and the Extraction of Rents

    Like the optimal contracting approach, the managerial power approach
starts with recognition of the shareholder/management agency problem.
However, under the managerial power approach executive compensation is
not seen solely as a remedy to this agency problem. Rather, certain features
of executive compensation are seen as part of the problem itself. Under the
optimal contracting approach, the board designs compensation arrange-
ments exclusively for the purpose of alleviating the agency problem between
shareholders and executives. In contrast, under the managerial power ap-


pragmatic considerations of institutional investors, but it hardly indicates that executive
compensation arrangements are optimal.



                                            33
proach part of the agency problem is that executives use their compensation
to provide themselves with rents.
     The managerial power approach picks up with our analysis of the limi-
tations of the optimal contracting approach. That analysis indicates that cor-
porate managers have considerable power. Even nominally independent di-
rectors are often connected to executives by bonds of interest, collegiality, or
affinity. These directors might rise up and displace a particularly poorly per-
forming CEO. However, if the CEO is performing adequately, they generally
will be inclined to defer to and support the CEO’s judgment. Given the con-
siderable influence of the CEO and the CEO’s management team over the
board, bargaining over executive compensation does not usually approach
the arm’s length ideal. Rather, executives frequently use their power to in-
crease their compensation, and directors cooperate with management at
least to some extent.
     The excess pay that executives are able to extract because of their posi-
tional power constitutes rents. Specifically, the amount of rents that an ex-
ecutive extracts is the excess of the pay obtained by him over what he would
have received under a contract that maximizes shareholder value. Because
rent extraction is associated with managerial power, the managerial power
approach suggests that there is a correlation between managerial power and
rents. Executives generally have at least some power and therefore can ex-
tract at least some rents, but the particular characteristics of a firm, espe-
cially its ownership and board structure, give its executives more or less
power. Under the managerial power approach, the greater the CEO’s power,
the higher the rents will tend to be.
     The power of the CEO will depend in large part on the ownership struc-
ture of the firm. The more shares owned by the CEO, the greater will be her
influence on director elections and her ability to thwart or discourage a hos-
tile takeover attempt. The more shares owned by unrelated parties, the less
will be the CEO’s influence on director elections and the more vulnerable
the CEO will be to a hostile takeover attempt. Thus, the power of the CEO
will tend to increase with the percentage of shares he owns, and will tend to
decrease with the percentage of shares owned by outside blockholders.
     The CEO’s power will also depend on the organization and composition
of the board. The CEO’s power will depend on the number of inside direc-
tors and the number of independent directors. Also critical is the number of
directors over whom the CEO has some kind of influence. For example, an
independent director might follow a CEO’s wishes because he is a longtime
friend of the CEO or because he is grateful that the CEO has placed him on
the board. And because a classified board makes a hostile takeover more dif-
ficult, a CEO’s power will tend to be greater if the board is classified.



                                       34
    In Part III.G, we discuss the correlation between managerial power and
rent extraction in more detail, as well as present evidence of such a correla-
tion. For now, however, it is worth pointing out that this aspect of the mana-
gerial power approach can explain much of what is observed in the world of
executive compensation.
    It is important to emphasize that the cost to the shareholders resulting
from the extraction of rents might well be higher than the amount of the
rents themselves. To the extent that rent extraction involves efficiency
costs—due, in particular, to the adoption of inefficient compensation ar-
rangements—the shareholders’ losses will be larger than the rents extracted
by managers.
    Although our discussion of power and rent extraction often focuses on
the CEO, we should point out that other officers are also likely to receive
rents. Although in many companies power is concentrated in the hands of
the CEO, in some companies power might be distributed among two or
more officers (say, the CEO and the president), each of whom has the power
to extract rents. And even when the CEO has all of the power, the CEO
might use his power not only to extract rents for himself, but also to extract
rents for high-ranking members of his management team.87 Our discussion
regarding rent extraction will refer to the rents captured by the powerful
CEO and, in certain cases, by other officers as well.
    The managerial power approach is in the spirit of the economics litera-
ture that focuses on the power certain agents obtain in organizations and
those agents’ ability to use this power to extract rents.88 Unfortunately, fi-
nancial economists working in the particular context of executive compensa-
tion have largely followed the optimal contracting approach and paid little
attention to the role of managerial power.89


    87 A CEO might provide rents to his management team in order to narrow the gap be-
tween his compensation and theirs. Narrowing the gap might make the CEO’s rent extrac-
tion less noticeable to outsiders and thereby reduce “outrage costs,” the subject of the next
section. Narrowing the gap might also reduce the other officers’ resentment, if any, of the
CEO’s high pay, and thereby facilitate a better working relationship between the officers
and the CEO. Finally, in cases where the CEO and other officers are friends, the CEO might
provide the officers with rents on account of their friendship.
    88 See, for example, Jack Hirshleifer, Conflict and Rent-Seeking Success Functions: Ratio vs.
Difference Models of Relative Success, 63 Pub Choice 101, 101–12 (1989); Jack Hirshleifer, Com-
petition, Cooperation, and Conflict in Economics and Biology, 68 Am Econ Rev 238, 238–43
(1978); Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales, Power in a Theory of the Firm, 113 Q J Econ
387, 387–432 (1998); Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales, The Firm as a Dedicated Hierar-
chy: A Theory of the Origin and Growth of Firms, 116 Q J Econ 805, 817–18 (2001).
    89 Noteworthy exceptions are the studies listed in note 6.



                                               35
                       B. “Outrage” Costs and Constraints

     The managerial power model does not imply that there are no con-
straints at all on compensation and the rents that executives can capture. At
some point, even directors who have been appointed by the CEO and feel
loyal to him will refuse to approve a compensation package, or shareholders
might seek to replace the CEO. An important factor affecting executives’
ability to increase their compensation is the amount of “outrage” their pro-
posed pay package would create. If an executive’s compensation arrange-
ment goes far beyond what could be justified under optimal contracting and
is perceived that way by outsiders, those outsiders might become angry and
upset. If this outrage is sufficiently widespread and intense, it limits the ex-
tent to which compensation can be increased in a number of ways.
     First, outrage can affect the ability of the CEO to get the board’s ap-
proval of his pay package. We have argued that boards do not, as optimal
contracting theorists believe, secure compensation arrangements that are as
close to optimal as reasonably possible. That is, the need to get the board’s
consent to executives’ pay packages does not produce the same outcome as
arm’s length bargaining. However, even though boards are willing to give
executives more favorable treatment than what they would get under arm’s
length bargaining, there are obviously limits to how far they would be will-
ing to go. Whether a board is willing to approve a particular compensation
arrangement depends at least in part on the extent to which the arrangement
can be expected to generate outrage. At some point, directors would be ex-
pected to draw the line because the outrage produced by going further
would be too costly for them. In other words, outrage imposes constraints
through its effect on the board.
     Outrage might produce various social and reputational costs to direc-
tors. Professional reputation is very important to outside directors who gen-
erally do not join a board solely for the pay. Many outside directors join
boards for the prestige and connections that the posts give them.90 Hence,
outside directors would be loath to approve a compensation plan that would
embarrass them or compromise their reputations. Outside directors would
be concerned about how such plans might be viewed by the media or vari-
ous social or professional groups whose opinions are important to the direc-
tors. As a result, they would support management only insofar as the com-
pensation proposal does not impose too much outrage cost. In certain cases,
the same fear of embarrassment that might discourage directors from ap-
proving an outrageous compensation package might also affect managers


  90 See Lorsch and MacIver, supra note 24, at 23–31.



                                           36
directly and thereby discourage them from seeking such a package in the
first instance.
     In addition, outrage might affect the market forces discussed earlier that
could, in theory, limit executive compensation. These forces, we have ar-
gued, are usually not sufficiently strong to prevent substantial deviations
from optimal contracting. However, outrage might strengthen one or more
of the various market forces in a way that makes them more of a constraint.
      Consider the market for corporate control. Although the reduction in
shareholder value due to excessive compensation is unlikely by itself to trig-
ger a challenge to managers’ control, outrageous increases in compensation
might increase significantly the likelihood of such an attempt. For example,
institutional investors might view such compensation as a signal that the ex-
ecutives or directors are especially insensitive to shareholder interests and
thus be less willing to support the incumbents in a control contest. If support
for management weakens, a contest for control, through either a proxy battle
or a takeover bid, might be more likely to arise.
     It is worth emphasizing that for outrage to impose significant costs it
must be sufficiently widespread among the relevant groups of people. Al-
though a small group of observers—be they sophisticated market partici-
pants or researchers—might identify a compensation scheme as involving
an especially egregious amount of rents, the resulting outrage by itself
would not necessarily generate significant costs for the directors and execu-
tives. For executives or directors to be adversely affected in a material way
the outrage must be felt by relevant groups—such as institutional investors
en masse, the media, and/or social and professional groups—about whose
views the executives and directors care. Therefore, whether significant out-
rage costs can be expected to arise would depend on the extent to which rent
extraction is clearly apparent to outsiders, not just (or even mainly) upon
how much rents are extracted.
     A testable prediction of the influence of outrage costs is that criticism by
outside observers will have an effect on executive compensation. Evidence
consistent with this prediction is in fact provided by recent studies. One
study finds that firms receiving negative coverage of their executive com-
pensation policies in Business Week, Forbes, Fortune, and Institutional Investor
during the years 1992–1994 experienced smaller increases in total compensa-
tion than other firms during the years 1993–1994.91 These firms also subse-
quently increased the sensitivity of cash compensation to firm perform-


   91 See Marilyn F. Johnson, Susan Porter, and Margaret B. Shackell, Stakeholder Pressure
and the Structure of Executive Compensation at 4, working paper (1997), available online at
<http://papers.ssrn.com/id=41780>.



                                            37
ance.92 Another study provides evidence that shareholder precatory resolu-
tions criticizing executive compensation as excessive lead to some reduction
in executive pay—even though these resolutions are nonbinding and rarely
receive enough votes for passage.93
     Another testable implication is that designers of compensation arrange-
ments will seek to avoid or reduce outrage by designing, packaging, and jus-
tifying compensation arrangements in a way that camouflages managers’
rents and conceals their magnitude. This brings us to the role of camouflage
under the managerial power approach.

                         C. The Critical Role of “Camouflage”

     As we have discussed, excessive compensation will not by itself impose
significant outrage costs. A large amount of outrage will occur only if there
is widespread recognition that the level of compensation does not result
from a contract designed to maximize shareholder value, but rather reflects
a large extraction of rents. Thus, outrage costs depend on the extent to which
the rent extraction can be easily and distinctly identified. A large extraction
of rents will not cause the executives or directors harm if it can be dressed,
packaged, or hidden—in short, camouflaged—so that it is not readily appar-
ent as such.
     Accordingly, under the managerial power approach, managers will pre-
fer compensation structures and processes that enable the extraction of rents
to be camouflaged as optimal contracting. As we discuss below, outrage
costs and constraints and the resulting camouflage motive might explain
why firms rely so heavily on compensation surveys and consultants. In Part
III, we will show that many other aspects of existing compensation practice
can be explained by considerations of camouflage.
     One might ask how any observer can tell that rent extraction is taking
place if it is camouflaged. To be sure, rent extraction will sometimes be un-
detectable by outside observers. However, the presence of camouflage does
not imply that rent extraction will be unidentifiable to every observer. As
noted earlier, camouflage is successful as long as it prevents rent extraction
from being easily identifiable to certain large groups of outside observers.
Thus, it is in no way a contradiction for a researcher to view a certain com-


    92 Id.
    93 Randall S. Thomas and Kenneth J. Martin, The Effect of Shareholder Proposals on Execu-
tive Compensation, 67 U Cin L Rev 1021, 1065 (1999). But see Johnson, et al, supra note 91, at
4 (reporting that shareholder proposals do not have a significant effect on either the
amount of executive compensation or its sensitivity to performance).



                                             38
pensation practice as being likely to include camouflaged rents. Such a
judgment simply reflects the conclusion that the researcher has found to her
own satisfaction that the compensation package or program is likely not to
serve shareholders’ interests, but rather to represent rent extraction.
    A testable implication of the managerial power approach is that, when
compensation arrangements and practices deviate from those that are opti-
mal, they tend to do so in a way that minimizes the amount of managerial
rents easily visible to outsiders. As will be seen in Part III, this testable pre-
diction appears to be borne out by the way in which actual practices deviate
from what would be expected under optimal contracting.

                   D. Compensation Consultants and Camouflage

     U.S. public companies typically employ outside consultants to provide
input into the executive compensation process.94 Their use can be explained
within the optimal-contracting framework in the following way: Compensa-
tion consultants contribute to improving executive pay practices for two dis-
tinct reasons. First, they contribute expertise on the design of compensation
packages. Second, they conduct compensation surveys and provide access to
industry pay data that would not be shared directly among companies.95
These data, in turn, might be used to improve the design of compensation
packages.
     Although we agree that compensation consultants can and sometimes
might play such a useful role, we think it is important to understand that
they also might play a role in camouflaging rent. In particular, the process
through which pay consultants are retained—and some evidence regarding
their use—suggest that managers use compensation consultants primarily to
justify executive pay, rather than to optimize it.96
     The compensation consultant has a strong incentive to please the CEO.
Typically, compensation consultants are hired through a company’s human
resources department, and anecdotal evidence suggests that some CEOs are



    94 See John M. Bizjack, Michael L. Lemmon, and Lalitha Naveen, Has the Use of Peer
Groups Contributed to Higher Levels of Executive Compensation? at 10, 44, working paper
(2000), available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=252544> (reporting that at least 65
percent of firms use compensation consultants).
    95 These data are provided in summary form only, of course. Firms participate in com-
pensation surveys with the understanding that individual firm data will be kept confiden-
tial by the consultant.
    96 For an insider’s account of the use of compensation consultants to justify executive
pay, see Crystal, supra note 6.



                                            39
heavily involved in the process.97 Even if the CEO is not normally involved
in the selection of the compensation consultant, the threat of his involvement
the next time—should the consultant suggest a package not to his liking—is
likely to keep the consultant in line. Moreover, executive pay consultants of-
ten work for consulting firms that have other, larger assignments with the
hiring company. This tends to undermine their objectivity.98
     Pay consultants can gain the favor of the CEO by generating a mass of
compensation data that can be used to justify “objectively” the desired pay
plan. For example, they can design surveys to focus on comparative data
that help make the case for higher pay.99 It is widely understood that the
methodology of compensation consultants and boards in devising compen-
sation plans results in a “ratcheting up” of salaries.100
     Once the compensation consultant has collected the “relevant” compara-
tive data on peer compensation, the board almost always decides that it
wants the firm to be at the fiftieth percentile of CEO salary or higher.101
Bizjack, Lemmon, and Naveen report that in a review of the 1997 compensa-
tion committee reports of one hundred firms in the S&P 500 index, ninety-
six firms indicated that they use peer groups in determining management
compensation, and that the “vast majority” of firms that use peer groups set
compensation at or above the fiftieth percentile of the peer group.102 This
leads to an ever increasing ratcheting-up of compensation, including the
compensation of poorly performing executives.103 Examining approximately
1500 publicly traded firms during the period 1992–1998, Bizjack, Lemmon,
and Naveen found that CEOs who are paid below the median amount re-
ceive much larger increases (in both percentage and absolute terms) than
CEOs who are paid above the median, even when these firms have worse
accounting and stock price performance.



    97 See id at 220.
    98 See id at 219 (suggesting that employee benefits and other assignments often pro-
duce more revenue for a consulting firm than the executive compensation consulting as-
signment).
    99 See id at 221 (describing the different rationalizations used by CEOs for pay in-
creases).
    100 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 2517–18; Crystal, supra note 6, at 219.
    101 See Crystal, supra note 6 (reporting that 35 percent of firms surveyed aimed to pay
at the seventy-fifth percentile, while 65 percent aimed for fiftieth percentile pay).
    102 Bizjack, Lemmon, and Naveen, Has the Use of Peer Groups Contributed to Higher Lev-
els of Executive Compensation?, supra note 94, at 2.
    103 See Tully, supra note 6, at 272.



                                            40
    Wade, Porac, and Pollack provide some evidence that companies use
pay consultants and surveys strategically in justifying executive compensa-
tion to outsiders. They find that companies that pay their CEOs larger base
salaries and firms with more concentrated and active outside ownership are
more likely to cite the use of surveys and consultants in justifying executive
pay in their proxy reports to shareholders.104 The authors also find that ac-
counting returns are emphasized when they are high and that market re-
turns are de-emphasized when they are volatile.105 These findings are again
consistent with a view that executives use compensation consultants to gen-
erate and justify higher compensation.

         E. The Design of Stock Option Plans: The Devil Is in the Details

    During the 1980s and 1990s, executive stock options became an increas-
ingly important element of corporate compensation schemes.106 The increas-
ing use of options has been a primary factor driving the tenfold increase in
CEO pay-for-performance sensitivity over the last two decades.
    This trend was responsive to the longstanding demand of management
experts and shareholder activists for a shift away from fixed compensation
to performance-responsive pay.107 Another factor in the rise of options was
the enactment of Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, which disal-
lows a deduction for executive compensation paid to an executive in excess
of $1 million per year unless the excess compensation is “performance-
based.”108
    The managerial power approach does not question the desirability of us-
ing options to compensate executives. Options provide managers with
greater incentive to create shareholder value, and thus the use of options in
executive compensation might well be beneficial to shareholders. Rather, the


    104 See James B. Wade, Joseph F. Porac, and Timothy G. Pollock, Worth, Words, and the
Justification of Executive Pay, 18 J Org Beh 641, 657 (1997).
    105 See id at 658.
    106 Murphy reports that option grants in manufacturing firms increased from 27 per-
cent to 36 percent of total compensation between 1992 and 1996 alone. See Murphy, supra
note 2, at 2490. Yermack finds that, on average, option awards accounted for 20 percent of
CEO compensation in 1984 and 30 percent in 1991. See David Yermack, Do Corporations
Award CEO Stock Options Effectively?, 39 J Fin Econ 237, 238 (1995).
    107 Insensitivity of executive compensation to firm performance reportedly was one
criterion employed by T. Boone Pickens’s United Shareholders of America in its 1986–1993
campaign to improve corporate governance. See Deon Strickland, et al, A Requiem for the
USA: Is Small Shareholder Monitoring Effective?, 40 J Fin & Econ 319, 320 (1996).
    108 See note 17.



                                           41
managerial power approach focuses on whether the magnitude and design
of a particular option-based pay package is close to that which would arise
under optimal contracting.
    In other words, the question is not whether a particular option plan
makes shareholders better or worse off than no option plan, but whether the
“details” of the plan that is adopted—the number of options granted to the
executives and, more importantly, the way in which those options are struc-
tured—are optimal. The devil is in these details, which are very important.
A badly designed option plan might produce significantly less value for
shareholders than a plan constructed to maximize shareholder wealth.109
    Interestingly, the only recent study that considers the effect of options
on shareholder value suggests that the option plans designed by boards do
not reflect optimal contracting. In particular, the study examines publicly
traded U.S. firms between 1992–1997. It finds that boards give CEOs too
many options: the marginal incentive benefit of the last option is less than
the cost to shareholders. In other words, shareholder value would increase if
the number of options held by CEOs were reduced, holding everything con-
stant.110 Thus, the most relevant empirical data suggest that the design of op-
tion programs is consistent with the presence of managerial power and rent
extraction.111


    109 There is an extensive literature on the design of optimal compensation arrange-
ments and related issues. Recent contributions to this literature include Jorge G. Aseff and
Manuel S. Santos, Stock Options and Managerial Optimal Contracts, working paper (2001),
available online at <http://www.cob.asu.edu/pubs/files/aseff-santos.pdf>; John Core
and Wayne Guay, When Contracts Require Risk-Averse Executives to Hold Equity: Implications
for Option Valuation and Relative Performance Valuation, working paper (2001), available
online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=271123>; Tom Nohel and Steven Todd, Executive
Compensation, Reputation, and Risk-Taking Incentives, working paper (2001); Tom Nohel and
Steven Todd, Optimal Compensation for Risk-Averse Executives with Career Concerns, working
paper (2001); Yisong S. Tian, Optimal Contracting, Incentive Effects, and the Valuation of Execu-
tive Stock Options, working paper (2001); Lisa K. Meulbroek, The Efficiency of Equity-Linked
Compensation: Understanding the Full Cost of Awarding Executive Stock Options, 30 Fin Mgmt 5
(Summer 2001); Frank Moers and Erik Peek, Managerial Risk Aversion and Executive Compen-
sation: Measurement Issues and an Empirical Test, working paper (2000); Tom Nohel and Ste-
ven Todd, Executive Compensation, Managerial Risk Aversion, and the Choice of Risky Projects,
working paper (2000) ; George Baker, Distortion and Risk in Optimal Incentive Contracts at 22,
working             paper           (2000),            available             online            at
<http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/research/workshops/wto/PDF/Distortion_and_Risk_15.
pdf>; Li Jin, CEO Compensation, Diversification and Incentives at 25, working paper (2000),
available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=254260>.
    110 Michel A. Habib and Alexander P. Ljungqvist, Firm Value and Managerial Incentives
at 17, working paper (2000), available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=252375>.
    111 The only other study focusing exclusively on options also suggests that option



                                               42
    We will focus on the design of option plans in Part III, where we argue
that many of the most prominent features of option grants—such as the use
of non-indexed options, at-the-money strike prices, and the lack of restric-
tions on unwinding incentives—are better explained by the managerial
power approach, and thus that managerial power likely plays a significant
role in the design of option plans and practices.

                          F. A Note on Conforming to Norms

    In the last ten years there has been much interest among legal scholars in
the existence and evolution of “norms” and their effect on behavior in a
wide variety of contexts. Recently, legal scholars have focused their atten-
tion on the effect of norms in the context of corporate law and corporate
governance.112 It is thus natural to ask whether norms—and, in particular,
the pressure to conform to norms—might play a role in executive compensa-
tion.
    In legal scholarship, the term “norms” has been used generally to refer
to nonlegal rules of conduct and behavior. Some norms simply reflect pat-
terns of behavior that have arisen and tend to persist primarily because ac-
tors observe one another behaving in a particular way and believe that there
is a potential cost to deviating from that behavior. Suppose, for example,
that every year the partners of ABC law firm use firm funds to give each of
their secretaries a Christmas bonus. Beth, a partner at ABC law firm, learns


plans might not be designed optimally. An analysis of companies that adopted executive
stock option plans between 1978 and 1982 determined that cumulative abnormal returns
declined subsequently for two-thirds of the sample, that ROA declined absolutely and ad-
justed for industry, that R&D expenditure decreased, and that perquisite consumption in-
creased. See Richard A. DeFusco, Robert R. Johnson, and Thomas S. Zorn, The Association
between Executive Stock Option Plan Changes and Managerial Decision Making, 20 Fin Mgmt 36,
40 (1991). There have been a number of other studies that find that the use of options in-
creases stock price and cash flow volatility. See, for example, Richard A. DeFusco, Robert
R. Johnson, and Thomas S. Zorn, The Effect of Executive Stock Option Plans on Stockholders and
Bondholders, 45 J Fin 617, 626 (1990); Anup Agrawal and Gershon N. Mandelker, Managerial
Incentives and Corporate Investment and Financing Decisions, 42 J Fin 823 (1987); Shivaram Ra-
jgopal and Terry Shevlin, Early Evidence on the Informativeness of the SEC’s Market Risk Dis-
closures: The Case of Commodity Price Risk Exposure of Oil and Gas Producers, 74 Acct Rev 251
(1999); Catherine Schrand and Haluk Unal, Hedging and Coordinated Risk Management: Evi-
dence from Thrift Conversions, 53 J Fin 979 (1998); Peter A. Tufano, Who Manages Risk?: An
Empirical Examination of Risk Management Practices in the Gold Mining Industry, 51 J Fin 1097
(1996).
    112 See, for example, Melvin A. Eisenberg, Corporate Law and Social Norms, 99 Colum L
Rev 1253–92 (1999), and the articles appearing in the 2001 University of Pennsylvania Law
Review Symposium on Norms and Corporate Law.



                                             43
that every other partner at ABC law firm is going to give his or her assistant
$500 in cash. She must decide how much to give her assistant. If she gives
less than this amount, her assistant might feel insulted. If she gives more,
other partners might feel obligated to give a larger bonus next year lest their
assistants feel insulted, and this may cause the other partners to resent Beth
for “wasting” the firm’s funds and reducing their profits. Thus, Beth will
have an incentive to stick to the established pattern of giving assistants a
Christmas bonus of $500 in cash.
    The pressure to conform probably plays an important role in executive
compensation. At any given point in time, this pressure is likely to affect
both the amount and structure of executive compensation arrangements
recommended by compensation committees and approved by boards. As we
noted earlier, compensation committees recommend pay arrangements
based in large part on the compensation packages they see at other firms.
There is clearly a desire on the part of such committees and the board to con-
form to “the norm,” or at least to be seen as conforming to the norm.
    At a minimum, the desire to conform makes any movement from one
equilibrium to another much slower and more gradual. Compensation
committees’ preference for conforming to the “norm” and fear of deviating
substantially from it means that the evolution of compensation arrange-
ments will take more time. Thus, whatever the nature of the current equilib-
rium, movement from it will be “sticky” due to the desire to conform to es-
tablished patterns.
    The main point we wish to emphasize is that the desire to conform to es-
tablished patterns cannot provide a basis for a full account of executive
compensation. The stickiness arising from the tendency to conform implies
only that movement from one equilibrium to another will be very slow. It
cannot explain why we are in a particular equilibrium to begin with. More
importantly, given that patterns of executive compensation change over
time, norms cannot tell us much about the new equilibrium to which we are
heading, however slowly. To provide a full account of executive compensa-
tion, norms must be combined with another theory such as optimal contract-
ing or managerial power.
    A theory combining norms with the optimal contracting approach
would predict that the evolution of executive compensation over time, al-
though slowed down by the tendency to follow established practices, would
be largely shaped by the forces of optimal contracting. That is, as changing
circumstances make the existing equilibrium suboptimal, boards induced by
market pressure will move toward what would be the new optimal ar-
rangement. Although the stickiness introduced by the desire to conform
would prevent adjustment from being instantaneous, the forces of optimal



                                      44
contracting should be sufficiently strong to ensure that executive compensa-
tion does not deviate for a long time from what participants recognize to be
the optimal arrangement.
    In contrast, the managerial power approach predicts that the evolution
of executive compensation over time is shaped at least in part by the desire
of executives to extract more rents from their firms. When changing circum-
stances create an opportunity to extract additional rents—either by changing
outrage costs and constraints or by giving rise to a new means of camou-
flage—managers will seek to take full advantage of it and will push firms
toward an equilibrium in which they can do so. However, the stickiness due
to norms will slow this movement somewhat.
    Thus, even though we recognize the importance of the pressure to con-
form we need another theory (or other theories) to explain why we are at the
current equilibrium and what forces will move us to the next as circum-
stances change. The question is whether optimal contracting is the only
other theory needed, or whether managerial power must also be taken into
account.

            III. EVIDENCE BETTER EXPLAINED BY THE MANAGERIAL
                             POWER APPROACH

      This Part discusses important elements of the empirical evidence on ex-
ecutive compensation that are difficult to understand within an optimal con-
tracting framework but that are consistent with and can be explained by the
managerial power approach. Some of the compensation practices and pat-
terns we consider—for example, the absence of any significant attempt by
firms to design option plans that at least partly filter out stock price gains
due to industry or general market trends—have long puzzled researchers
adhering to the optimal contracting approach. Others have so far received
little attention in the executive compensation literature (for example, man-
agers’ broad freedom to unwind incentives and to choose the time of such
unwinding).
      We believe that the managerial power approach can better explain these
and other features of the executive compensation landscape. But accepting
our thesis does not depend on accepting our interpretation of each and
every one of these practices and patterns. What is important is the picture
emerging from these patterns and practices in the aggregate. In the aggre-
gate, we suggest, these practices and patterns provide a solid basis for con-
cluding that managerial power is likely to play a significant role in the de-
sign of executive compensation.




                                      45
                 A. Rewarding Executives for General Market Rises

     This section examines a compensation practice that has long been re-
garded as odd by optimal contracting theorists—the practice of compensat-
ing executives for increases in firm value and the stock price that are not in
any way due to their own efforts. For example, conventional options reward
managers for absolute increases in the share price even when those increases
are due solely to factors beyond managers’ control, such as interest rate de-
clines.
     Compensation dollars could be much better targeted if executives re-
ceived these dollars only to the extent that the increase in their firm’s share
price was due to firm-specific performance, rather than sector or general
market performance. To be sure, it is not feasible to filter out perfectly the ef-
fects of sector or general market trends. As will be explained, however, there
are a number of ways of limiting managers’ windfalls from that part of the
stock price increase that would have occurred in any event. Some of these
approaches involve “indexing” the exercise price of options. For example, as
Alfred Rappaport has recently proposed in the Harvard Business Review,
stock options could be designed with an exercise price that rises or falls with
either sector or broader market movements.113 There are other approaches as
well. For example, the vesting of options could be made dependent on the
share price exceeding a certain benchmark. “Moderate” versions of such
vesting schemes might bar vesting only if the firm is one of the worst per-
forming firms in its sector (say, in the bottom 20 percent). Each of the possi-
ble alternative mechanisms would tie an executive’s reward more closely to
firm-specific performance, over which he has considerable control.
     Yet, as this Part explains, firms almost never employ any version (how-
ever moderate) of what we call “reduced-windfall options”—options with
features (such as an indexed exercise price) that screen out effects beyond
managers’ control. Optimal contracting theorists have tried to explain the
failure of all but a handful of companies to employ reduced-windfall options
but, as we will see, their efforts have not been very successful. The wide-
spread failure of firms to adopt mechanisms that filter out sector and market
effects from managers’ option compensation has led some prominent re-
searchers in the field of executive compensation to conclude that “the near



   113 See Alfred Rappaport, New Thinking on How to Link Executive Pay with Performance,
Harv Bus Rev 91, 101 (Mar-Apr 1999). See also Mark A. Clawson and Thomas C. Klein, In-
dexed Stock Options: A Proposal for Compensation Commensurate with Performance, 3 Stan J L,
Bus & Fin 31, 31–50 (1997).



                                            46
complete absence [of such mechanisms] seems to be a puzzle.”114 As we will
show, however, this failure can be explained under the managerial power
approach.

1. The Suboptimality of Rewarding Managers for Market Rises

     The optimal principal-agent contract should compensate the agent based
on the achievement of objectives within the scope of his control. Since
managerial effort essentially is unobservable and accounting results are
noisy and fail to reflect the current value of growth opportunities, the share
price of a firm provides a useful tool for evaluating executive performance.
     However, compensation based on absolute share price performance re-
wards managers even when the managers’ efforts have not contributed to
the share price increase. In particular, the share price increase might be
driven solely by factors external to the firm—such as changes in the econ-
omy that benefit the firm’s industry or interest rate declines that benefit the
market as a whole. One study of U.S. stock prices over a recent ten-year pe-
riod reports that only 30 percent of share price movement reflects corporate
performance, with the remaining 70 percent driven by general market condi-
tions.115 Because of such external factors, even managers who perform
poorly—and whose actions therefore make shareholders relatively worse
off—can profit when their compensation is linked to changes in the absolute
share price.
     To be sure, when managers’ compensation is linked to the absolute
share price, even managers who add value will not profit if their firm’s stock
price nevertheless declines because of changes in the economy or the firm’s
sector. But such negative shocks are unlikely to hurt managers as much as
positive shocks will benefit them. At worst, negative shocks make the op-
tions worthless. Positive shocks, on the other hand, can increase the value of
the options by an unlimited amount. Thus, on an expected-value basis, the
contribution of external market and sector forces to the value of the options
is always positive.
     From shareholders’ perspective, an option plan should be designed to
maximize incentives given the amount of dollars spent, or to achieve a cer-
tain amount of incentives at the lowest possible cost. When managers are
rewarded for market- and sector-wide price movements that have nothing to


   114 Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey B. Liebman, Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?, 113 Q J
Econ 653, 683 n 34 (1998).
   115 See Simon Patterson and Peter Smith, How to Make Top People’s Pay Reflect Perform-
ance, Sunday Times § Bus at 12 (Aug 9, 1998).



                                            47
do with their efforts, the money is poorly spent. This raises the possibility
that the firm could either create the same incentives for less money or use
the same amount of money to create even more powerful incentives.
     The latter possibility is worth spelling out. If the firm gives the manag-
ers one thousand options to buy stock at the current market price of one
hundred dollars, some of the expected value of the options—and therefore
some of the expected cost of the options to other shareholders—comes from
the fact that the stock price might increase for reasons having nothing to do
with the managers’ efforts but rather, say, because of unexpected reductions
in interest rates. To the extent industry- and market-wide effects boost the
stock price, the manager will be “rewarded” for these increases when he ex-
ercises the options and shareholders will pay for this reward, even though
this reward has no effect on the manager’s incentives.
     If we could design a scheme to remove or reduce the undeserved re-
ward component of the option’s value—that is, create a reduced-windfall
option—we could at the same cost give the manager a larger number of dif-
ferently structured options that would provide better incentives by linking
the payoff more closely to the manager’s efforts. Thus, significant benefits
could be obtained from “reduced-windfall” schemes that remove some or all
of the reward that has nothing to do with the manager’s contribution to the
stock price increase.

2. Alternative ways of designing reduced-windfall options

     There are a number of ways that windfall gains from options could be
reduced. One approach that has received a great deal of support from aca-
demics and other commentators is that of “indexing” the exercise price of
the option to the performance of the sector or the market to filter out
changes in the stock price that are not due to the manager’s efforts. To the
extent the indexed option could not be used to capture the expected increase
in the stock price due to non-firm-specific effects, its expected value—and its
expected cost to shareholders—would be lower. We first consider indexing,
and then examine other methods of reducing option-based windfalls.
     a) Indexing. By giving managers options that reward them only for in-
creases in stock price that are firm-specific and thus more likely to result
from the managers’ own efforts, a firm could, at the same cost, give more
options to the managers and thereby increase their reward for creating value
themselves.116 This in turn should induce more effort and lead managers to

    116 See, for example, Shane A. Johnson and Yisong S. Tian, The Value and Incentive Ef-
fects of Non-Traditional Executive Stock Option Plans, 57 J Fin Econ 3, 25–26 (2000) (arguing
that indexed options create more powerful incentives per dollar value than traditional op-



                                             48
do more things that are unpleasant for them but good for shareholders, such
as firing loyal but incompetent subordinates.
     Returning to our example, one might be able to give—at the same ex-
pected cost as one thousand conventional options—1500 options whose
strike price is $100 (the current market price) multiplied by, say, a market
index. Under such a scheme, if the market has risen 30 percent since the op-
tions were granted, the exercise price would be $100 x (1.30) or $130. Al-
though such a scheme would have the same expected cost to the firm, it
would provide stronger incentives. Of course, the index need not reflect the
average performance of the market as a whole—it could reflect the average
performance of firms in the same industry. Using this narrower index would
screen out not only broad market effects, but also effects associated with the
firm’s industry.117
     We should emphasize that standard indexing of exercise prices (index-
ing either to the market average or to the average of a basket of peer firms) is
not the only possibility. Suppose, for example, that one opposes indexing
options to the average performance of peer firms because one believes that
there are problems specific to the firm, not attributable to the CEO, that will
limit the firm’s performance in the short run. Or suppose the firm has no
such problems but one is concerned that the CEO will have insufficient in-
centive to generate value if, in the middle of the vesting period, the CEO
finds his firm ranked at the bottom of the industry and believes there is little
he can do to bring his options into the money. A person with these concerns
might prefer a more “moderate” form of indexing where the exercise price is
indexed not to the average performance of the industry (or the wider mar-
ket) but to a certain fraction of it. Alternatively, one could tie the exercise
price to the performance of the companies in say, the bottom quartile of the
industry.
     Note that such full or partial indexing may lead to the exercise price be-
ing lower than the grant-date market price. It is worthwhile, therefore, to
consider the case in which one wants the exercise price never to fall below
the grant-date market price. In such a case, one could still index the exercise


tions). For a detailed analysis of the incentive effects and valuation of indexed options, see
Shane A. Johnson and Yisong S. Tian, Indexed Executive Stock Options, 57 J Fin Econ 35
(2000).
   117 For an analysis suggesting that indexed options could not screen out all market or
industry effects, see Lisa K. Meulbroek, Executive Compensation Using Relative-Performance-
Based Options: Evaluating the Structure and Costs of Indexed Options at 1–3, working paper
(2001), available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=281028> (contending that an op-
tion with an exercise price tied to a market or industry index does not completely filter out
market or industry effects, and offering an alternative mechanism designed to do so).



                                             49
price but do so only on the upside. This could be done by using an exercise
price that is the greater of (a) the grant-date market price and (b) the index-
adjusted price. Any index could be used. Therefore, one could tie the exer-
cise price to the performance of the broader market, the industry, or some
other set of firms, using average performance or any other metric, such as
percentiles. The only situation in which this semi-indexed scheme would
yield different results than a conventional option is that in which the index
is in positive territory. In such cases, the payouts would be lower. However,
by employing the semi-indexed scheme, the expected savings from not re-
warding the manager for changes in the sector and the market beyond his
control could be used to increase the number of options given at the grant
date and thereby boost performance incentives.
     We want to stress that it is not our intention here to reach firm conclu-
sions on the optimal design of reduced-windfall options. Indeed, it is un-
likely that one size would fit all. The optimal design might well vary from
industry to industry and perhaps even from firm to firm. Our main point is
that using some form of windfall-reduction is likely to be optimal for at least
a significant fraction of, if not all, companies.118
     b) Other methods of reducing windfalls. Although tying the exercise price of
options to market or sector indexes is the best known and perhaps the most
effective way of reducing managers’ gain from windfalls beyond their con-
trol, other approaches could be used.
     One other approach that has been used to reduce managers’ rewards
from windfalls is performance-conditioned vesting of options. Under this

   118 There are other possible benefits to indexing that we have not addressed. For ex-
ample, it has been argued that indexing the exercise price of options could reduce the ex-
ecutive’s exposure to market risk. See Holmstrom, supra note 8, 13 Bell J Econ, at 328–30;
Holmstrom, supra note 8, 10 Bell J Econ, at 74–75. But see Gerald T. Garvey and Todd T.
Milbourn, Market-Indexed Executive Compensation: Strictly for the Young at 2, working paper
(2001),                       available                       online                      at
<http://www.finance.commerce.ubc.ca/research/abstracts/BUCFIN00-6.html> (arguing
that older, wealthier executives can always offset the market risk generated by non-
indexed options by reducing their equity portfolios); Jin, supra note 109, at 25 (observing
that indexing shifts market risk back to shareholders who might also be risk averse, and
thus that from a pure risk-sharing perspective the optimal contract might not involve in-
dexing); Core and Guay, supra note 109, at 1–4 (observing that to the extent that a firm re-
quires managers to invest in firm shares rather than use the funds to invest in the market,
non-indexed options expose the managers to market risk that they would have been ex-
posed to in any event); David M. Schizer, Tax Constraints on Indexed Options, 149 U Pa L Rev
1941, 1942–43 (2001) (arguing that executives would prefer market risk to additional firm-
specific risk). In any event, our focus is not on the riskiness of conventional options but
rather on the fact that the random noise associated with conventional options has signifi-
cant positive value.



                                            50
approach, managers who do not meet certain performance targets forfeit
their options. The exercise price is usually set to the market price on the date
of grant. Thus, if the executive is permitted to exercise the options, he can
profit to the full extent of the stock price appreciation. However, the options
do not vest (become exercisable) unless certain performance targets are
met.119
     These performance targets might involve an index. For example, the ex-
ecutives might be required to generate share price increases that beat the
market or a basket of similar stocks. This approach is like an indexed option
in that there is no payout unless the share price exceeds a certain bench-
mark. Thus, to the extent that the increase of a firm’s stock price merely re-
flects market- or sector-wide changes, the managers do not receive a reward.
It is unlike an indexed option in that the payout, if made, corresponds to the
absolute share price increase rather than the amount by which the stock
price exceeds some benchmark.
     The performance targets can also use other benchmarks. For example,
vesting could be conditional on the firm’s earnings per share, net asset
value, return on capital, and/or cash generation. Such measures might not
screen out sector-wide effects (for example, the effect of an increase in oil
prices on an oil drilling firm) but might screen out market-wide effects (such
as a decline in interest rates). Another approach is to provide cash or shares
to executives who beat the market or the sector (depending on the particular
plan) over a three-, four-, or five-year period.

3. The Rare Use of Reduced-Windfall Options

    Only a small fraction of companies use reduced-windfall options even
though options, as we have noted, now represent the largest single compo-
nent of the average executive’s compensation package.120 To the best of our
knowledge, there is only one publicly traded firm that indexes its options:
Level 3 Communications, a computer networking firm, which ties the exer-
cise price of executive options to the S&P 500 index. Not surprisingly, Level
3 Communications has attracted considerable attention from the financial

    119 Another variation of performance vesting, which is more favorable to executives,
enables executives to accelerate the vesting of their options if they meet specified perform-
ance targets. Because this form of performance vesting makes the option more valuable to a
manager than a conventional option (with the same strike price and initial vesting period),
it does not reduce the reward from windfalls.
    120 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 70 (finding that only one out of one thousand large
public companies examined indexed the exercise price of options to market or peer per-
formance).



                                             51
press and has garnered widespread praise for its shareholder-friendly ap-
proach to executive compensation.121
     There are also a small number of firms—such as Monsanto and Citi-
group—that reduce option windfalls to executives by conditioning option-
vesting on the firm meeting certain performance targets. For example, Mon-
santo will not allow the CEO’s options to vest unless he generates share-
holder returns of at least 10.5 percent per annum over a five-year period.122
Like Level 3 Communications, these firms are widely praised by the busi-
ness press and by prominent market personalities such as Warren Buffett.123
However, the use of performance-conditioned vesting is rare. Only 5 percent
of the 250 largest publicly traded firms condition option vesting on perform-
ance.124
     Accordingly, the overwhelming majority of executives are rewarded for
absolute share price increases, even though such increases might be purely a
function of broad market or sector movements. Thus, an executive whose
firm’s stock price has increased because of favorable sector- or market-wide
developments can make a large profit by exercising her options and selling
the acquired stock even when she was not in any way responsible for the
share price increase. Indeed, during the 1990s stock market boom, an execu-
tive might have made a large amount of money even if her firm’s perform-
ance was worse than that of every other peer firm. Remarking on the situa-
tion, Warren Buffett has said, “There is no question in my mind that medio-
cre CEOs are getting incredibly overpaid. And the way it’s being done is
through stock options.”125

    121 See Joann S. Lublin, Pay for Outperforming: James Crowe, Chief of Level 3 Communica-
tions, Makes the Case for Linking Stock Options to Market-Beating Gains, Wall St J R8 (Apr 6,
2000) (reporting on Level 3 Communication’s use of S&P 500 indexed options and noting
that “[t]oday, no other public corporation takes such a daring approach to equity compen-
sation”).
    122 See Tully, supra note 6, at 272.
    123 Id.
    124 See Alan Levinsohn, A Garden of Stock Options Helps Harvest Talent, 82 Strategic Fin
81, 81 (2001). Another 15 percent use performance-vesting options that accelerate vesting if
certain targets are met. Id. Such accelerated-vesting options are more favorable to manag-
ers than similar conventional options without an acceleration feature. If the performance
target is not met, the payout associated with the accelerated-vesting options is the same as
that of a conventional option with some exercise price and maturity. Thus, the accelerated-
vesting option permits managers to reap the same windfalls as holders of conventional op-
tions. However, they might be preferable to conventional options if the acceleration feature
induces the executives to exert more effort or make decisions that are better for sharehold-
ers.
    125 Tully, supra note 6, at 272.



                                             52
4. Is there an Adequate Optimal Contracting Explanation?

     Why then do we not observe more reduced-windfall options? Financial
economists have tried to come up with explanations. As we show below,
however, none of the suggested explanations can adequately explain the
rare use of such options.
     a) Design costs. It has been suggested that it might be too costly to design
schemes that filter out the industry or market noise that gives rise to wind-
falls.126 However, the economic cost of filtering does not seem to be a plausi-
ble explanation for the absence of reduced-windfall options. A wide variety
of sector and broader market indices are reported daily in The Wall Street
Journal and are available online from numerous sources. Moreover, the
SEC’s executive compensation disclosure regulations already require public
corporations to select and present industry, line-of-business, or peer-group
stock price performance data.127 Firms are thinking about the relevant indi-
ces and tracking these data already. Incorporating this information into their
option plans would be trivial.
     b) Avoiding distortions in managers’ decisions to enter other industries. It has
also been suggested that the optimal agency contract might not involve fil-
tering out industry noise. Shareholders, it is postulated, might prefer incen-
tives that prompt executives to adapt to poor industry conditions by shifting
company resources into more profitable sectors.128 Providing such incentives
requires rewarding managers not only for their own efforts in a given sector,
but also for sector-driven rises beyond their control.
     This sector-shifting explanation is unlikely to explain the lack of re-
duced-windfall options, however. To begin, it is not clear that investors
want established firms to shift between industries. Investors can diversify
across industries as they choose. Having decided to invest in an industry
and to accept the sector-specific risk, diversified investors might simply
want their firms to outperform the others in that sector. Second, and more
importantly, even if investors are seeking maximum absolute performance
rather than maximum performance within a sector, one could still easily re-
duce certain windfalls without adversely affecting managers’ incentives. In


   126 See Surya N. Janakiraman, Richard A. Lambert, and David F. Larcker, An Empirical
Investigation of the Relative Performance Evaluation Hypothesis, 30 J Acct Rsrch 53, 66 (1992).
   127 See 17 CFR § 229.402 (2001).
   128 See Janakiraman, Lambert, and Larcker, supra note 126, at 67. Compare Ronald A.
Dye, Relative Performance Evaluation and Project Selection, 30 J Acct Rsrch 27, 28 (1992) (argu-
ing that managers who are paid based on performance relative to their sector will prefer to
operate in industries where their relative talent, not their absolute talent, is greatest).



                                              53
particular, a firm that wished to encourage managers to shift into more prof-
itable sectors and reduce windfalls could employ a relatively broad index,
such as the S&P 500 (rather than an industry-specific index) to screen out
market-wide (rather than sector-wide) rises that are beyond the managers’
control. The failure of all but a handful of firms to use any form of reduced-
windfall options, then, suggests that sector-shifting considerations cannot
explain the absence of these options.
    c) Softening industry competition. Strategic considerations underlie one
explanation for the near-absence of reduced-windfall options.129 There is
evidence that executive compensation is positively related to the perform-
ance of rival firms, particularly in industries that are subject to high levels of
product competition, and it has been suggested that implicitly linking pay to
rival firm performance in such cases serves shareholders by softening com-
petition and making supra-competitive returns possible.130
    Once again, however, while fostering collusion among firms in competi-
tive markets might explain the failure to filter out sector-wide price in-
creases, the theory does not explain why these companies fail to filter out
broader price increases. In addition, the limited evidence concerning the use
of explicit relative performance evaluation cuts against these strategic ex-
planations: In annual incentive plans where we do observe such explicit
evaluation, industry peer group comparison is overwhelmingly favored
over broad-based comparison.131 Therefore, the implicit collusion theory
does not appear to offer strong support for firms’ almost complete failure to
use reduced-windfall options.
    d) Retaining CEOs during market booms. Himmelberg and Hubbard offer
an explanation for firms’ failure to filter out broad market effects based on
the scarcity of talented managers.132 They find evidence that CEO compensa-
tion is positively correlated with market returns and that the market effect
on compensation is stronger in larger firms. They argue that this evidence


   129 See Rajesh K. Aggarwal and Andrew A. Samwick, Executive Compensation, Relative
Performance Evaluation, and Strategic Competition: Theory and Evidence, 54 J Fin 1999, 2000
(1999).
   130 See id.
   131 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 74, Table 9.
   132 See Himmelberg and Hubbard, supra note 9, at 1–3. See also Paul Oyer, Why Do
Firms Use Incentives that Have No Incentive Effects? at 1–2, Stanford University Graduate
School of Business working paper (2000), available online at <http://faculty-
gsb.stanford.edu/oyer/wp/luck.pdf> (presenting a model in which it is optimal to pay
individuals for group-level, industry-level, or economy-wide performance because agents’
opportunities are correlated with aggregate performance and it is costly to adjust terms of
employment contracts).



                                            54
can be explained by inelasticity in the supply of individuals qualified to run
large firms.133 On their theory, the demand for executives rises when the
economy is robust and companies need to pay CEOs more to retain them.
Allowing stock option rewards to increase with increasing market levels
during boom periods responds to this need. CEO talent is more important
and the supply less elastic in the case of large firms, they suggest, and for
this reason large firms need to make executive pay even more sensitive to
broad stock market levels.134
     To begin, it is not clear that a CEO is likely to take a new job outside his
current industry. If such a move is unlikely, the CEO’s compensation need
not be tied to broader market movements. Rather, his pay needs to be linked
only to the performance of his own industry. The CEO could then be paid
with options designed to reduce market-based but not sector-based wind-
falls. The “market boom” theory therefore cannot explain the use of conven-
tional options in situations where CEOs are unlikely to be offered a job in a
different industry.
     In addition, the market boom theory appears to assume that the CEO
and the firm cannot renegotiate his salary if he gets a better offer. However,
there is no reason to believe that in most cases the CEO and his firm would
not be able to adjust his compensation in the face of a higher outside offer.
When renegotiation is possible, it would make sense for a firm to pay the
CEO with options that screen out sector and broader market rises and then
retain the CEO by countering any outside offer with one that is even more
attractive. The advantage of this approach compared to the use of windfall-
rewarding options is that the firm saves money by not paying the executive
extra compensation unless and until he receives an attractive outside offer.
     Finally, even if renegotiation were difficult and CEOs were likely to be
hired by firms in other sectors, the market boom theory still fails to ade-
quately explain standard practices that tie executive compensation to broad
stock price increases. Consider a company that signs a three-year contract
with its CEO. The CEO is given options that vest gradually over the three-
year period. Suppose that the company seeks to address a scenario in which,
after two of the three years, the economy booms, the stock market rises, and
the executive is tempted to switch to a higher-paying firm. At this point, in-
creasing the value of unvested options to reflect the hypothesized increased
demand for CEOs might assist in retention. Two-thirds of the options would
have vested, however, and increasing the value of any of the vested options
that are still unexercised would further increase the executive’s compensa-

  133 See Himmelberg and Hubbard, supra note 9, at 1–3.
  134 See id.



                                         55
tion without increasing the executive’s opportunity cost of departing. If a
company is concerned about retention in the foregoing scenario, establishing
a mechanism through which executives are issued additional reduced-
windfall options in the event of a market boom would be superior to grant-
ing conventional options.
     e) Discouraging excessive risk alteration. Saul Levmore has offered a “su-
per-risk alteration” explanation for the lack of indexing (which, we should
note, would also apply to other types of reduced-windfall options). Accord-
ing to Levmore, indexed options would encourage managers to differentiate
their firms from the index in order to increase the likelihood that their op-
tions would be in-the-money.135 This in turn could cause managers to forgo
the best projects in favor of lower-value projects that have higher volatility
(relative to the index).136
     But even if indexing affects managers’ choice of projects, it is not clear
that indexing would overall worsen managers’ decisionmaking. Indeed, it
could have the opposite effect. It is well understood that risk-averse manag-
ers tend to prefer low volatility projects, even when they do not maximize
the present value of the firm’s assets. Options, which increase the reward to
managers for choosing projects with more volatile distributions, give man-
agers an incentive to choose riskier projects. Indeed, that is one of the rea-
sons managers are given options in the first instance. However, there is no
reason to believe that ordinary options completely overcome the effects of
managerial risk aversion. Managers might still avoid some high-value but
high-volatility projects. In such a case, if indexing were to affect managers’
project choice in the manner suggested by Levmore, it could overall improve
the quality of projects chosen.
     In addition, even if Levmore is correct that indexing would overall
worsen the quality of projects selected by managers, it does not automati-
cally follow that this effect would be sufficiently large to overcome the po-
tential benefits of indexing—namely, the increased incentive to exert effort

   135 Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms, 149 U Pa L Rev 1901,
1922–23, 1930 (2001). Options with performance-conditioned vesting could have similar ef-
fects.
   136 Id at 1923, 1930. Levmore acknowledges that the problem with indexed options he
identifies cannot explain the failure to give indexed options to employees who either (1) do
not have control over the firm’s project choice or (2) are easily monitored. See id at 1931. To
explain the failure to give indexed options to these categories of employees, Levmore ar-
gues that a norm of “non-conflicting fortunes” prevents firms from distributing options in
such a way that some employees’ options would be in-the-money and others’ would be
out-of-the-money. Id at 1931–32. Thus, the need to give some employees (including the
CEO) conventional options requires that every other employee get conventional options.
See id at 1932–35.



                                              56
and boost shareholder value, given whatever project has been selected. Fi-
nally, even if the adverse effect suggested by Levmore were sufficiently
large to outweigh the benefits of indexed options in most cases, there is no
reason to believe that indexed options would create worse overall incentives
in the overwhelming majority of publicly traded firms. The potentially ad-
verse risk-alteration effects of indexed options are thus unlikely to account
for their almost complete absence.
     f) Saving taxes. David Schizer has identified a potential tax advantage of
conventional options over indexed options that could, it is argued, be a par-
tial explanation for the absence of indexing.137 As noted in Part II.B.1, since
1994 the annual pay of a CEO or top officer in excess of $1 million has not
been deductible by a publicly held corporation unless the excess compensa-
tion is performance-based: namely, the compensation is based upon the
achievement of performance goals established by a compensation committee
composed solely of independent directors.138 Both conventional and indexed
options qualify as performance-based.139 However, because a conventional
option does not screen out market or industry effects, the option provides
some value to managers that is not performance-based. Thus, a conventional
option offers non-performance-based pay that is exempt from the $1 million
deductibility cap. The tax benefit identified by Schizer would be useful to a
tax-paying firm that wishes to give a manager non-performance-based pay
in excess of $1 million and desires to give that pay in the form of a call on the
market.
     However, indexed options were extremely rare even before this rule
took effect in 1994. Moreover, many firms do not pay any taxes because they
are not yet profitable, and almost all of these firms do not use indexed op-
tions.140 Thus, as Schizer acknowledges, this tax advantage cannot entirely
explain the almost complete absence of indexed options.


   137 See David M. Schizer, Tax Constraints on Indexed Options, 149 U Pa L Rev 1941,
1942–43 (2001). As the discussion should make clear, one could also argue that the tax ad-
vantage of conventional options is a partial explanation for the lack of options with per-
formance-conditioned vesting.
   138 See 26 USC § 162m (1994).
   139 See Schizer, supra note 137, at 1942.
   140 It is not clear that, in an optimal contracting framework, even a tax-paying firm
would ever wish to give a manager this type of non-performance-based pay. Schizer sug-
gests that this form of pay might be valuable to risk-averse managers who do not want
their pay tied entirely to firm-specific performance. But if managers are risk-averse they
would place more value on cash than on a call option with the same expected value. Thus,
from an optimal contracting perspective, it would not make sense to give a manager a call
on the market with an expected value of $1 unless the risk-adjusted value of the call to the



                                            57
     g) Reducing managerial risk-bearing cost. It has been argued that standard
indexed options (options whose exercise price is indexed to the sector or
market average) would impose too much additional risk of nonpayment on
risk-averse executives. Kevin Murphy reports that the probability that a
given stock will earn returns in excess of a value-weighted index is below 50
percent, while a typical ten-year conventional option that is (like most con-
ventional options) granted at-the-money has a probability of expiring in-the-
money of over 80 percent.141 Presumably, risk-averse executives given stan-
dard indexed options rather than conventional options would demand in-
dexed options that have a higher expected value than the conventional op-
tions they would be replacing. The same claim could be made with respect
to options subject to performance-conditioned vesting.
     There are at least two problems with this argument. First, and most im-
portantly, a reduced probability of payout is not an inevitable consequence
of indexing. To be sure, indexing to sector or market averages would gener-
ally reduce the probability of a payout. But as we have emphasized, stan-
dard indexing is not the only possible form of indexing. One could instead
effect a more moderate form of indexing that would put the CEO in-the-
money even if she beats fewer than 50 percent of the other firms. In fact, one
could easily design an indexed option that has the same probability of pay-
out as a conventional option.
     Suppose, for example, that conventional ten-year options have an 80
percent likelihood of payout, and that one wished to design a ten-year sec-
tor-indexed option for ABC’s CEO with the same probability of payout. And
suppose that there are ten firms in ABC’s sector. One could simply tie the
exercise price of the CEO’s options to the stock price performance of the sec-
ond worst performing firm in ABC’s sector. Thus ABC’s CEO will get a posi-
tive payout as long as ABC is one of the eight best performers in the ten-firm
sector (and, of course, the better ABC performs, the higher the payout). The
advantage of such an indexed option over a conventional option with the
same payout probability is that it provides much better incentives than the
conventional option by screening out market- and sector-wide effects and
thereby tying the CEO’s compensation much more closely to the firm-
specific value he creates.


CEO, $x < $1, is greater than the after-tax cost of the call to the firm, $(1 – t). If $x < $(1 – t),
it would be cheaper for the firm to give the manager $x of nondeductible cash than a call
option with an expected value of $1 that costs the firm $(1 – t). Put differently, conventional
options are not a useful form of non-performance-based compensation unless the CEO dis-
counts this risky form of pay by less than the firm’s marginal tax rate.
    141 See Kevin J. Murphy, Explaining Executive Compensation: Managerial Power versus the
Perceived Cost of Stock Options, 69 U Chi L Rev 847, 863 (2002).



                                                 58
     Second, even if one wished to use standard indexed options, and mov-
ing from conventional to standard indexed options requires increasing the
expected value of the CEO’s compensation, there are likely to be at least
some cases in which shareholders would prefer such a tradeoff. Sharehold-
ers would prefer such a tradeoff whenever the extra value generated by im-
proving the CEO’s incentives exceeds the amount of additional compensa-
tion that must be paid to the CEO to offset the additional risk of nonpay-
ment. It is highly unlikely that in almost every publicly traded firm the CEO
is so risk-averse that the additional compensation that must be paid to the
CEO in order to compensate him for the extra risk imposed by standard in-
dexed options exceeds the additional value that would be created by im-
proving the CEO’s incentives.
     h) Managers’ ability to undo indexing. It has been argued that indexing
might be futile because managers can always make adjustments in their
portfolios to offset the effect of indexing.142 According to this argument,
managers’ outside investments generally are not restricted. If a manager is
given indexed options (which, for example, screen out market effects), she
can use personal assets to invest in the market portfolio in such a way that
the combination of (i) the indexed options and (ii) her market portfolio in-
vestment generates the returns of a conventional option on her firm’s
stock.143 If such adjustments can be made, the argument goes, then there is
no purpose incurring transaction costs to create indexed options in the first
instance.
     To be sure, a manager given indexed options can invest her own funds
in a portfolio that is designed to combine with her indexed options in a way
that yields the returns of a conventional option on her firm’s stock. But the
fact that the manager can buy such a portfolio with her own money hardly
means that it would be optimal for the firm to buy this portfolio for her. Not
doing so would save money that the firm could make available to share-
holders directly or use to create more powerful incentives for the manager.
     The only reason to give the manager conventional options is if it is de-
sirable for shareholders that the manager have such a portfolio. We have
seen, however, that this is unlikely to be the case. In short, the ability of the
manager to put together such a portfolio does not mean that the firm should
use its limited compensation dollars to do that itself.


   142 See Li Jin, CEO Compensation, Diversification, and Incentives, working paper (2001),
available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=254260>.
   143 In principle, one could also design financial contracts that, in conjunction with op-
tions whose vesting is performance-conditioned, would replicate the return of a conven-
tional option.



                                            59
5. Accounting Considerations

     A final and very commonly voiced explanation for the lack of indexing
deserves special attention because it applies not only to indexing but also to
performance-conditioned vesting. Most practitioners and many academics
attribute the dearth of indexing at least in part to the unfavorable accounting
treatment of these options.144 Under FASB rules, a company is not required
to take a charge against earnings when it issues an option with a predeter-
mined exercise price and expiration date and that exercise price equals or
exceeds the fair market value of the stock on the date of the grant.145 Accord-
ingly, conventional at-the-money (or out-of-the-money) stock options never
produce a corporate earnings charge. Indexed options, however, lack a fixed
exercise price and therefore fall outside of this charge-free zone. Companies
issuing indexed options must mark these options against the market on a
regular basis and accrue an earnings charge reflecting the appreciation in the
value of the option over the indexed exercise price. So, the argument runs,
conventional options are preferred over indexed options because the former
result in higher reported earnings, which enhance share value.146 Options
that do not vest unless performance conditions are met are subject to the
same unfavorable accounting treatment as indexed options.
     a) Some firms already use reduced-windfall options. If accounting considera-
tions were to preclude the use of reduced-windfall options, we would not
expect any firms to be observed using them. However, as noted earlier, 5
percent of the largest 250 firms use options that do not vest unless execu-
tives meet certain performance targets. These options—like indexed op-
tions—must be charged against accounting earnings. This suggests that un-
favorable accounting treatment is unlikely to explain other firms’ failure to
use reduced-windfall options. Furthermore, in at least several cases, institu-
tional investors have put forward shareholder resolutions calling for index-
ing, which they would not do if indexing were expected to hurt share value.
     b) If the stock market is efficient, accounting should be irrelevant. The account-
ing explanation assumes that the cost of conventional options is hidden from

    144 See, for example, Murphy, supra note 2, at 21; Hall and Liebman, supra note 57, at 6
(reporting practitioners’ assertion that option plans with “bad accounting” are not seri-
ously considered).
    145 See APB Opinion No 25. See also Ronald L. Groves, Executive Compensation ¶ 214.04
at 498 (CCH Tax Transactions Library 1992).
    146 To the extent that the managers’ bonuses are based on reported earnings, higher
earnings also increase the bonuses. But presumably if the board were sophisticated enough
to use indexed options, it would understand that the bonus formula would need to be ad-
justed to reflect the accounting effect of these options.



                                            60
the stock market if it is not charged to earnings. But firms not reporting the
actual cost of conventional options as an accounting expense are required to
disclose, in the footnotes to their financial statements, pro forma net income
and earnings-per-share figures that include an accounting adjustment for
these options (based on the grant-date value).147 Thus, if market participants
read the footnotes they should be able to figure out how the issuance of con-
ventional options affects accounting earnings.
     To be sure, reduced-windfall options would require marking-to-market
and accruing an earnings charge every quarter in which the options become
more in-the-money. Conventional options do not. Thus, the difference be-
tween conventional and reduced-windfall options is not only their location
on the income statement, but also the frequency with which they appear on
the income statement. However, the value of the option at the grant date
should equal the expected value of the payoff of the option. Thus, the
amounts reported as charges to earnings in the income statement should
not, on average, exceed the amounts reported in footnotes.
     Given the pro forma disclosure requirement associated with conven-
tional options, one may question whether the “unfavorable” treatment of
reduced-windfall options affects the stock price of a company that adopts
these options. Are stock prices affected differently if an earnings charge ap-
pears in the income statement rather than in the footnotes? If stock prices
largely reflect publicly available information in accordance with the semi-
strong form of the efficient capital markets hypothesis,148 the location of the
disclosure does not matter and the unfavorable accounting treatment of re-
duced-windfall options would not adversely affect stock prices.149
     c) Even if markets are inefficient, the use of reduced-windfall options might still
make shareholders better off. We accept the possibility that markets are not per-
fectly efficient and that the disclosure mechanism might therefore affect a
company’s stock price. Even if this is the case, however, it does not follow
that the lack of reduced-windfall options reflects optimal contracting. It may
be that executives of firms not using reduced-windfall options avoid them
because the charges resulting from their use would have a negative impact

   147 See Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 14 (Oct 1995).
   148 See Richard A. Brealey and Stewart C. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance 369 (Ir-
win McGraw-Hill 6th ed 2000).
   149 Responding to the concern that investors may be misled by the company disclosing
options expense only by footnote, Microsoft’s CFO noted, “[T]he Street figures it out pretty
fast.” Laura Jereski, Share the Wealth: As Options Proliferate, Investors Question Effect on Bot-
tom Line, Wall St J A1 (Jan 14, 1999). See also Rappaport, supra note 113, at 94 (arguing that
option disclosure has the same effect on stock price whether the information appears in the
income statement or in its footnotes).



                                               61
on the firms’ stock prices. If so, avoiding indexing in these cases might be in
shareholders’ interest. But this would be the case only if, with respect to the
firms that do not use reduced-windfall options and that have not been asked
by shareholders to institute them, (i) the market is inefficient; (ii) the market
is sufficiently inefficient that there will be a substantial short-term decline in
the price from moving to indexed or performance-conditioned options (in
the long run, presumably, the stock price will reflect the fundamental value
of the firm);150 and (iii) the cost of the short-term decline in share price to
shareholders (who might sell in the interim for liquidity reasons) is greater
than the benefit of using reduced-windfall options. It is far from clear that all
these propositions hold for firms in general and that accounting considera-
tions can thus provide a complete explanation for the almost complete ab-
sence of reduced-windfall options.

6. The Managerial Power Explanation

    Although optimal contracting considerations cannot easily explain why
the overwhelming majority of firms do not use any form of reduced-
windfall options, the managerial power approach offers a number of com-
pelling reasons for the almost complete absence of these mechanisms.
    Most importantly, for the same reasons that reduced-windfall options
would be better for shareholders, these options would be less favorable to
managers: reduced-windfall options would provide managers with less
money or would require them to cut managerial slack, or both. Thus, as long
as managers can get away with the use of conventional options, they will do
so.
    As we explained above, the expected value of a conventional option is
substantially greater than that of a reduced-windfall option. Specifically, the
return on the conventional option is equal to the windfall-reduced return
plus the windfall portion of the return that is screened out by, for example,
indexing. Consider, for example, an option indexed to the firm’s sector.
Since the market return has a substantial expected value for any given pe-
riod, the value of a conventional option is much greater than that of the in-
dexed option. An executive of a company that performs worse than all of the
other firms in its sector might receive no gains from an indexed option, but
would receive substantial gains from a non-indexed option in any case in
which the firm’s stock price increases over time.


   150 There is considerable evidence that the market sees through obvious accounting
manipulations, which suggests that many in the market would ignore the change in ac-
counting earnings due to a one-time move to reduced-windfall options.



                                         62
     The prospect of gains arising from market and sector movements does
not have any incentive effect on managers. As we explained earlier, from the
shareholders’ perspective these gains represent wasted money. By tying the
options to market or sector performance, the firm could create the same in-
centives at a lower price, saving shareholders money. Alternatively, the firm
could use the same amount of money it currently spends on conventional
options to give managers a larger number of reduced-windfall options,
which would create more powerful incentives. In either case, shareholders
would benefit.
     But in either case, managers would be worse off. If the firm provides
them with the same amount of incentives at a lower cost to shareholders, the
managers will earn less. If, on the other hand, the firm provides them with
more incentives at the same cost to shareholders, the managers will not earn
less but will need to work harder and smarter for the same compensation.
For example, the managers might need to downsize their empires, fire loyal
but unproductive subordinates, and take other steps that might be person-
ally unpleasant but are necessary to boost shareholder value. Thus, for the
same reasons that reduced-windfall options are better for shareholders, they
are worse for managers.
     Furthermore, indexing the exercise price (or conditioning vesting on the
firm outperforming a certain number of other companies) might be undesir-
able for many managers because it would shine a spotlight on their per-
formance relative to their peers. Sector indexing, for example, would explic-
itly reveal the ranking of each manager against other managers in the same
industry. This, in turn, would expose 50 percent of all managers as being be-
low average. To the extent that managers do not know where they would
rank, the fear of being ranked below average might lead all of the managers
in a sector—even those who are fairly confident in their abilities—to oppose
indexing.
     Note that the fear of being exposed as relatively mediocre is completely
distinct from the risk of nonpayment under an indexing regime. Suppose,
for example, that managers were guaranteed a minimum payment even if
their firm performs worse than all other firms in their sector. These manag-
ers would still be embarrassed if the board or the compensation committee
were forced to report that the reason the managers earned what they did
was that the firm was the worst-performing in its sector. Thus, the fear of
embarrassment would arise even if the firm adopted a soft form of indexing
that provided a greater likelihood of payout than conventional options.
     There is a third possible reason why managers might oppose reduced-
windfall options—the desire to keep option compensation more camou-
flaged. Suppose that, as some have claimed, the market is more likely to no-



                                     63
tice the cost of managers’ options when they appear as charges against earn-
ings rather than in the footnotes of their financial statements. In that case,
executives may oppose reduced-windfall options also because they believe
the increased salience of the charge to earnings will draw additional nega-
tive attention to their option compensation.
     Indeed, this fear of exposure may explain managers’ fierce resistance to
the FASB’s attempt to rationalize options accounting. Financially, there is no
plausible justification for the disparate treatment of conventional and in-
dexed or performance-conditioned options. The FASB attempted several
years ago to impose a requirement, essentially in line with the current treat-
ment of indexed and performance-conditioned options, that all stock-based
compensation be accounted for on a rational and consistent basis.151 Encoun-
tering heated resistance, the FASB stopped short of requiring firms to adopt
its “fair value” method of option accounting.152 Instead, FASB decided to re-
quire companies that fail to adopt the new standards voluntarily and instead
continue to employ the traditional accounting methods (almost all firms) to
disclose the information in footnotes.153 Thus, to the extent the market does
not fully notice the cost of options reported in footnotes, conventional op-
tions enable managers to better camouflage rent extraction.
     Of course, in certain situations one type of reduced-windfall option—
indexed options—makes executives better off. In particular, if the index de-
clines from the issue date to the exercise date, the exercise price will fall, in-
creasing the profits from exercise of the option. As explained earlier, the
amount by which executives would be made better off in such cases is likely
to be less, on average, than the amount by which they would be made worse
off when the index increases. However, executives are risk averse, and thus
might be willing to make such a tradeoff. One might ask, therefore, why
managers do not find this aspect of indexing sufficiently appealing.
     The answer, we believe, is quite simple. As will be explained in Part
III.C, when the stock price declines, executives might be able to get their op-
tions repriced at a lower exercise price. In such a case, they have ex post in-
dexing on the downside. However, when the stock price increases for rea-
sons unrelated to the CEO’s performance, the options are not repriced at a
higher price and the CEO gets to benefit fully. Thus the CEO is in the posi-
tion of “heads I win, tails I don’t lose.” And this is better for the CEO than
indexing, where there is a favorable adjustment on the downside but also an
unfavorable adjustment on the upside.

  151 See Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, supra note 147, at 23–25.
  152 See Crystal, supra note 6, at 234.
  153 See Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, supra note 147, at 14.



                                            64
     We are not claiming that the practice of using conventional rather than
reduced-windfall options arose because managers consciously preferred and
pushed for the use of such options when they were first introduced on a
large scale. It may well be the case that those who initially advocated the use
of options—whether they were academics, compensation consultants, insti-
tutional investors, or even the managers themselves—had not thought much
about the benefits of designing options in a way that prevents or reduces
rewards for general market or sector rises. However, for some years now
academics, leading investors, and business commentators have understood
the advantages of such option designs, and in a number of firms such de-
signs (for example, vesting conditional on performance) have been imple-
mented. Thus, the puzzle for the optimal contracting view is not why the
practice of rewarding managers for general or sector increases arose in the
first place. Rather the challenge for this view is to explain why this practice
has persisted for so long and why designs aimed at reducing such rewards
have been introduced so sparingly.154

7. Is Non-Option Compensation Adjusted to Reduce Windfalls?

     It is difficult to reconcile firms’ failure to adopt reduced-windfall options
with optimal contracting. Before moving on, however, we should consider
whether managers’ non-option compensation is adjusted to offset any wind-
fall managers receive through the option component of their compensation
so as to better tie total compensation to the value created by the managers’
own efforts. That is, companies can take the managers’ performance and the
managers’ option profits into account ex post in adjusting bonuses and fu-
ture salary, and in deciding whether to retain an executive. For example, the
board could reduce the cash compensation of a relatively poorly performing
manager who has profited heavily from his options because of sector-wide


    154 One might be inclined to think that the practice of using conventional options per-
sists not because of managerial power but simply because of inertia. Indeed, we acknowl-
edged earlier in our discussion of norms that the desire of boards to conform to “the norm”
(and avoid the possible risks associated with change) is likely to introduce “stickiness” into
executive compensation and slow movement from one equilibrium to another. However, it
is unlikely that such inertia can explain the almost universal use of conventional options.
First, stickiness has not stopped compensation consultants from rapidly introducing and
“selling” to clients new option features that make managers better off—such as reloading
and accelerated vesting. Second, a number of the largest and most prestigious firms in the
U.S. have already adopted windfall-reducing features such as performance-conditioned
option vesting. Thus, boards of other firms that are interested in linking compensation
more closely to the managers’ contribution to shareholder value can, if they wish, easily
follow the model created by these early-adopting firms.



                                             65
increases in demand for the industry’s product. Conversely, the board could
increase the cash salary of a manager who has added value for shareholders
but who has not been able to profit from his options because of a stock price
decline due to bad industry conditions.
     If there is such an adjustment, one would expect cash compensation to
be negatively related to industry and market performance. There is some
evidence suggesting that changes in cash salary and bonus are negatively
linked to industry and market performance. Gibbons and Murphy found
that the size of CEO pay raises is negatively correlated with industry and
broader market performance.155 However, there is apparently no evidence
that the absolute amount of cash compensation (rather than changes in cash
compensation) decreases with sector or market increases.
     Indeed, there is evidence that CEO cash compensation increases with
market returns.156 There is also evidence—presented in two studies—that
managers’ cash compensation also increases in response to sector-wide and
firm-specific windfalls. The first study, by Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer,157 examines what eleven firms did with windfalls they received in
connection with won or settled lawsuits, most of which had nothing to do
with the current business activities of the firms and thus were unlikely to re-
flect the efforts of current executives. Most of the cash was retained by the
firm. Those firms distributing cash did so either to give a significant divi-
dend to a large controlling shareholder or to repurchase the shares of large
outside shareholders that could pose a threat to managers. The study found
that 16 percent of the net award was given to the top three executives over
three years following the award, boosting median cash compensation to
these executives by 84 percent. Some firms also gave more stock and option
grants to managers.
     The second study, by Bertrand and Mullainathan,158 finds that managers
are rewarded for sector-related luck. The authors examine the compensation
of managers when, because of changes beyond their control, their sector

   155 See Robert Gibbons and Kevin J. Murphy, Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief
Executive Officers, 43 Indus Labor Rel Rev 30, 36 (1990) (examining 1974–1986 data). A
study by Murphy looking at later data determined that the size of increases in cash com-
pensation was negatively related only to broader market performance. See Murphy, supra
note 2, at 2535.
   156 See Himmelberg and Hubbard, supra note 9, at 17, 24.
   157 See Olivier Jean Blanchard, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, What
Do Firms Do with Cash Windfalls?, 36 J Fin Econ 337, 358–59 (1994).
   158 See Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, Do CEO’s Set Their Own Pay? The
Ones without Principals Do at 37, NBER Working Paper No 7604 (2000), available online at
<http://papers.nber.org/papers/w7604.pdf>. We discuss this study further in Part III.G.



                                          66
does exceptionally well. The authors study three such situations: (1) when
oil price increases boost the performance of the oil industry; (2) when a
change in exchange rates benefits import-affected industries; and (3) when,
for whatever reason, all other firms in the industry perform well. The au-
thors find that in all of these situations managers are paid the same for a
“lucky” dollar as for a “general” dollar.
    These findings are clearly more consistent with the managerial power
approach than with optimal contracting.159 Under optimal contracting, there
is no need to compensate or penalize managers for changes that are beyond
their control. Indeed, making compensation depend on such changes is con-
sidered undesirable because it adds riskiness to the compensation package
and thereby reduces the value of the package to managers. Under the mana-
gerial power approach, however, managers are expected to take as much as
their power allows, consistent with not triggering too much outrage. Be-
cause the windfall increases earnings and makes shareholders as a group
better off, managers can increase their compensation at a lower outrage cost.
Thus when the firm gains a windfall, managers can be expected to boost
their pay.

                   B. Near-Uniform Use of At-the-Money Options

     An analysis of options granted to the CEOs of one thousand large com-
panies in 1992 determined that 95 percent of the options were granted at-
the-money, that is, with an exercise price equal to the company’s stock price
on the date of the grant.160 No one has provided a convincing explanation for
this phenomenon, which Hall and Murphy call “striking.”161

1. The Puzzle of One-Size-Fits-All

    There is a debate in the literature as to the optimal exercise price for ex-
ecutive stock options, and researchers have identified various factors that
might be relevant for this question.162 It is highly unlikely, however, that a

   159 The authors of these studies did in fact interpret their results as evidence of “skim-
ming.”
   160 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 70, Table 5.
   161 Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy, Stock Options for Undiversified Executives at 19,
NBER       Working      Paper      No      8052      (2001),      available     online     at
<http://papers.nber.org/papers/w8052.pdf>.
   162 Options ordinarily encourage executives to take on additional risk. See, for exam-
ple, Kevin J. Murphy, Performance Standards in Incentive Contracts, 30 J Acct Econ 245, 273
(2001). Because most managers are underdiversified and risk averse, it generally is as-



                                             67
single design would be optimal for nearly all companies and all executives.
Option values and the incentives they create depend on a stock’s volatility,
the grantee’s stock holdings, and the grantee’s general level of risk aver-
sion.163 Moreover, the shape of the desired incentive will depend on a firm’s
growth opportunities, debt load, and other factors.164 These variables will
differ from firm to firm, and even among executives within the same firm.
Thus, there is no reason for the optimal exercise price to be the same for al-
most all companies. 165



sumed that encouraging executives to take on additional risk is positive for shareholders.
See DeFusco, Johnson, supra note 111, at 617. But certain option designs might cause execu-
tives to take on too much or too little risk. While it is possible to show, under certain as-
sumptions about managerial risk aversion, managers’ reservation utility, and project
choices, that at-the-money options are optimal, under other assumptions one can show that
they are not. See Nohel and Todd, supra note 109, at 4 (finding that out-of-the-money op-
tions may dominate both in- and at-the-money options). See also Nohel and Todd, supra
note 109, at 4 (showing that in-, at-, or out-of-the-money options can align incentives de-
pending on the circumstances); Tom Nohel and Steven Todd, Stock Options and Managerial
Incentives     to    Invest,    working       paper      (2001),    available    online     at
<http://www.sba.luc.edu/research/wpapers/011109.pdf> (describing circumstances in
which out-of-the-money options best align managerial and shareholder interests); Brian J.
Hall, A Better Way to Pay CEOs?, in Jennifer Carpenter and David Yermack, eds, Executive
Compensation and Shareholder Value: Theory and Evidence 35, 42 (Kluwer Academic 1999) (ar-
guing that some firms could improve their executive compensation practices by adopting
out-of-the-money and indexed options, which provide greater sensitivity to performance
than at-the-money options); Johnson and Tian, supra note 116, at 25–26 (arguing that out-of-
the-money options create more powerful incentives than at-the-money options of equal
value); Richard A. Lambert, David F. Larcker, and Robert E. Verrecchia, Portfolio Considera-
tions in Valuing Executive Compensation, 29 J Acct Rsrch 129, 144 (1991) (arguing that options
that are very likely to wind up in-the-money undesirably reduce managers’ willingness to
take risks).
    163 See Nohel and Todd, supra note 109, at 7.
    164 See Chongwoo Choe, Executive Stock Options and Investment Choice at 3, La Trobe
University School of Business working paper (1999), available online at
<http://www.latrobe.edu.au/business/dps/pdfs/dps99/A99.11.pdf> (arguing that the
exercise price of managerial stock options should be adjusted when the firm has debt in its
capital structure). Compare Harley E. Ryan Jr. and Roy A. Wiggins III, The Influence of Firm-
and Manager-Specific Characteristics on the Structure of Executive Compensation, 7 J Corp Fin
101, 101–05 (2001) (finding that CEO compensation is affected by firm-specific factors such
as research and development and capital expenditure intensities and by manager-specific
factors such as the CEO’s age).
    165 See Tian, supra note 109, at 40 (arguing that the optimal exercise price depends in
part on the level of risk aversion and could be in-, at-, or out-of-the-money depending on
the executive and concluding that the uniform practice of granting at-the-money options is
not supported by principal-agent theory).



                                             68
    There is, however, a possible tax explanation for the almost complete
absence of in-the-money options. In particular, in-the-money options are not
considered “performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the
Internal Revenue Code and are therefore not deductible if an executive’s to-
tal non-performance-based compensation exceeds $1 million per year. In
addition, options that are granted in-the-money must be taken into earnings,
whereas at-the-money and out-of-the-money options need not. Thus, al-
though we are somewhat skeptical of accounting explanations for firm be-
havior, one might argue that accounting considerations can also explain the
absence of in-the-money options.
    However, neither the tax nor the accounting explanation can explain the
near complete absence of out-of-the-money options. The only possible opti-
mal contracting explanation for this phenomenon is that out-of-the-money
options are almost never optimal. 166 However, as Brian Hall has argued,
out-of-the-money options offer much higher pay-for-performance sensitivity
per dollar of expected value than conventional options. And there is empiri-
cal evidence suggesting that giving managers out-of-the-money options
rather than at-the-money options would, on average, boost firm value.167
Thus, it is extremely unlikely that out-of-the-money options are almost
never optimal. According to Hall, the “almost complete absence of premium
or indexed options seems puzzling given their striking advantages in terms
of pay to performance.”168



    166 In recent work, Hall and Murphy use numerical simulations in an attempt to derive
optimal exercise prices under various assumptions about the shape of managerial utility
functions, managerial wealth, stock market returns, and the volatility of the firm’s stock.
See Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy, Optimal Exercise Prices for Executive Stock Options, 90
Am Econ Assoc Proceedings 209, 213 (2000). Under a range of parameters, they show that
the exercise price that maximizes pay-for-performance sensitivity is usually in a range that
includes the current market price. Id. See also Hall and Murphy, supra note 161, at 20–22
(“[S]etting exercise prices at (or near) the grant-date market price maximizes
pay/performance incentives for risk-averse, undiversified executives.”). However, their
analysis cannot explain why, as they report, 94 percent of option grants are at-the-money.
First, there is no evidence that the utility functions they use—which are designed to make
their calculations tractable—correspond to those of actual managers. Second, the analysis
does not take into account the incentive effects of the options on managerial behavior and
the stock price. Third, even if their parameters corresponded to the situations of actual
CEOs and incentive effects could be ignored, their parameters generate a range of optimal
exercise prices, some of which (under certain conditions) are out-of-the-money. Yet, almost
all option grants are at-the-money.
    167 See Habib and Ljungqvist, supra note 110, at 17.
    168 Hall, supra note 162, at 43.



                                             69
     While many have noticed that there is near-uniformity among the exer-
cise price of options, little attention has been given to the fact that there are
actually two dimensions along which this uniformity occurs: (1) any given
firm will use the same exercise price for options regardless of the vesting pe-
riod of the option—for example, an option that vests in a year has the same
exercise price as an option that vests in five years; and (2) almost all firms
use the same formula for determining this exercise price, namely, the current
market price.
     As we saw earlier, the literature has focused on the second pattern. But
it has not fully considered the first—that exercise prices are uniform across
vesting periods. Note that because prices on average go up, an option that is
issued at the current market price is likely to be in-the-money in the future.
The effect of such an option on effort then would be equivalent to the effect
on effort today of an option that is currently in-the-money. As Warren Buf-
fett has observed, getting rich with at-the-money options vesting over a ten-
year period does not require much effort. If the CEO buys government
bonds with the firm’s earnings instead of paying them out in dividends, the
share price is likely to rise over time. As Buffett puts it, “these [at-the-
money] plans are really a royalty on the passage of time.”169
     We certainly do not attempt to analyze here what would be the optimal
exercise price of options that are going to vest a number of years from now.
This might depend on the time value of money and the rate of inflation. An
option exercisable at the current market price that vests in five years will
have in real terms an exercise price much lower than the current market
price. The important point is that there is little reason to think that the opti-
mal exercise price would not only be uniform across sectors, companies, and
executives but also be uniform across vesting periods.

2. The Managerial Power Explanation

    Under optimal contracting, the exercise price of options should be set to
maximize shareholder value and, since there is reason to believe that the
value-maximizing exercise price might differ across vesting periods and
across firms, the uniformity along both dimensions poses a puzzle. Under
the managerial power approach, however, the nearly uniform use of at-the-
money executive stock option plans can be easily explained. Under that ap-
proach, managers are not seeking exercise prices that are value-maximizing
for shareholders. Rather, managers are interested in exercise prices that are



  169 Tully, supra note 6, at 272.



                                       70
value-maximizing for managers—namely, the lowest possible exercise price
consistent with other constraints.
    At-the-money options might well provide the best combination of high
rents and low outrage. Holding the number of options granted constant, ex-
ecutives prefer the lowest possible exercise price. Each dollar of strike price
reduction is a dollar gained once the option is in-the-money. Thus, execu-
tives prefer an option that bears the lowest possible strike price without
causing too much outrage.
    Granting in-the-money options might appear to provide a gift to the ex-
ecutives—“incentive” compensation that requires no improvement in per-
formance—and thus might spark some outrage. In addition, as we explained
above, a grant of in-the-money options would force the firm to reduce ac-
counting earnings by the amount by which the options are in-the-money.170
To the extent that firms refuse to issue options that reduce accounting earn-
ings, this requirement sets a floor for the exercise price at the current market
price. We are a bit skeptical about the force of the accounting explanation for
the lack of indexing, as we noted earlier. Rather, we think that firms might
be using accounting effects as an excuse for not using reduced-windfall op-
tions. If this is in fact the case, firms could not use in-the-money options
with their adverse accounting effects, because this would remove the excuse
that adverse accounting effects prevent them from using reduced-windfall
options.
    The above discussion explains why plan designers might be reluctant to
use in-the-money options. This leaves, however, a range of possible exercise
prices at or above the grant-date market price. Within this range, the lowest
possible exercise price is the grant-date market price. And this exercise price
can plausibly be justified because managers profit if and only if the stock
price increases above its current level. And there may well be some situa-
tions in which at-the-money options are indeed optimal. Thus, in any given
firm, at-the-money options are unlikely to generate any outrage. The empiri-
cal observation that exercise prices are almost uniformly set to the com-
pany’s stock price on the date of the grant, regardless of the vesting period,
the type of company, and the stage of the executive’s career—all factors
relevant for economic optimization—is thus consistent with rent extraction
constrained by the possibility of outrage.




   170 In addition, as noted earlier, in-the-money options do not qualify as performance-
based compensation under IRC § 162(m).



                                           71
                         C. Resetting of Option Exercise Prices

     In many cases, corporations have lowered the strike prices of options
when their stock prices fell below the original exercise prices, but firms have
rarely raised strike prices in a rising market. This one-sided practice of reset-
ting is yet another feature of option practice that is puzzling from an optimal
contracting perspective, but consistent with the managerial power approach.
     Although not universal, the practice of resetting was fairly common in
the 1990s, even though the market as a whole was performing well. Examin-
ing the S&P ExecuComp database for 1992–1995, Brenner, Sundaram, and
Yermack found that on average 1.3 percent of executives had options reset
each year.171 Of 806 individual option resets, they found that the strike price
was increased in only two cases, and they calculated an average reduction in
exercise price of 39 percent.172 It is worth noting that the S&P 500 Index rose
by about 50 percent during the period studied by the authors, with no sig-
nificant downturns. The frequency of resetting is likely to be much higher in
falling markets.173

1. The Resetting Puzzle

    Ex post adjustments to compensation contracts have troubling implica-
tions that make them difficult to explain within an optimal contracting
framework. Clearly, the expectation that firms will adjust ex post for adverse
stock price movements undermines ex ante incentives. Thus, the practice of
ex post resetting undermines the goal that underlies the very use of stock
option plans.174 Indeed, if executives anticipate that the exercise price will be

   171 See Menachem Brenner, Rangarajan K. Sundaram, and David Yermack, Altering the
Terms of Executive Stock Options, 57 J Fin Econ 103, 110 (2000). See also Kathy B. Ruxton, Ex-
ecutive Pay, 1998: Chief Executive Officer Compensation at S&P Super 1,500 Companies as Re-
ported in 1998 2 (Investor Responsibility Research Center 1999) (finding that 3 percent of
1189 firms surveyed by the IRRC repriced options in 1998).
   172 See Brenner, Sundaram, and Yermack, supra note 171, at 112.
   173 The FASB has issued new guidelines that impose unfavorable accounting require-
ments on companies that reset the exercise price of outstanding options. One might there-
fore believe that even if stock prices fall, firms will be more reluctant to reprice options.
However, no such requirements are imposed when the firm simply gives executives an
equivalent number of new options at a lower strike price without canceling the old options,
which is a common approach to “resetting” exercise prices. In addition, there are no unfa-
vorable accounting consequences if the firm cancels the old options and issues the new op-
tions with a strike price set to the market price on a date that is at least six months and one
day after the cancellation.
   174 See Viral V. Acharya, Kose John, and Rangarajan K. Sundaram, On the Optimality of



                                              72
reset if the stock price falls, they might have an incentive to take steps to re-
duce the share price in the short run in order to lower the exercise price.
     Companies claim that these adjustments are necessary to retain and mo-
tivate executives when prices fall to levels that make existing options far
out-of-the-money. Although ex post resetting undermines ex ante incentives
to some extent, so the argument goes, companies might determine that on
balance these ex post retention and incentive benefits outweigh the ex ante
costs.
     However, when stock options have a long maturity and the stock is
highly volatile, even a steep fall in the share price might not substantially
change the value of, and the incentives provided by, the options.175 Thus, the
retention and incentive justifications for repricing options do not always ap-
ply.
     Even when a fall in stock market price does eliminate incentives, opti-
mal contracting suggests that companies should adjust option terms to pro-
vide better incentives going forward, not merely to transfer value to recipi-
ents. If exercise prices are reset, for example, vesting periods should be reset
as though the options were granted on the date of the repricing. There is no
incentive or retention reason to give executives any benefit from fully or par-
tially vested options that have lost their value. Any such benefit would
therefore constitute a windfall.
     It has been argued that, even if resetting is undesirable following a com-
pany-specific price decline, it might be appropriate after a general market
downturn, because such an event is outside of the executives’ control and
executives will demand a large risk premium if there is no adjustment for
general market corrections.176 But repricing conventional options in the
wake of a market downturn appears to be a second-best result compared
with indexing the options against market movements in the first place. Ex
post adjustment of the terms of indexed options that automatically correct
for sector-wide (or at least market-wide) shocks will generally be less neces-
sary, and will certainly be more difficult to justify.
     Consider two regimes. In the first, executives receive conventional op-
tions and fall back on resetting when the market moves against them. This
arrangement allows the executives to reap the gains that come with a mar-

Resetting Executive Stock Options, 57 J Fin Econ 65, 67 (2000).
   175 See Li Jin and Lisa Meulbroek, Do Underwater Executive Stock Options Still Align In-
centives?: The Effect of Stock Price Movements on Managerial Incentive-Alignment at 39–40,
Harvard      Business     School     working      paper     (2001), available   online    at
<http://www.people.hbs.edu/lmeulbroek/02-002.pdf>.
   176 See P. Jane Saly, Repricing Executive Stock Options in a Down Market, 16 J Acct Econ
325, 326 (1994).



                                            73
ket-wide rally, even if the rally simply offsets an earlier market slide. So re-
setting provides much more than downward price protection—resetting lets
executives “buy” on major market dips. Moreover, because the determinants
of share prices are complex, executives can justify resetting when only a
fraction of the decline in their firm’s share price is actually attributable to a
market correction.
     In the second regime, executives hold standard indexed options, whose
exercise price is tied to the sector or market average. The executives are insu-
lated from sector or broad market swings. Resetting becomes difficult, if not
impossible, to justify, and market slides do not become opportunities for
profit taking on the rebound. Thus, even if the executives receive more in-
dexed options to reflect their reduced expected value, as they should, the
loss of the resetting advantage leaves them worse off overall.
     Optimal contracting explanations for resetting are further undermined
by empirical analyses concerning the use of this device. Brenner, Sundaram,
and Yermack find that resetting does not occur as a result of industry-wide
shocks, as one would expect if the process were used to avoid penalizing ex-
ecutives for larger trends beyond their control.177 Rather, resetting is associ-
ated with poor firm-specific stock price performance, which might reward
the management of poorly performing firms.178 Similarly, Chance, Kumar,
and Todd find that repricing decisions are not driven by market or industry
factors.179

2. The Managerial Power Explanation

    From the managerial power perspective, however, the resetting ar-
rangement makes sense. Executives’ enjoyment of large option gains when
market prices increase across the board can easily be justified to observers in
this fashion: There was a contract; it provided incentives; all parties to the


   177 See Brenner, Sundaram, and Yermack, supra note 171, at 121.
   178 See id at 120.
   179 See Don M. Chance, Raman Kumar, and Rebecca B. Todd, The Repricing of Executive
Stock Options, 57 J Fin Econ 129, 131 (2000) (reporting that “poor performance prior to re-
pricing is not driven by market or industry factors”). See also N.K. Chidambaran and Nag-
purnanand R. Prabhala, Executive Stock Option Repricing, Internal Governance Mechanisms,
and Management Turnover, J Fin Econ (forthcoming 2002) (reporting that repricing firms are
likely to have enjoyed rapid, above-industry growth rates and profitability two years be-
fore repricing, and a drop to below-industry growth rates and profitability the year of re-
pricing); Mary Ellen Carter and Luann J. Lynch, An Examination of Executive Stock Option
Repricing, 61 J Fin Econ 207, 209 (2001) (reporting that repricings follow firm-specific price
declines).



                                             74
contract—shareholders and executives—enjoyed large gains; the firm sticks
by its contracts. When the stock price drops, resetting can be justified based
on the need to retain and motivate executives as the firm moves forward. If
the company is still nervous about public reaction, it can reduce the exercise
price somewhat, but leave it above market to show investors that the execu-
tives are not getting a free ride.180
     The practice of resetting must also be considered in light of the failure of
companies to index options. As noted above, the combination of effects
seems to enhance executive rent extraction. Executives appear to be much
better off with conventional options that may be reset than they would be
with indexed options. Finally, empirical data also support the managerial
power explanation. For example, Chance, Kumar, and Todd find that repric-
ing is more likely among smaller firms with boards that are dominated by
insiders and otherwise suffer from greater agency problems.181 And Cal-
laghan, Saly, and Subramaniam report that executives release bad news
shortly before the date on which the options are repriced and delay the re-
lease of good news until after that date in order to reduce the exercise price
of the repriced options.182

                 D. Executives’ Broad Freedom to Unwind Incentives

    Companies claim that they use equity-based compensation as a means of
aligning incentives and increasing executive shareholding.183 But firms take
surprisingly few steps to prevent or regulate the unwinding of the incentives
provided by the grant of options and restricted stock.184 Executives generally

    180 See Brenner, Sundaram, and Yermack, supra note 171, at 112 (reporting that the
strike price was reduced but left above market in about 20 percent of the resetting cases ex-
amined).
    181 See Chance, Kumar, and Todd, supra note 179, at 148, 153.
    182 See Sandra Renfro Callaghan, P. Jane Saly, and Chandra Subramaniam, The Timing
of Option Repricing, working paper (2000). See also Yermack, supra note 19, at 462–64 (re-
porting that managers manipulate news around option grants in order to lower the exer-
cise price).
    183 See Eli Ofek and David Yermack, Taking Stock: Equity-Based Compensation and the
Evolution of Managerial Ownership, 55 J Fin 1367, 1367 (2000).
    184 It is not unusual for a firm to use “trading windows” and “blackout periods” to re-
strict the times during the year that a manager can trade in the shares in order to reduce the
possibility that it will be held liable for an insider trading violation. J. Carr Bettis, Jeffrey L.
Coles, and Michael L. Lemmon, Corporate Policies Restricting Trading by Insiders, 57 J Fin
Econ 191, 192 (2000). For example, many firms permit managers to trade only during the
two- or three-week period after quarterly earnings have been released. Id. Such restrictions
might sometimes impose liquidity costs on a manager by forcing the manager to delay a



                                                75
are left free to hedge away equity exposure before these instruments vest,
and typically are permitted to choose the amount and timing of unwinding
once vesting has occurred. The permissive attitude of firms toward manag-
ers determining the extent and the timing of incentive-unwinding presents
an additional puzzle for the optimal contracting approach.

1. Freedom to Determine the Amount of Unwinding.

     Options and restricted shares are awarded in order to provide execu-
tives with stronger incentives to generate shareholder value. Because execu-
tives are risk-averse, they would prefer to receive the expected value of
these incentive instruments in cash. Indeed, they might prefer to receive an
amount in cash that is significantly less than the expected value of the incen-
tives. Thus, once the options and restricted shares have vested, executives
might wish to convert them into cash. But such an unwinding would elimi-
nate the incentive benefits that come from the executive holding these in-
struments. As a result, an optimal contract would be expected to restrict ex-
ecutives’ freedom to unwind vested options and stock in a way that balances
risk-averse executives’ desire to cash out these equity-based instruments
against the need to provide them with the proper amount of incentives.
      It should be noted that the rationale for restricting executives’ freedom
to unwind vested incentives is not necessarily the same as the rationale for
vesting periods. The purpose of a vesting period is to prevent an executive
who has just been given options from immediately resigning and walking
away with the options (or underlying shares) without having contributed
any value to the firm. Once the options have vested, they are considered to
have been earned by the executive and can no longer be taken away. But the
fact that the options belong to the executive once they have vested does not
necessarily imply that the executive should be permitted to exercise the op-
tions and sell the shares acquired thereby immediately upon the options’
vesting.
     It is possible that the optimal design of option compensation in certain
cases would be to prohibit the unwinding of the option for a specified pe-
riod after the options have vested. For example, it might be desirable to give
to a particular executive options that vest in three years but cannot be
cashed out during the two-year period beginning with the vesting date. If
the executive continues to work for the company during those two years, the

planned trade for several months. However, these restrictions do not limit the number of
shares that can be sold or the type of transaction that can be entered into when trading is
permitted. Thus, these trading restrictions cannot prevent managers from selling or hedg-
ing their equity positions.



                                            76
options (or, if he has exercised the options, the underlying shares) would
provide desirable incentives during that period.
     Compare this restricted-unwinding arrangement to the situation in
which such options can be exercised immediately on the vesting date, and
the executive in fact exercises the options and sells the underlying shares at
that time. In this situation, shareholders must either (a) provide the execu-
tive with new options to maintain the same amount of incentives, which
costs the shareholders more money than under the restricted-unwinding ar-
rangement; or (b) indirectly bear the costs associated with the executive hav-
ing weaker incentives during the two years following the vesting date than
under the restricted-unwinding arrangement.
     Furthermore, the restricted-unwinding arrangement is also likely to
have an advantage over an unrestricted unwinding arrangement even when
the executive does not expect to remain for two years after the vesting date.
Even if the executive expects to leave on or shortly after the vesting date, the
restricted-unwinding arrangement is likely to provide better incentives to
maximize long-term shareholder value than one in which the executive can
cash out the options on the vesting date.
     To be sure, restrictions on executives’ ability to cash out vested incentive
instruments would impose some liquidity and diversification costs on ex-
ecutives. These costs must be balanced against the incentive benefits of re-
stricting the unwinding of these instruments. Thus, we are not claiming that
in all cases such restrictions would be desirable. Moreover, in those cases
where such restrictions on unwinding vested options and stock are desir-
able, we are not claiming that there is a single optimal length for the restric-
tion period. This is likely to vary from case to case, and would depend,
among other things, on the expected length of the executive’s tenure at the
firm and the executive’s diversification and consumption needs.
     What is clear, however, is that there is no reason to assume that the op-
timal contract would always give the executive the ability to unwind options
and restricted stock as soon as they vest. Nevertheless, we observe virtually
no attempts by firms to prevent executives from unwinding options and re-
stricted shares immediately after they have vested.
     Not surprisingly, executives exercise many of their options well before
expiration.185 A recent study examining ten-year options granted to the ex-
ecutives of forty large companies determined that the options were exer-
cised after an average of 5.8 years.186 Moreover, despite the pressure that


    185 See David M. Schizer, Executives and Hedging: The Fragile Legal Foundation of Incen-
tive Compatibility, 100 Colum L Rev 440, 468–72 (2000).
    186 See Jennifer N. Carpenter, The Exercise and Valuation of Executive Stock Options, 48 J



                                             77
boards supposedly put on executives to increase their shareholdings, execu-
tives sell all or almost all of the shares that are acquired through option ex-
ercise, far in excess of the level of sales required to satisfy the taxes due.187
Shares that are not sold after option exercise are often hedged in transactions
that do not generate taxable income and which are not reported to the
SEC.188 For example, executives often utilize collars and equity swaps to lock
in gains on their shareholdings following a stock price increase, which, of
course reduces their incentive to boost the price further.189
     A similarly puzzling practice is the lack of restrictions on the use of fi-
nancial instruments to eliminate or weaken the incentive effects of unvested
options and restricted shares. Executives generally are not barred from
hedging away their equity exposure before these instruments vest. At the
moment, several serendipitous features of the federal income tax code re-
duce the attractiveness of hedging unvested options and (to a lesser extent)
restricted stock through the derivatives market.190 But even modest changes
in tax rules could eliminate this disincentive. Thus, there is little reason not
to include contractual prohibitions on such unwinding.
     Finally, when managers are granted options to align their interests with
those of shareholders, it would seem optimal—at least sometimes—for the
firms granting those options to require that managers not offset the desirable
effect created by these incentives by selling shares they already hold. Yet,




Fin Econ 127, 139 (1998). Because executives are taxed when they exercise most options, the
deferral of taxes provides executives with some incentive to delay exercise. See Schizer, su-
pra note 185, at 468–72. Thus, many options are not exercised immediately upon vesting. In
a recent survey, the IRRC reported that in 1998 the median S&P 500 CEO held unexercised
in-the-money options worth $10.9 million and that two-thirds of these options were vested.
In 1997, the median CEO had held unexercised options worth $5.6 million. See Ruxton, su-
pra note 171, at 16.
    187 See Ofek and Yermack, supra note 183, at 1376–77 (finding that “when executives
exercise options to acquire stock, nearly all of the shares are sold”).
    188 See Ellen E. Schultz and Theo Francis, Fair Shares?: Why Company Stock Is a Burden
for Many and Less So for a Few, Wall St J A1 (Nov 27, 2001).
    189 See J. Carr Bettis, John M. Bizjak, and Michael L. Lemmon, Insider Trading in Deriva-
tive Securities: An Empirical Examination of the Use of Zero-Cost Collars and Equity Swaps by
Corporate     Insiders   at    2–3,   working      paper     (1999),    available online   at
<http://papers.ssrn.com/id=167189>. See also Paul U Ali and Geof Stapledon, Having
Your Options and Eating Them Too: Fences, Zero-Cost Collars and Executive Share Options, 18
Co & Sec L J 277, 277–78 (2000) (describing the use of hedging devices by managers as an
“alarming development” that subverts the economic purpose of stock options).
    190 See Schizer, supra note 185, at 442–43.



                                             78
such restrictions are generally not used. As a result, executives often sell
stock they already hold when options (or restricted shares) are granted.191
     We want to stress that we are sympathetic to the possibility that in many
cases the consumption and diversification needs of managers would require
permitting some unwinding of positions before the managers leave the firm.
Thus, in certain cases an optimal contract might permit a specified amount
of unwinding after option vesting as well as when new options are granted.
It might be desirable to write into compensation contracts provisions that
authorize the compensation committee to expand the scope of unwinding in
case of unanticipated increases in liquidity needs. All that said, however, it
would be difficult to explain under the optimal contracting approach the
almost universal absence of restrictions on the unwinding of vested options
and shares, on the hedging of unvested options and restricted shares, and on
the sale of existing shares when new options are granted.
     Once again, we believe that the absence of such restrictions can be ex-
plained under the managerial power approach to executive compensation.
Broad freedom to unwind incentives benefits managers in a way that is not
particularly conspicuous. Because plan designers are seeking to benefit
managers, even at the expense of public shareholders, the designers are not
particularly concerned by the fact that the broad freedom to unwind incen-
tives dilutes the strength of these incentives. Indeed, managers’ freedom to
unwind incentives and their practice of doing so conveniently serves as a
justification for providing the managers with new options and restricted
stock to restore incentives. The puzzling absence of any contractual restric-
tions, even on the hedging of unvested shares and restricted stock, can thus
be better understood under the managerial power approach than under the
optimal contracting approach.

2. Freedom to Determine the Time of Unwinding

    The previous discussion makes clear that managers are essentially free
to choose the extent to which they unwind their incentives. We now focus on
another important freedom managers enjoy with respect to the incentive fea-
tures of their compensation contracts: that managers are permitted to choose
the timing of the unwinding of their incentives.
     Consider a situation in which—under an optimal contract—it would be
desirable to allow an executive to sell a certain number of shares in a given

   191 See Ofek and Yermack, supra note 183, at 1376 (finding that managers who already
owned shares in excess of the number of options (or restricted shares) granted sold ap-
proximately 680 shares for every one thousand options granted and 940 shares for every
one thousand restricted shares granted).



                                          79
year, even though the executive is expected to continue to serve the firm for
many more years. Suppose, for example, that the executive has liquidity or
diversification needs that can be met only by these sales, and that the cost to
him from being forced to hold onto these shares exceeds the marginal incen-
tive benefit these shares provide.
     The fact that it is desirable for the executive to sell a certain number of
shares per year does not imply that the executive should choose the exact
timing of the sales. After all, most of these liquidity and diversification
needs are unlikely to arise unexpectedly one morning. Rather, most of these
needs can be anticipated and planned for. Accordingly, one could adopt a
variety of restrictions on the timing of sales without hindering the execu-
tive’s ability to satisfy his legitimate liquidity and diversification needs. For
example, one could require that sales be carried out gradually over a speci-
fied period, perhaps pursuant to a prearranged plan. One could require the
executive to receive advance permission from the compensation committee
(or another committee) before trading. Or, the executive could be asked to
sell the shares directly to the company for the average share price over a
specified (and sufficiently long) period (say, the prior six months).
     The advantage of preventing managers from controlling the exact timing
of their sales is that it would reduce the amount of profits they can make
trading on their inside information. Although it is illegal for executives to
trade on “material” inside information, the “materiality” standard is suffi-
ciently high that executives can still make significant profits trading on in-
side information that is valuable but not considered legally “material.”192
These profits are unlikely to be an efficient mechanism for compensating ex-
ecutives. Indeed, the prospect of being able to control the timing of trades
and make such profits might not only fail to provide useful incentives to ex-
ecutive, but also distort their behavior in a way that hurts shareholders.193
For example, the ability to time their sales might enable managers to benefit
from transient rises in the stock price that do not reflect the creation of long-
term shareholder value. This, in turn, would undesirably increase managers’
focus on short-term price movements.
     Surprisingly, however, most firms impose few restrictions on executives’
ability to time the unwinding of their incentives. To be sure, in the past fif-
teen years many firms have adopted trading windows and blackout periods

   192 See Fried, supra note 5, 71 S Cal L Rev, at 334–37. For more recent evidence, see Jen-
nifer N. Carpenter and Barbara Remmers, Executive Stock Option Exercises and Inside Infor-
mation, 74 J Bus 513–34 (2001) (finding evidence that senior managers of small publicly
traded companies exercise their options and sell the underlying stock shortly before the
price of the stock exhibits negative abnormal returns).
   193 See Fried, 71 S Cal L Rev, supra note 5, at 313–16.



                                             80
which prevent executives from trading during periods when they are likely
to know “material” inside information—for example, a large, unexpected
change in quarterly earnings—on which it is illegal to trade. But the impetus
for these restrictions came not from a desire to improve pay arrangements
but rather from the adoption of tough insider trading laws in the 1980s that
made firms liable for illegal insider trading by their employees if they had
not taken reasonable steps to prevent such trading.194 Moreover, these trad-
ing windows and blackout periods frequently fail to prevent executives with
important but not legally “material” inside information from selling their
shares before large stock price declines, thereby avoiding large losses.195
     Whether or not the board restricts the timing of sales, the board could
require enhanced disclosure of these trades. Currently, Section 16(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires that executives disclose their trades
to the Securities and Exchange Commission by the tenth day of the month
following the trade. Under the optimal contracting approach, one might ex-
pect firms to require their executives to provide much earlier disclosure.
     For example, the board could, as one of us has proposed in an earlier
work, require executives to publicly disclose publicly in advance their in-
tended trades.196 Under such a pretrading disclosure scheme, announcement
of an unusually large sale would signal the possibility that the executive
knows bad news about the firm, driving the price down. The market’s reac-
tion would reduce executives’ ability to make profits trading on their inside
information.
     Alternatively, the board could require real-time disclosure or disclosure
the day after the sale. But even firms that use trading windows or similar re-
strictions make no attempt to require managers to provide timely disclosure
of sales. Indeed, many firms have moved in the opposite direction and taken
steps to reduce transparency. These firms permit or even facilitate transac-
tions that are economically equivalent to sales but which allow the execu-
tives to avoid making the usual post-trade disclosure to the SEC. For exam-
ple, more than 25 percent of large companies give their executives multi-


    194 Id at 331, 345.
    195 See, for example, Bridget O’Brian, Insider Selling of a Stock Headed South May Mean
Others Should Also Bail Out, Wall St J C14 (July 17, 1996) (reporting that an executive of Mi-
cro Warehouse Inc., which permits executives to trade only during a nine-day period that
begins five days after each quarterly earnings announcement, sold $2.4 million of stock in
late-April/early-May, a month before an announcement about disappointing second quar-
ter earnings drove the share price down by more than 60 percent). For an explanation for
why trading windows do not completely prevent executives from trading on inside infor-
mation, see Fried, 71 S Cal L Rev, supra note 5, at 346.
    196 See Fried, 71 S Cal L Rev, supra note 5, at 348.



                                             81
million-dollar loans, which executives often repay with company stock. Al-
though the use of stock to repay these loans is economically equivalent to a
sale of the stock to shareholders, these transactions are not covered by Sec-
tion 16(a) and thus need not be reported to the SEC by the tenth day of the
following month. Instead, firms are required to disclose these transactions
only once per year, within forty-five days of the end of the fiscal year.197
     Not surprisingly, executives exploit their broad freedom to time their
sales of shares and camouflage these transactions to make substantial profits
trading on private information. In fact, there is evidence indicating that ex-
ecutives make at least several billion dollars per year in profits (and avoided
losses) because of their access to inside information.198 Although the broad
freedom to make such profits is difficult to explain from an optimal contact-
ing perspective, it is easily explained under the managerial power approach.
These profits, which ultimately come at the expense of public shareholders,
provide extra value to executives that does not show up in any of the firm’s
accounting information or compensation figures disclosed to shareholders.
These insider trading profits are also not usually remarked on by the media,
except in notorious cases involving large sales of stock that precede dramatic
declines in the stock price.199 Thus, the cost of these hidden insider trading
profits to shareholders is likely to go unnoticed.

                                   E. Reload Options

    A significant number of firms grant new, or “reload,” options to execu-
tives who exercise options by surrendering stock. This practice is yet another
twist to conventional options plans that we think is better explained by the
managerial power approach than by the optimal contracting approach.200
Basic reload options work as follows: The holder of an option with a reload
provision exercises that option before expiration and pays the exercise price
with stock that he already owns. In return, he receives the underlying shares
optioned, plus a new option for each share tendered in exercising the op-
tions. The new reload options carry the same expiration date as the original

   197 David Leonhardt, It’s Called a ‘Loan’, But It’s Far Sweeter, NY Times § 3 at 1 (Feb 3,
2002).
   198 See Fried, 71 S Cal L Rev, supra note 5, at 332, 323.
   199 For example, the media have recently focused their attention on the fact that Enron
executives sold $1 billion worth of shares in the period leading up to the firm’s bankruptcy,
even as the executives were encouraging shareholders and employees to buy the stock.
   200 Reingold reports that reload provisions were included in 17 percent of new stock
option plans adopted in 1997. See Jennifer Reingold, Nice Option If You Can Get It, Bus
Week 111 (May 4, 1998).



                                             82
options, but the exercise price is set at market. For example, a CEO who held
ten reloadable options with a $20 strike price would surrender five shares of
stock to exercise the options if the market price at exercise stood at
$40/share. He would receive the ten shares optioned plus five new reload
options with a $40 strike price.201
     Options with a reload provision are worth more to the holder than are
conventional options. By exercising the first generation options after a price
spike, the recipient locks in a portion of the gain against a subsequent share
price decline, and the reload options allow him to do so without giving up
all of the upside potential.202 Thus, reload options enable executives to profit
more from share price volatility—even if long-term share performance is
flat. The incremental value of the reload feature depends on the volatility of
the firm’s stock price and other factors. Examining one executive at one firm
by way of example, Saly, Jagannathan and Huddart estimated that basic re-
load options in that case were worth about 15 percent more than conven-
tional options.203
     Reloads are difficult to explain under the optimal contracting approach.
Proponents argue that the reload feature encourages executives to exercise
options earlier and therefore to hold more shares.204 However, if the execu-
tives sell the shares they receive on exercise, as is generally the case,205 the
reloads do not result in executives holding more shares unless there are ad-
ditional constraints on the reload program. For example, a reload plan might
place minimum holding times on the stock surrendered on exercise or on the
stock received through exercise, and thereby indirectly or directly cause ex-
ecutives to hold more stock. However, there is a cheaper and more direct

   201 As will be explained, there are several variations on the reload theme. For example,
some reload plans provide additional reload options to replace shares that would have to
be sold to pay the tax that is due on exercise.
   202 Hemmer and colleagues demonstrate that it is optimal for the holder of a multiple-
reload option to exercise whenever the stock price exceeds the previous high reached since
the grant date. See Thomas Hemmer, Steve Matsunaga, and Terry Sherlin, Optimal Exercise
and the Cost of Granting Employee Stock Options with a Reload Provision, 36 J Acct Rsrch 231,
234 (1998).
   203 See P. Jane Saly, Ravi Jagannathan, and Steven J. Huddart, Valuing the Reload Fea-
ture of Executive Stock Options, 12 Acct Horizons 219, 220 (1999).
   204 See Christopher Gay, Hard to Lose: ‘Reload’ Options Promote Stock Ownership among
Executives; But Critics Say They’re a Lot More Costly than Shareholders Realize, Wall St J R6
(Apr 8, 1999); Reingold, supra note 200, at 111.
   205 See Ofek and Yermack, supra note 183, at 1377–78 (examining S&P 1500 data from
the 1993–1995 period and finding that executives with relatively low stock holdings retain
about 30 percent of the shares received on exercise of their options, while relatively high
ownership executives sold all of their shares).



                                             83
way to achieve the same result: the executive could be required to own a
minimum number of shares. In some cases, the reload feature might actually
reduce an executive’s shareholdings by giving him an incentive to “pay” for
his reload options with existing shares rather than with cash raised.
     Although reloads are not easily explained by the optimal contracting
approach to executive compensation, the reload feature is quite consistent
with the managerial power approach. The reload feature makes the options
more valuable for the executives, but it does so in a way that is complex and
hard to evaluate. Despite their added cost, reloads can plausibly be justified
to investors. Even better, reloads can be tweaked to provide even more
value with little or no investor reaction. We have already seen that options
with the basic reload feature are more valuable to their recipients, and we
have suggested that their justification—increasing executive stock owner-
ship—is facially plausible, but that the benefit is illusory unless the execu-
tives are required to hold shares for some period prior to or following option
exercise. These are constraints that have little or nothing to do with reloads
per se. We will now turn to the variations in reloads that add even more
value.
     An executive who exercises nonqualified stock options owes ordinary
income tax on the gain. Many firms with reload programs issue additional
reload options to cover the shares that must be set aside to pay the execu-
tive’s taxes.206 This practice is justified as necessary to maintain the execu-
tive’s total share price exposure.207 This sounds plausible at first blush, but in
fact the tax reload provision (as it is known) is the equivalent of making a
larger conventional option grant in the first place—a grant that is more
valuable to the executive and more costly for the shareholders.208
     One might ask, what is so special about the tax that is due on the exer-
cise of options? Most executives own a fair number of shares of company

   206 See Gay, supra note 204, at R6 (reporting that twenty-one of forty reload firms sur-
veyed issue additional options to replace shares set aside to pay taxes on option exercise).
   207 See id.
   208 Saly and colleagues estimated that, with the tax reload feature, the reload options
they studied were worth 24 percent more than conventional options, holding other terms
of the options constant. See Saly, Jagannathan, and Huddart, supra note 203, at 220. With-
out the tax reload feature these reload options would have been worth 15 percent more
than conventional options. Id. A few companies deviate from the standard reload design in
other ways. Some issue a new option for every option exercised, rather than for each share
surrendered in exercising the options. See Gay, supra note 204, at R6 (reporting that three of
forty reload firms surveyed used this procedure). Others extend the term of the new op-
tions issued beyond the maturity date of the initial options. See id. Both practices add value
for executives, and one can imagine, without help from us, the weak but perhaps vaguely
plausible justifications that might be offered in support of these variants.



                                             84
stock and owe taxes each year on their salary, bonus, exercised options, and
restricted stock that becomes unrestricted. One could just as plausibly argue
that the company should issue options to replace hypothetical stock sales
made by an executive to cover the taxes due on any of these sources of in-
come.

                     F. Gratuitous Acquisition-Related Payments

     Another compensation practice that is more easily explained under the
managerial power approach is the practice of giving the CEO of an acquired
firm a “gratuitous” payment for facilitating the acquisition—a payment that
is not required under the terms of his contract.
     It is no secret that executives are often paid large amounts when their
firms are acquired.209 In many cases, these payments are made pursuant to
the terms of the executive’s compensation contract. One common way for
the compensation contract to provide for an acquisition-related payment to
the executive is through what is called a “golden parachute.”210 Under such
an arrangement, the executive is paid a specified amount in the event that
the firm is acquired and certain other conditions are met.
     There is a debate over whether the use of golden parachutes and similar
arrangements is driven by optimal contracting or managerial opportunism.
Some researchers have argued that golden parachutes encourage managers
to take desirable risks; others have argued that golden parachutes reduce the
disciplining effect on managers of the market for corporate control.211


    209 See Jay Hartzell, Eli Ofek, and David Yermack, What’s in It for Me?: Personal Benefits
Obtained by CEO’s Whose Firms Are Acquired at 3, New York University Stern School of
Business         working          paper          (2000),       available        online       at
<http://www.stern.nyu.edu/~eofek/papers.htm> (reporting that CEOs whose firms are
acquired obtain total financial of gains with a median value of $4 to $5 million and a mean
value of $8 to $11 million).
    210 See id at 11 (reporting that 69 percent of the CEOs in a sample of firms that were
acquired had golden parachutes).
    211 There is an extensive literature investigating the incentives and wealth transfers
created by golden parachutes and other ex ante compensation arrangements. For theoreti-
cal and empirical investigations of the effect of golden parachutes on ex ante incentives and
wealth, see Albert Choi, Golden Parachute as a Compensation Shifting Mechanism at 6–8, Uni-
versity     of      Virginia     working        paper    (2002),      available    online    at
<http://www.people.virginia.edu/~ahc4p/> (presenting a model in which the creation of
a golden parachute shifts some of the expected cost of compensating the executive to an
acquirer, thereby allowing shareholders to pay the executive a lower salary when there is
no acquisition); Lane Daley and Chandra Subramaniam, Free Cash Flow, Golden Parachutes,
and the Discipline of Takeover Activity, 27 J Bus Fin & Acct 1, 3–4 (2000) (presenting evidence



                                              85
     Our focus, however, is on situations where executives receive payments
in connection with acquisitions that are not required under the terms of the
executives’ compensation contracts. These gratuitous acquisition payments,
which are often made in addition to golden parachute payments, can take a
variety of forms. For example, target boards sometimes augment the value
of a previously negotiated golden parachute.212 At other times, target boards
make special cash payments to the CEO.213
     Gratuitous payments, by definition, are not negotiated in advance. Be-
cause managers do not know whether they will receive a gratuitous pay-
ment if there is an acquisition (and the amount of such payment, if any), the
prospect of such a payment is unlikely to have much effect—good or bad—
on managerial behavior ex ante. Thus, even if it could be shown conclusively
that golden parachutes generate desirable ex ante incentives, it would still be
difficult to explain how these gratuitous payments reflect optimal contract-
ing.
     However, gratuitous payments can easily be explained under the mana-
gerial power approach. That approach suggests two reasons why boards
might agree to make these payments. First, given a CEO’s power to delay or
prevent desirable acquisitions, the board might find it necessary to “bribe”
the CEO to allow the acquisition to go forward smoothly. Second, the CEO


that entrenched managers get golden parachutes to shield them from market discipline);
M.P. Narayanan and Anant K. Sundaram, A Safe Landing? Golden Parachutes and Corporate
Behavior at 3, University of Michigan working paper 98-015R (1998), available online at
<http://eres.bus.umich.edu/docs/workpap/wp98_015r.pdf> (examining 245 firms adopt-
ing golden parachutes for the first time during 1980–1994 and concluding that managers do
not appear to run down firms following adoption of golden parachute plans in the hope of
being acquired); Charles R. Knoeber, Golden Parachutes, Shark Repellants, and Hostile Tender
Offers, 76 Am Econ Rev 155, 160 (1986) (explaining how golden parachutes can function as
bonds posted by shareholders to prevent shareholders from opportunistically reneging on
implicit long-term compensation by selling the firm to a new owner); Richard Lambert and
David Larcker, Golden Parachutes, Executive Decision-Making, and Shareholder Wealth, 7 J Acct
& Econ 179, 183–86 (1985) (arguing that golden parachutes reduce shareholder value by in-
sulating managers from takeover discipline).
    For evidence on how ex ante compensation arrangements affect managers’ willingness
to allow an acquisition, compare Judith C. Machlin, Hyuk Choe, and James A. Miles, The
Effects of Golden Parachutes on Takeover Activity, 36 J L & Econ 861, 869 (1993) (reporting that
golden parachute contracts increase the likelihood of an acquisition), with James F. Cotter
and Marc Zenner, How Managerial Wealth Affects the Tender Offer Process, 35 J Fin Econ 63, 92
(1994) (finding no significant effect of golden parachutes on likelihood of acquisition).
    212 See id at 12 (reporting that in 12 percent of the cases where the target CEO has a
golden parachute the target board increases the payout at the time it approves the merger).
    213 See id (reporting that in 27 percent of acquisitions the target board gives the CEO a
special cash payment at the time it approves the merger).



                                              86
might be able to convince the board to give him a parting gift (using share-
holders’ money). In each case, the CEO is using his power to extract rents.
     Consider the first situation: the board determines it must bribe the CEO
to allow the acquisition to go forward. Managers enjoy private benefits of
control (including rent extraction through formal salary arrangements,
which is the focus of this paper) because of their positions in the firm. There-
fore, they have an incentive to resist takeovers, even if the takeover would
benefit shareholders. Under current law, managers have the power to resist
a takeover and substantially delay the completion of any acquisition. Given
managers’ ability to impede the acquisition, it might be necessary to bribe
them not to.
     To be more concrete, let B denote the (present value of the) private bene-
fits that managers will lose in the event their firm is acquired. Let Ga denote
the acquisition-related payment, if any, to which managers are contractually
entitled by virtue of a golden parachute or similar ex ante arrangement. Let
Gp denote the gratuitous acquisition-related payment. If Ga < B, the manag-
ers will have an incentive to resist the acquisition unless the board provides
the managers with an (additional) payment, Gp, such that Ga + Gp > B. And,
even if Ga > B, managers might threaten to hold up the deal unless they re-
ceive more compensation.
     It may well be the case that, given managers’ power to defend their posi-
tions and the private benefits of control they enjoy as a result of their posi-
tions, it is a desirable “second-best” strategy for boards to reward managers
with gratuitous payments for allowing acquisitions to take place.214 If so,
these arrangements should not be restricted or substantially curtailed. Al-
though such restrictions might make shareholders better off in cases where
they do not prevent an acquisition, such restrictions would leave sharehold-
ers in a worse position overall by reducing the number of value-increasing
acquisitions.215 For our purposes, however, it is irrelevant whether the prac-
tice of giving CEOs gratuitous payments to facilitate transactions is desir-


   214 See Kahan and Rock, supra note 86, at 898. For a systematic analysis of the effects of
managerial compensation on managers’ incentives to facilitate and bargain over acquisi-
tions, see Ehud Kamar, Managerial Change-in-Control Benefits and Takeovers, working paper
(2002).
   215 But see Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack, supra note 209, at 20 (finding evidence that in
transactions where CEOs get direct or indirect gratuitous transfers, they negotiate lower
acquisition premia for shareholders). For evidence of the effect of ex ante compensation
agreements on the likelihood of acquisition, compare Machlin, Choe, and Miles, supra note
211, at 869 (reporting that golden parachute contracts increase the likelihood of an acquisi-
tion), with Cotter and Zenner, supra note 211, at 92 (finding no significant effect of golden
parachutes on likelihood of acquisition).



                                             87
able. The important point, for our purposes, is that the practice of making
such payments is an indication that managers use their power to extract
rents.
     The second reason a board might give a CEO a gratuitous payment in
connection with an acquisition is to bestow a gift on the CEO. That is, the
payment is not necessary to secure the CEO’s cooperation in connection
with the acquisition. The board might agree to make this payment out of af-
fection for the CEO, because of personal gratitude, or to curry favor with the
CEO (who might be in a position to help them in the future). This payment,
made with shareholders’ money, provides no benefit to shareholders—
unlike the bribe in the first situation.
     There are a number of reasons why an acquisition might facilitate the ex-
traction of these additional rents. The acquisition might enable such rent-
extraction because the CEO and the board need not fear any repercussions
from shareholders. Alternatively, the acquisition might provide camouflage
by distracting shareholders from the payment or tying the payment to a
transaction that benefits shareholders overall. In any event, the gift reflects
managers’ use of power—specifically, their close relationship with the
board—to extract rents.

         G. Differences between Executives with More and Less Power

    The managerial power approach focuses upon the connection between
managerial power and the rents that managers can extract. In all companies
with dispersed shareholders and no controlling shareholder, executives will
have power and will be able to extract at least some rents. Management
power, however, is not uniform in all companies with dispersed sharehold-
ing. Managers will have more or less power depending upon the presence of
effective takeover impediments, the structure of the board, the presence of
large shareholders (even if they are not controlling shareholders), and the
fraction of shares held by institutional investors. All else being equal, the
managerial power approach predicts that managers will extract more rents
in situations and structures in which they have more power. There is sub-
stantial evidence consistent with this position.

1. Relationship between Power and Pay

   There are several factors whose presence would tend to make managers
more powerful. Other things being equal, managers would tend to have
more power when (a) the managers are protected by antitakeover arrange-
ments, (b) the board is relatively weak or ineffectual, (c) the managers have a



                                        88
large ownership stake, (d) there are fewer institutional shareholders, or (e)
there is no large outside shareholder. As described below, empirical exami-
nations of each of these factors have found that they affect managerial pay
arrangements in the way predicted by the managerial power approach.
    (a) Antitakeover protection. There is evidence that CEOs of firms that
adopt antitakeover provisions get higher salaries, receive more options, and
are more likely to have a golden parachute arrangement.216 The mean level
of above-market compensation increases significantly after the provisions
are adopted—that is, after the CEOs have become less vulnerable to a hostile
takeover.217
    (b) Strength and independence of boards. In addition, there is evidence that
executive compensation is higher when the CEO is more powerful vis-à-vis
the board. Core, Holthausen, and Larcker find that CEO compensation is
higher when the board is larger (and thus less cohesive), when more of the
outside directors have been appointed by the CEO (and thus might feel a
sense of gratitude and obligation to the CEO), when the outside directors are
older, and when outsiders serve on five or more boards (and thus are likely
to be relatively distracted).218 Cyert, et al, report that CEO pay is negatively

    216 See Kenneth A. Borokhovich, Kelly R. Brunarski, and Robert Parrino, CEO Contract-
ing and Anti-Takeover Amendments, 52 J Fin 1495, 1503–13 (1997). Optimal contracting might
predict the opposite—that if managers’ jobs are more secure, shareholders need not pay
managers as high a risk premium. See Anup Agrawal and Charles R. Knoeber, Managerial
Compensation and the Threat of Takeover, 47 J Fin Econ 219 (1998) (finding that CEOs of firms
in industries with a higher rate of takeovers and CEOs of firms that are eventually taken
over are paid slightly more than other CEOs, and attributing this differential to a risk-
premium paid to CEOs more likely to lose their jobs).
    217 See Borokhovich, Brunarski, and Parrino, supra note 216, at 1515. Managers who
have become less vulnerable to a hostile takeover take advantage of their power in other
ways as well. For example, CEOs of firms incorporated in states that adopt antitakeover
statutes reduce their use of debt in order to reduce the risk of financial distress and con-
straints on their use of the firms’ cash, even though the debt is likely to have provided use-
ful tax and agency benefits. See Gerald T. Garvey and Gordon Hanka, Capital Structure and
Corporate Control: The Effect of Antitakeover Statutes on Firm Leverage, 54 J Fin 519, 521 (1999)
(finding that, overall, impediments to takeovers induce a shift from debt to equity financ-
ing). See also Shjun Cheng, Venky Nagar, and Madhar V. Rajan, Control versus Risk in Stock-
Based Incentives: Evidence from Antitakeover Regulation at 30, working paper (2001), available
online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=288738> (finding that CEOs of firms that become
protected by new takeover legislation sell a large portion of their shares because the shares
are not as necessary for maintaining control).
    218 See John E. Core, Robert W. Holthausen, and David E. Larcker, Corporate Govern-
ance, Chief Executive Compensation, and Firm Performance, 51 J Fin Econ 371, 372–73 (1999).
CEO pay also increases when a board contains interlocking directors. See Kevin Hallock,
Reciprocally Interlocking Boards of Directors and Executive Compensation, 32 J Fin & Quant Anal
331, 332 (1997) (finding that the pay gap between interlocked and non-interlocked firms is



                                               89
related to the share ownership of the board of directors, is positively related
to the CEO’s tenure, and is higher if the CEO is the chairman of the board.219
Relatedly, Wade, O’Reilly, and Chandratat find that as the percentage of the
board composed of outsiders appointed after the CEO takes office increases,
the more likely it is that the CEO will be able to secure a golden parachute.220
      (c) CEO share ownership. The managerial power approach predicts that
as the CEO’s share ownership increases, thereby making the CEO more
powerful vis-à-vis other shareholders, his compensation will increase. In
fact, the amount of CEO compensation is positively related to CEO stock
ownership.221 Not surprisingly, executives owning majority blocks receive
higher salaries than executives in similar firms that do not have a lock on
control.222
     (d) Presence of institutional investors. In a study of S&P firms from 1991
through 1997, Hartzell and Starks find that the more concentrated institu-
tional ownership is, the lower executive compensation is. They also find that
a larger institutional presence results in more performance-sensitive com-



as high as 17 percent after adjusting for all variables). This might not be as rare as one
would imagine: in approximately one out of twelve firms, the board is current CEO-
interlocked: the CEO of Firm A sits on the board of Firm B, and the CEO of Firm B sits on
the board of Firm A. See Kevin Hallock, Dual Agency: Corporate Boards with Reciprocally In-
terlocking Relationships, in Jennifer Carpenter and David Yermack, eds, Executive Compensa-
tion and Shareholder Value: Theory and Evidence 55, 58 (Kluwer Academic 1999) (reporting
that 8 percent of a sample of 773 large publicly-traded firms had CEO-interlocked boards
and 12 percent had employee-interlocked boards). For an examination of the factors that
make reciprocal CEO board membership more likely, see Eliezer M. Fich and Lawrence J
White, Why Do CEO’s Reciprocally Sit on Each Other’s Boards? at 1–3, working paper (2001),
available online at <http://www.stern.nyu.edu/clb/01-002.pdf>.
    219 See Cyert, et al, supra note 37, at 17–20. They also find that CEO pay is positively re-
lated to the percentage of outsiders on the board. They surmise that many of the outside
directors are handpicked friends of the CEO.
    220 See James Wade, Charles A. O’Reilly, III, and Ike Chandratat, Golden Parachutes,
CEOs and the Exercise of Social Influence, 35 Admin Sci Q 587, 592–93 (1990) There is also
evidence that the structure of CEO pay is affected by the composition of the compensation
committee. When at least one member of the compensation committee is an insider, the
sensitivity of pay to performance is lower. See Harry A. Newman and Haim A. Mozes,
Does the Composition of the Compensation Committee Influence CEO Compensation Practices?, 28
Fin Mgmt 41–53 (1999).
    221 See Cyert, et al, supra note 37, at 3.
    222 Clifford Holderness and Dennis Sheehan, The Role of Majority Shareholders in Pub-
licly Held Corporations, 20 J Fin Econ 317 (1988) (finding that top executives owning majority
blocks receive larger salaries than top executives in similar firms in which shareholding is
diffuse).



                                              90
pensation.223 This study suggests that the presence of institutions serves to
reduce the power of management to extract rents through compensation.
     (e) Presence of a large blockholder. Moreover, there is evidence that the
presence of a large shareholder is significant. Even when such a shareholder
does not have a controlling or dominant position, its monitoring can reduce
the extraction of rents. Richard Cyert and his colleagues found a negative re-
lationship between the equity ownership of the largest shareholder and the
amount of CEO compensation.224 In an analysis of manufacturing firms, Tosi
and Gomez-Mejia determined that CEO incentive alignment is superior, and
that the CEO exercises less influence over his own compensation, when the
company has a 5-percent external shareholder.225
     In two recent creative empirical studies, Bertrand and Mullainathan pre-
sent findings indicating that the absence of shareholders owning more than
5 percent of the shares is associated with significant deviations from optimal
contracting. In the first study, Bertrand and Mullainathan examine compa-
nies with and without a large shareholder to determine if there is a differ-
ence in the extent to which CEOs are rewarded for changes in company per-
formance outside of their control (in other words, for luck).226 The study
finds that CEOs in firms that lacked large external shareholders tended to
receive more “luck-based” pay. Furthermore, this study finds that CEOs in
firms that lack large shareholders have their cash compensation reduced less
when their options-based compensation is increased.227
     The second study by Bertrand and Mullainathan compares companies
with and without a 5-percent shareholder in terms of how the performance

    223 See Jay C. Hartzell and Laura T. Starks, Institutional Investors and Executive Compen-
sation      at      32,     working       paper       (2002),      available     online      at
<http://www.bus.utexas.edu/AIMCenter/Working%20Papers/Hartzell8.pdf> (finding a
significant negative relationship between CEO compensation and the concentration of in-
stitutional ownership).
    224 See Cyert, et al, supra note 37,at 18 (finding that a CEO who is not also the largest
shareholder receives, on average, about 5 percent less in total compensation).
    225 See Henry L. Tosi Jr. and Luis R. Gomez-Mejia, The Decoupling of CEO Pay and Per-
formance: An Agency Theory Perspective, 34 Admin Sci Q 169, 181 (1989). Relatedly, Benz, Ku-
cher, and Stutzer find that in S&P 500 firms a higher concentration of shareholders results
in a significantly reduced number of options granted to top executives. See Matthias Benz,
Marcel Kucher, and Alois Stutzer, Stock Options: The Managers’ Blessing: Institutional Restric-
tions and Executive Compensation at 21, University of Zurich Institute for Empirical Research
in     Economics      Working      Paper     No      61    (2001),    available   online     at
<http://www.iew.unizh.ch/wp/iewwp061.pdf>.
    226 See Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?: The
Ones without Principals Are, 116 Q J Econ 901, 929 (2001).
    227 See Bertrand and Mullainathan, supra note 158, at 34.



                                              91
sensitivity of compensation relates to the volatility of the company’s stock
price.228 Under optimal contracting, pay-performance sensitivity should de-
crease with increasing variance. However, the study finds that such a rela-
tionship is present only among companies that have a 5-percent outside
shareholder.

2. Inferences and Objections

    From the various empirical studies described above, there emerges a
clear picture of a link between managerial power and pay arrangements—a
link that is predicted by the managerial power approach. Interestingly, the
financial economists who conducted the above studies, unlike most academ-
ics working in this area, came to the view that some appropriation of wealth
might be taking place in those situations in which managers are especially
powerful. Bertrand and Mullainathan, for example, concluded that some
“skimming” takes place in companies without a 5-percent shareholder.229
However, these researchers appear to believe that rent extraction occurs
only in situations in which managers are relatively more powerful.
    In our view, once the connection between power and rents is recog-
nized, there is reason to believe that managerial rent extraction might occur
to some extent in all companies without a controlling or dominant share-
holder. To be sure, managers will have less power, and thus be able to ex-
tract less rents, in circumstances in which a large external shareholder is pre-
sent or more shares are in the hands of institutions. As we have explained,
however, even in such circumstances managers still have considerable
power and thus can be expected to extract rents.230 Indeed, the compensation
practices we have described in the preceding sections of Part III (such as the
absence of reduced-windfall options and the lack of unwinding restrictions)
occur also at companies which have large shareholders or concentrated insti-
tutional share ownership. This indicates that rent extraction might well take
place, even if to a reduced extent, in companies where managers are less
powerful.



   228 See Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, Agents with and without Princi-
pals, 90 Am Econ Assoc Papers & Proceedings 203 (2000).
   229 See id at 205.
   230 Consider cases in which a 5- or 10-percent external shareholder is present. Given
the power that managers have to issue poison pills and to control the proxy machinery,
such a shareholder might have influence but usually not anything close to controlling
power. Thus, executives in such cases are likely to have still a great deal of power.



                                          92
    Finally, we wish to discuss the recent finding Kevin Murphy has put for-
ward as evidence inconsistent with our managerial power approach.231
Murphy provides evidence that newly hired CEOs coming from outside of
the firm receive in their first year almost twice the total compensation of
newly hired CEOs coming from inside the firm. Suggesting that CEOs com-
ing from outside of the firm do not yet have power to influence their pay,
Murphy argues that their higher pay is inconsistent with the managerial
power hypothesis.232
    We think that such an inference cannot be drawn. To begin with, while
the managerial power approach suggests that managers with more power
are paid more, all else being equal, it does not suggest that more power is
the only reason why some managers are paid more than others. Inside can-
didates usually have an advantage over outsiders because of their familiar-
ity with the firm and their existing ties to the board. Thus, in those instances
in which the board turns to the outsiders, the outside hires are likely to be,
on average, a stronger group. Furthermore, outside hires are often CEOs al-
ready (which inside candidates by definition are not), and thus have higher
reservation values.
    Indeed, for those outside hires who are already CEOs, the managerial
power approach would predict higher pay, even assuming hypothetically
(and, we believe, counterfactually) that they were not a stronger group on
average than inside hires. CEOs hired from the outside who at the time of
their hiring are CEOs of other firms are likely to be using their power at
those firms to extract rents. Thus, the hiring firm cannot attract them with-
out compensating them for whatever rents they currently enjoy and must
give up to take the new positions. In contrast, no such compensation need be
given when the company can find and hire an appropriate candidate in-
house because that in-house candidate does not give up the rents and pri-
vate benefits associated with being a CEO in order to take the CEO position.




   231 See Murphy, supra note 141, at 853.
   232 It is not clear that the boards’ bargaining with a soon-to-be-hired CEO is arm’s
length bargaining. The directors will recognize that the person on the other side will in the
future have influence over director nominations and compensation. If one of us had the
chance to bargain with his soon-to-be hired dean over the dean’s compensation terms, we
doubt that the bargaining would be at arm’s length. In any event, the critical point for
Murphy’s argument, and one with which we agree, is that while bargaining with soon-to-
be-hired CEOs might differ from arm’s length bargaining, soon-to-be-hired CEOs coming
from outside should not be expected to have more power than those coming from inside.



                                             93
               H. Differences between U.S. and Non-U.S. Companies

    U.S. CEOs are paid considerably more than their non-U.S. counter-
parts,233 but lower-level managers are not. U.S. CEOs receive both more op-
tion- and equity-based pay234 and more cash compensation than their non-
U.S. counterparts.235 U.S. human resources directors, by comparison, receive
no more compensation than their international counterparts.236 The
U.S./international CEO pay gap provides yet another puzzle for students of
executive compensation to explain.237
    Can the optimal contracting approach provide a persuasive explanation
for this pattern? First, it might be argued that U.S. CEOs are simply more
important to the success of the business. The skills of the CEO might be
more important in the U.S. if our corporate culture gives CEOs more deci-
sionmaking power than others. Undoubtedly, the CEO is the major factor in
the success of many U.S. companies. However, there is no reason to think
that CEOs are, on average, less of a factor in the success of many foreign
companies. CEOs might also be more important in the U.S. because markets
in the U.S. are more competitive and therefore more “demanding,” which
makes a CEO’s skills more critical to the company’s performance. In econo-
mies with much government regulation and intervention, however, a com-
pany’s performance might also depend critically on the skills of the CEO
(though, in this case, on different skills) in dealing with political and regula-
tory constraints.
    Second, it could be argued that in the U.S. CEOs are relatively scarce.
However, the scarcity argument is also not persuasive. Although U.S. firms
employ a particularly large number of CEOs, they employ an even larger
number of junior executives. It is unclear why qualified CEOs would be rela-
tively more scarce than qualified junior executives.
    Third, it might be that the tournament model of executive compensation
is more applicable in the U.S. than it is in other countries. According to this

   233 See Abowd and Bognanno, supra note 58, at 70–72; Murphy, supra note 2, at 7.
   234 See Abowd and Bognanno, supra note 58, at 70–72; Murphy, supra note 2, at 7.
   235 See Mark J. Lowenstein, The Conundrum of Executive Compensation, 35 Wake Forest L
Rev 1, 5 (2000).
   236 See Abowd and Bognanno, supra note 58, at 72–73.
   237 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 7–9, for a thorough review of the puzzle posed by
cross-country differences in CEO compensation. For a discussion of whether the differ-
ences between U.S. and foreign executive pay practices are likely to be narrowed, see Brian
R. Cheffins and Randall S. Thomas, The Globalization (Americanization) of Executive Pay: Yes,
No,     or     Not    Yet?,   working      paper      (2002),    available     online      at
<http://www.ciaonet.org/conf/cip01/cip01c.pdf>.



                                             94
theory of compensation, junior executives accept lower pay in their present
jobs in exchange for the chance of winning the tournament, becoming CEO,
and capturing the big prize.238 It is possible that this extremely competitive,
survival-of-the-fittest model simply works better in our highly laissez-faire
corporate culture than it does abroad. There are theoretical problems with
the tournament explanation,239 however, and there is no real evidence that it
applies to executive pay.
     Fourth, it might be argued that U.S. firms are at the front of the learning
curve when it comes to CEO pay. It has been suggested that other countries
have not caught up to the U.S. with regard to stock-based compensation.240
However, the typical CEO in over half of the foreign countries surveyed by
Towers Perrin in 1997 did receive options or other long-term performance
units; they simply received fewer.241 Moreover, the learning curve hypothe-
sis fails to explain why U.S. CEOs are better paid than their foreign counter-
parts but junior executives in the U.S are not.
     While the pattern of cross-country differences is difficult to explain un-
der the optimal contracting approach, the managerial power approach can
make sense of it. As we have discussed, rent extraction depends on manag-
ers having power. In the U.S., managers have considerable power, espe-
cially, as we have seen, when ownership is very dispersed and there is no
large shareholder to provide discipline. U.S. CEOs rarely have other busi-
ness interests that could enable them to extract rents through favorable con-
tractual arrangements. Thus, U.S. managers use their power to extract rents
through their executive compensation.
     In other countries, there are relatively fewer companies with dispersed
ownership and relatively more companies with controlling shareholders. 242
And in those countries with dispersed ownership, such as the United King-
dom, ownership tends to be much more concentrated than in the U.S.243

   238 See Edward P. Lazear and Sherwin Rosen, Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum La-
bor Contracts, 89 J Polit Econ 841, 841–42 (1981).
   239 For example, tournaments might provide poor incentives when it is apparent that
one player is likely to win and others likely to lose the competition (due to differences in
skills or other qualities) or even encourage collusion or sabotage. See Ronald A. Dye, The
Trouble with Tournaments, 22 Econ Inq 147, 148 (1984).
   240 See Abowd and Bognanno, supra note 58, at 70.
   241 See Murphy, supra note 2, at 7.
   242 See Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, Corporate
Ownership around the World, 54 J Fin 471, 491–96 (1999).
   243 In Britain, it is common for a firm’s twenty-five largest institutional investors to
own a majority of the shares. In the U.S. the same number of institutions will typically own
only about one-third of the equity. Not surprisingly, U.S. CEOs are much better paid than



                                            95
When share ownership is more concentrated, the CEO will have less power
(unless, in firms with a controlling shareholder, the CEO is related to the
controlling shareholder). Professional CEOs hired by companies with more
concentrated ownership and companies controlled by a large shareholder
will therefore extract less rents than the CEOs of U.S. firms, whose share-
holders are likely to be more dispersed and therefore less able to closely
monitor the CEOs.
     In some companies controlled by a large shareholder or family, how-
ever, those controlling the firm will not hire professional managers but
rather install themselves in those positions. CEOs of these companies might
well have more power than U.S. CEOs. And they could use this power to ex-
tract rents through their executive compensation. But the controlling group
or family is likely to control other significant assets that might often offer
more important avenues for extracting rents—namely, through self-dealing
and the taking of business opportunities.244
     In such a case, although the CEO could extract additional rents through
executive compensation, refraining from doing so might be a cost-effective
means of camouflaging the overall amount of rents that is being extracted.
By paying himself reasonable compensation, the controlling shareholder
might be able to create the impression that he is being loyal to minority
shareholders. And because compensation is not that large a source of rents
relative to the other sources that are available, the cost to the controlling
shareholder of not paying himself a larger salary is relatively small.245 In
sum, CEO pay tends to be lower in other countries because the CEO either
has less power to extract rents or the CEO generally has other avenues for
rent extraction (because the CEO is affiliated with the controller, who is
likely to have other business interests).



their British counterparts. See Martin J. Conyon and Kevin J. Murphy, The Prince and the
Pauper?: CEO Pay in the United States and the United Kingdom, 110 Econ J 640, 640 (2000). In
addition, the options received by British CEOs are more likely to be subject to performance
conditions, less likely to have a reload feature, and less likely to be repriced. See corre-
spondence with Professor Brian Cheffins. However, as in the U.S., there are still complaints
about the high pay of U.K. CEOs. See Brian R. Cheffins, Company Law: Theory, Structure and
Operation 653–706 (Clarendon 1997).
    244 See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Reinier H. Kraakman, and George G. Triantis, Stock Pyra-
mids, Cross-Ownership, and Dual Class Equity: The Creation and Agency Costs of Separating Con-
trol From Cash Flow Rights, in Randall K. Morck, ed, Concentrated Corporate Ownership 295
(Chicago 2000).
    245 In some countries, minority shareholder rights are so weak that there is no need for
the controlling shareholder to camouflage rent extraction. This might explain why in some
emerging markets executive compensation in family controlled firms is so high.



                                             96
     The managerial power approach is consistent with the observation that
the cross-country difference in pay is concentrated at the top, while much
lower-level U.S. executives do not receive more pay than their foreign coun-
terparts. We have noted that sometimes power will be concentrated in the
hands of the CEO, and at other times it will be shared by two or more top of-
ficers. As a result, rents will be received either by the CEO or the CEO and
one or more other top-ranking executives. This would suggest that at times
there will be a compensation differential only at the CEO level, and at other
times there will be such a differential with respect to the CEO and one or
two other top executives. Thus, it is not surprising that human resources di-
rectors and other lower-level executives who do not have a significant share
of corporate power do not enjoy higher compensation than their non-U.S.
peers.246 The managerial power explanation that we have put forward here
is also consistent with our explanation of the finding that, in the U.S., CEOs
of companies that have large shareholders are paid less than CEOs of com-
panies that do not.

                                   CONCLUSION

     This paper has examined two alternative approaches to the study and
analysis of executive compensation: the optimal contracting approach,
which has dominated academic research on the subject, and the managerial
power approach, which focuses on the role of managerial power in explain-
ing deviations from optimal contracting. The former approach views execu-
tive compensation as an instrument for combating the agency problem be-
tween managers and dispersed shareholders; the latter approach regards
compensation arrangements as partly a product of the agency problem.
     Analyzing the processes that set executive compensation, we have iden-
tified reasons to believe that their outcomes might well deviate significantly
from optimal contracting. Whatever the appearances, executive compensa-
tion is not generally the product of arm’s length bargaining, but is the result
of a process that executives can substantially influence. Moreover, although
executive compensation is set against a background of market forces, these
forces are hardly strong enough to compel optimal contracting outcomes. As
a result, executives can use their power to influence compensation arrange-
ments and to extract rent.
     The forces that limit rent extraction are affected by how compensation
arrangements are perceived by outsiders. This, in turn, provides incentives


  246 It would be interesting to compare international pay difference between COOs,
CFOs, and other very senior executives who might realistically share power with a CEO.



                                         97
for structuring compensation arrangements in a way that camouflages the
presence and extent of rent extraction. Consequently, the desire to extract
rents might lead to the use of inefficient pay structures and produce subop-
timal incentives.
     Analyzing the large body of empirical evidence on executive compensa-
tion, we have concluded that the evidence supports the view that manage-
rial power plays a significant role. Indeed, this approach can explain various
puzzling features and practices that have long occupied researchers operat-
ing under the optimal contracting approach. Among other things, this ap-
proach can explain the conventional use of options that make no attempt to
filter out rewards for general market or sector factors, the almost uniform
use of at-the-money options, the broad freedom given to executive to un-
wind incentives and to choose the time of unwinding, and the systematic
correlation between managerial power and pay.
     The role that managerial power plays in executive compensation has
implications for the study, practice, and regulation of corporate governance.
For these implications to receive the attention they deserve, the role of
managerial power must first be recognized and appreciated. We hope that
this paper will contribute to such recognition and that it will provide a use-
ful framework for subsequent study of how managerial power influences
executive compensation.




                                      98
